613 commandments The 613 commandments (: "taryag mitzvot", "613 Mitzvot";
Biblical Hebrew: Miá¹£woth) is the number of mitzvot listed in the Torah, first
codified by Rabbi Simlai in Talmud Makkot 23b. These principles of Biblical law
are sometimes called connections or commandments ("mitzvot") and referred to
collectively as the "Law of Moses" ("Torat Mosheh", ), "Mosaic Law," "Sinaitic
Law," or simply "the Law". The word "mitzvot" is plural; singular is "mitzvah".
Although there have been many attempts to codify and enumerate the commandments
contained in the Torah, the traditional view is based on Maimonides'
enumeration. The 613 commandments comprise of "positive commandments", to
perform an act ("mitzvot aseh"), and "negative commandments", to abstain from
certain acts ("mitzvot lo taaseh"). The negative commandments number 365, which
coincides with the number of days in the solar year, and the positive
commandments number 248, a number ascribed to the number of bones and main
organs in the human body (Babylonian Talmud, "Makkot" 23b-24a). Though the
number 613 is mentioned in the Talmud, its real significance increased in later
medieval rabbinic literature, including many works listing or arranged by the
"mitzvot". Three types of negative commandments fall under the "yehareg ve'al
ya'avor", meaning "One should let oneself be killed rather than violate it".
These are murder, idolatry, and forbidden sexual relations. The 613 mitzvot
have been divided into three general categories. A category of mitzvoth are
called Mishpatim. These include commandments that are deemed to be self-
evident, such as not to murder or not to steal. Another category of mitzvot are
called Edot ("testtimonies"). They stand as testimonies in religious branches
of Judaism. For example, the Shabbath is said to testify to the story that
Hashem created the world in six days and rested on the seventh day and declared
it holy. A third category of mitzvot are called Chukim. These commandments have
no known rationale, and are perceived as pure manifestations of the Divine
will. Many of the "mitzvot" cannot be observed now, following the destruction
of the Second Temple, although they still retain religious significance.
According to one standard reckoning, there are 77 positive and 194 negative
commandments that can be observed today, of which there are 26 commands that
apply only within the Land of Israel. Furthermore, there are some time-related
commandments from which women are exempt (examples include "shofar", "sukkah",
"lulav", "tzitzit" and "tefillin"). Some depend on the special status of a
person in Judaism (such as "kohanim"), while others apply only to men and
others only to women. Significance of 613. According to the Talmud (tractate
Makkoth 23b), is to be interpreted to mean that Moses transmitted the "Torah"
from God to the Israelites: "Moses commanded us the Torah as an inheritance for
the community of Jacob". The Talmud notes that the Hebrew numerical value
(gematria) of the word "Torah" is 611, and combining Moses's 611 commandments
with the two received directly from God in Genesis, to "be fruitful and
multiply" and male circumcision, adds up to 613. The Talmud attributes the
number 613 to Rabbi Simlai, but other classical sages who hold this view
include Rabbi Simeon ben Azzai (Sifre, Deuteronomy 76) and Rabbi Eleazar ben
Yose the Galilean (Midrash Aggadah to Genesis 15:1). It is quoted in Midrash
Shemot Rabbah 33:7, Bamidbar Rabbah 13:15â€“16; 18:21 and Talmud Yevamot 47b.
Many Jewish philosophical and mystical works (e.g. by Baal ha-Turim, the
Maharal of Prague and leaders of Hasidic Judaism) find allusions and
inspirational calculations relating to the number of commandments. The
"tzitzit" ("knotted fringes") of the "tallit" (" shawl") are connected to the
613 commandments by interpretation: principal Torah commentator Rashi bases the
number of knots on a gematria: the word tzitzit (Hebrew: ×¦×™×¦×ª (Biblical),
×¦×™×¦×™×ª, in its Mishnaic spelling) has the value 600. Each tassel has eight
threads (when doubled over) and five sets of knots, totalling 13. The sum of
all numbers is 613. This reflects the concept that donning a garment with
tzitzit reminds its wearer of all Torah commandments. In gematria, the "
Mitzvos or Mitzvot is transliterated as Taryag mitzvot". "TaRYaG" is the
gematria for the number "613". Dissent and difficulties. Rabbinic support for
the number of commandments being 613 is not without dissent and, even as the
number gained acceptance, difficulties arose in elucidating the list. Some
rabbis declared that this count was not an authentic tradition, or that it was
not logically possible to come up with a systematic count. No early work of
Jewish law or Biblical commentary depended on the 613 system, and no early
systems of Jewish principles of faith made acceptance of this Aggadah (non-
legal Talmudic statement) normative. The classical Biblical commentator and
grammarian Rabbi Abraham ibn Ezra denied that this was an authentic rabbinic
tradition. Ibn Ezra writes "Some sages enumerate 613 mitzvot in many diverse
ways [...] but in truth there is no end to the number of mitzvot [...] and if
we were to count only the root principles [...] the number of mitzvot would not
reach 613" ("Yesod Mora", Chapter 2). Nahmanides held that this particular
counting was a matter of rabbinic controversy, and that rabbinic opinion on
this is not unanimous. Nonetheless, he concedes that "this total has
proliferated throughout the aggadic literature... we ought to say that it was a
tradition from Moses at Mount Sinai," (Nahmanides, Commentary to Maimonides'
"Sefer Hamitzvot"", Root Principle 1). Rabbi Simeon ben Zemah Duran likewise
rejected the dogma of the 613 as being the sum of the Law, saying that "perhaps
the agreement that the number of mitzvot is 613... is just Rabbi Simlai's
opinion, following his own explication of the mitzvot. And we need not rely on
his explication when we come to determine affect the Law, but rather on the
Talmudic discussions" ("Zohar Harakia", Lviv, 1858, p.Â 99). Ultimately,
though, the concept of 613 commandments has become accepted as normative
amongst practising Jews and, today it is still common practice to refer to the
total system of commandments within the Torah as the "613 commandments, even
among those who do not literally accept this count as accurate." However, the
613 Mitzvot do not constitute a formal code of present-day halakha. ("See
Halakha: Codes of Jewish law".) The most widely recognized code is the Shulkhan
Arukh, written by Rabbi Yosef Karo (Safed, Israel, 1550). For Sephardic Jewry,
this is generally the accepted code. Ashkenazim, however, customarily follow
the glosses appended to the Shulchan Arukh by Rabbi Moses Isserles. The Kitzur
Shulkhan Arukh of Rabbi Shlomo Ganzfried (Hungary 1804 -1886) is an also
popular among Ashkenazic Jews. Although it is often criticized, it does
overview of the rules of Ashkenazi Jewish life according to the minhagim
followed by Hungarian Jewry. This is why it is not accepted by all Ashkenazic
rabbinic authorities. However, Maimonides did write his Mishneh Torah while
keeping in mind all of the 613 mitzvot.
