Abrahamic religions Abrahamic religions (also Abrahamism) are the monotheistic
faiths emphasizing and tracing their common origin to Abraham or recognizing a
spiritual tradition identified with him. They are one of the major divisions in
comparative religion, along with Indian religions (Dharmic), East Asian
religions (Taoic) and Neopaganism. , it was estimated that 54% of the world's
population (3.8 billion people) considered themselves adherents of the
Abrahamic religions, about 30% of other religions, and 16% of no religion. The
Abrahamic religions originated in Western Asia. The largest Abrahamic religions
are, in chronological order of founding, Judaism, Christianity, Islam and
Baha'i Faith. Beginning. Judaism regards itself as the religion of the
descendants of Jacob, a grandson of Abraham. It has a strictly unitary view of
God, and the central holy book for almost all branches is the Masoretic Text as
elucidated in the oral Torah. Christianity began as a sect of Judaism in the
Mediterranean Basin of the 1st century CE and evolved into a separate
religion‚Äîthe Christian Church‚Äîwith distinctive beliefs and practices. Jesus
is the central figure of Christianity, considered by almost all denominations
to be divine, typically as one person of a Triune God. The Christian Bible is
usually held to be the ultimate authority, alongside Sacred Tradition in some
denominations (such as Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy). Islam arose in
Arabia in the 7th century AD with a strictly unitary view of God. Muslims
(adherents of Islam) typically hold the Qur'an to be the ultimate authority, as
revealed and elucidated through the teachings and practices of a central, but
not divine, prophet, Muhammad. Less well-known Abrahamic religions, originally
offshoots of Shi'a Islam, include the Bah√°'√≠ Faith and Druze. Religions. The
three main Abrahamic religions have certain similarities. All are monotheistic,
and conceive God to be a transcendent Creator-figure and the source of moral
law, and their sacred narratives feature many of the same figures, histories,
and places in each, although they often present them with different roles,
perspectives, and meanings. They also have many internal differences based on
details of doctrine and practice. Christianity divided into three main branches
(Catholic, Orthodox, and Protestant), dozens of significant denominations, and
even more smaller ones. Islam has two main branches (Sunni and Shi'a), each
having a number of denominations. Judaism also has a small number of branches,
of which the most significant are Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform.
Etymology. It has been suggested that the phrase, "Abrahamic religion", may
simply mean that all these religions come from one spiritual source. Christians
refer to Abraham as a "father in faith". There is an Islamic religious term,
"Millat Ibrahim" (faith of Ibrahim), indicating that Islam sees itself as
having practices tied to the traditions of Abraham. Jewish tradition claims
descendance from Abraham, and adherents follow his practices and ideals as the
first of the three spiritual "fathers", Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. All the
major Abrahamic religions claim a direct lineage to Abraham. Other terms
sometimes used include Abrahamic faiths, Abrahamic traditions, religions of
Abraham, Abrahamic monotheistic religions, semitic religions, Semitic
monotheistic religions, and Semitic one god religions. However, the term
"Abrahamic faiths", while helpful, is also misleading. It conveys an
unspecified historical and theological commonality that is problematic on
closer examination. While there is commonality among the religions, in large
measure their shared ancestry is peripheral to their respective foundational
beliefs and thus conceals crucial differences. For example, the common
Christian beliefs of Incarnation, Trinity, and Jesus' Resurrection are not
accepted by Judaism or Islam (see for example Islamic view of Jesus' death).
There are key beliefs in both Islam and Judaism that are not shared by most of
Christianity (such as strict monotheism and adherence to the Law), and key
beliefs of Islam and Christianity not shared by Judaism (such as the prophetic
and Messianic position of Jesus, respectively), and so on. Common aspects. The
unifying characteristic of Judaism, Christianity and Islam is that all accept
the tradition that God revealed himself to the patriarch Abraham. Monotheism.
All Abrahamic religions claim to be monotheistic, worshiping an exclusive God,
though known by different names. All of these religions believe that God
creates, is one, rules, reveals, loves, judges, punishes, and forgives.
However, Christianity's Trinitarian doctrine conflicts with Jewish and Muslim
concepts of monotheism. They reject the incarnation of God in Christ; the
defining feature of the Christian religion, in which salvation is based on a
doctrine of atonement‚Äîmost commonly substitutionary atonement (for
Protestants) and ransom, victory of Christ or satisfaction (for Eastern
Orthodox and Catholics)‚Äîthrough faith in Jesus Christ as Saviour. Although
Christianity does not profess to believe in three gods, rather three persons,
or hypostases, united in one essence, or ousia, in the Godhead, the one
"Almighty God," the concept of the Trinity is categorically rejected by the
other major Abrahamic religions (and by certain non-mainstream‚Äîgenerally
defined by the similarity of beliefs to the Nicene Creed‚Äîsects of
Christianity, such as Oneness Pentecostals, Unitarians, Jehovah's Witnesses,
Mormons, and Christian Scientists). Since the conception of divine Triunity is
not amenable to "tawhid", the Islamic doctrine of monotheism, Islam considers
Christianity to be variously polytheistic or idolatrous. The worship of Jesus,
or the ascribing of partners to God, is categorically denounced as the heresy
of idolatry by Islam. The incarnation of God in to human form is denounced as a
heresy by Judaism. Islam also believes that Judaism has compromised Monotheism
by elevating the opinions and interpretations of rabbis to the level of God.
The single largest religious sect of any religion‚Äîand the largest Christian
sect, Roman Catholicism, with 1.1‚Äì1.3 billion adherents‚Äîas many as all
sects of Islam combined‚Äîthe second largest Christian sect, Eastern Orthodoxy,
with 250‚Äì350 million adherents, and the vast majority of Protestant
denominations (total ~750 million adherents) together making up more than 2
billion of the 2.1‚Äì2.2 billion Christians living as of 2010, defend the
doctrine of the Trinity‚Äîindeed, Trinitarianism is often used as one marker of
orthodox Christian thought and doctrine. Jesus (Arabic: "Isa" or "Yasu", among
Muslims and Arab Christians respectively) is common between Christianity,
Islam, and Baha'i Faith, but with vastly differing conceptions, viewed as God
incarnate and the Saviour of mankind by Christians, and as a Prophet of Islam
by Muslims, and a Manifestation of God by Baha'is. Theological continuity. All
the Abrahamic religions affirm one personal eternal God who created the
universe, who rules history, who sends prophetic and angelic messengers and who
reveals the divine will through inspired Scriptures. They also affirm that
obedience to this creator God is to be lived out historically, and that one day
God will unilaterally intervene in human history on the day of judgment and
will determine for all humanity their eternal destinies of heaven or hell based
upon a person's beliefs and actions. Scripture. All Abrahamic religions believe
that God guides humanity through revelation to prophets, and each religion
recognizes that God revealed teachings up to and including those in their own
scripture. Ethical orientation. An ethical orientation: all these religions
speak of a choice between good and evil, which is associated with obedience or
disobedience to a single God and to Divine Law. Eschatological world view. An
eschatological world view of history and destiny, beginning with the Creation
of the world and the concept that God works through history, and ending with a
Resurrection of the dead and final judgment and World to Come. The significance
of Abraham. Even though members of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam do not all
claim Abraham as an ancestor, some members of these religions have tried to
claim him as exclusively theirs. For Jews. For Jews, Abraham is, through Isaac
and Jacob, the founding patriarch of the children of Israel. God promised
Abraham: "I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you." With
Abraham, God entered into "an everlasting covenant throughout the ages to be
God to you and to your offspring to come." Abraham is primarily a revered
ancestor or patriarch (referred to as "Avraham Avinu" (◊ê◊ë◊®◊î◊ù ◊ê◊ë◊ô◊ ◊ï in
hebrew) "Abraham our father") to whom God made several promises: chiefly, that
he would have numberless descendants, who would receive the land of Canaan (the
"Promised Land"). According to Jewish tradition, Abraham was the first post-
Flood prophet to reject idolatry through rational analysis, although Shem and
Eber carried on the tradition from Noah. For Christians. Christians view
Abraham as an important exemplar of faith, and a spiritual, as well as
physical, ancestor of Jesus‚Äîa Jew considered the Son of God through whom God
promised to bless all the families of the earth. For Christians, Abraham is a
spiritual forebearer as well as/rather than a direct ancestor depending on the
individual's interpretation of Paul the Apostle, with the Abrahamic Covenant
"reinterpreted so as to be defined by faith in Christ rather than biological
descent" or both by faith as well as a direct ancestor; in any case, the
emphasis is placed on faith being the only requirement for the Abrahamic
Covenant to apply; see also New Covenant and Supersessionism. In Christian
belief, Abraham is a role model of faith, and his obedience to God by offering
Isaac is seen as a foreshadowing of God's offering of his son Jesus. Christian
commentators have a tendency to interpret God's promises to Abraham as applying
to Christianity subsequent to (and sometimes rather than (as in
Supersessionism) being applied to Judaism, whose adherents predominantly
rejected Jesus. They argue this on the basis that just as Abraham as a Gentile
"believed God and it was credited to him as righteousness" (cf. Rom. 4:3, James
2:23), "those who have faith are children of Abraham" (see also John 8:39).
This is most fully developed in Paul's theology where all who believe in God
are spiritual descendants of Abraham. However, with regards to and , in both
cases he refers to these spiritual descendants as the "sons of God" rather than
"children of Abraham". For Muslims. For Muslims, Abraham is a prophet, the
"messenger of God" who stands in the line from Noah to Muhammad, to whom Allah
gave revelations, who "raised the foundations of the House" (i.e., the Kaaba)
with his first son, Isma'il, a symbol of which is every mosque. Ibrahim
(Abraham) is the first in a genealogy for Muhammad. Islam considers Abraham to
be "one of the first Muslims" (Surah 3)‚Äîthe first monotheist in a world where
monotheism was lost, and the community of those faithful to God, thus being
referred to as ÿßÿ®ŸàŸÜÿß ÿßÿ®ÿ±ŸáŸäŸÖ or "Our Father Abraham", as well as
"Ibrahim al-Hanif" or "Abraham the Monotheist". Islam holds that it was
Ishmael, (Isma'il, Muhammad's ancestor) rather than Isaac, whom Ibrahim was
instructed to sacrifice. In addition to this spiritual lineage, the northern
Adnani Arab tribes trace their lineage to Isma'il, and thus to Abraham. Abraham
is also recalled in certain details of the annual Hajj pilgrimage. The
religions. Judaism. Judaism's oldest text is the "Tanakh", an account of the
Israelites' relationship with God from their earliest history until the
building of the Second Temple (c. 535 BCE). Abraham is hailed as the first
Hebrew and the father of the Jewish people. One of his great-grandsons was
Judah, from whom the religion ultimately gets it name. The Israelites were
initially a number of tribes who lived in the Kingdom of Israel and Kingdom of
Judah. After being conquered and exiled, some members of the Kingdom of Judah
eventually returned to Israel. They later formed an independent state under the
Hasmonean dynasty in the 2nd and 1st centuries BCE, before becoming a client
kingdom of the Roman Empire, which also conquered the state and dispersed its
inhabitants. From the 2nd to the 6th centuries Jews wrote the Talmud, a lengthy
work of legal rulings and Biblical exegesis which‚Äîalong with the
"Tanakh"‚Äîis a key text of Judaism. Christianity. Christianity began in the
1st century as a sect within Judaism initially led by Jesus. His followers
viewed him as the Messiah; after his crucifixion and death they came to view
him as God incarnate, who was resurrected and will return at the end of time to
judge the living and the dead and create an eternal Kingdom of God. Within a
few decades the new movement split from Judaism. After several periods of
alternating persecution and relative peace "vis a vis" the Roman authorities
under different administrations, Christianity became the state church of the
Roman Empire in 380, but has been split into various churches from its
beginning. An attempt was made by the Byzantine Empire to unify Christendom,
but this formally failed with the East‚ÄìWest Schism of 1054. In the 16th
century the birth and growth of Protestantism further split Christianity into
many denominations. Islam. Islam is based on the teachings of the Quran.
Although it considers Muhammad to be the Seal of the prophets, Islam teaches
that every prophet preached Islam, providing a historical back-story for the
religion by co-opting Jewish and Christian prophets, and adding others, such as
Cyrus the Great ("Dhul-Qarnayn") and "al-Khidr". The teachings of Quran are
presented as the direct revelation and words of Allah, and earlier scriptures
are considered to have been corrupted over time. Islam (meaning "submission",
in the sense of submission to Allah) is universal (membership is open to
anyone); like Judaism, it has a strictly unitary conception of Allah, called
"tawhid", or "strict" or "simple" monotheism. Early disputes over who would
lead Muslims following the death of Muhammad led to a split between Sunni and
Shia, Islam's two main denominations. God. All the Abrahamic religions are
monotheistic. In both Judaism and Islam, God is viewed as a single divine
being; this view is not shared by Christianity which views God as an
indivisible Trinity. While the Christians hold that the Trinity is the same as
the Judaic and Islamic singular divine being view of God, the distinction is
sufficiently huge as to require an overt explanation on the part of the
Christians and on the part of the Islamic faith which restates the issue with
an admonition in chapter 112 of the Qur'an. Judaism. Jewish beliefs are based
on the Hebrew Bible (called the Tanakh in Hebrew), which consists of the
"Torah" (traditionally regarded as the writings of Moses), along with the
writings of the prophets, psalmists, and other ancient canonized scriptures,
all of which reveal the nature and commandments of God. Additionally, Jewish
faith has a basis in the Oral Law, as recorded in the Mishnah and Gemara that
together form the Talmud. The Supreme Being is referred to in the Hebrew Bible
in several ways, such as "Elohim", "Adonai" or by the four Hebrew letters "Y-H-
V (or W) -H" (the tetragrammaton), which observant Jews do not pronounce as a
word. The Hebrew words "Eloheynu" (Our God) and HaShem (The Name), as well as
the English names "Lord" and "God", are also used in modern-day Judaism. The
latter is sometimes written "G-d" in reference to the taboo against pronouncing
the tetragrammaton. The word "Elohim" has the Hebrew plural ending "-ƒ´m",
which some Biblical scholars have taken as support for the general notion that
the ancient Hebrews were polytheists in the time of the patriarchs; however, as
the word itself is used with singular verbs, this hypothesis is not accepted in
traditional Jewish thought. Jewish texts point out other words in Hebrew used
in the same manner according to the rule of Hebrew Grammar, denoting respect,
majesty and deliberation, similar to the royal plural in English and ancient
Egyptian, and the use of the plural form ""vous"" for individuals of higher
standing in modern French. Jewish Biblical scholars and historical commentary
on the passage also suggest that Elohim in the plural form indicates God in
conjunction with the heavenly court, i.e., the Angels. Some Kabbalistic texts
explain the use of the Elohim as a pluralistic singularity, one essence
sustaining all levels of creation from the mundane physical to the sublime and
Holy spiritual. Christianity. Christians believe that the God worshiped by the
faithful Hebrew people of the pre-Christian era has always revealed himself as
he did through Jesus; but that this was never obvious until the Word of God
(the divine Logos) became flesh and dwelt among us (see John 1). Also, despite
the fact that the Angel of the Lord spoke to the Patriarchs, revealing God to
them, it has always been only through the Spirit of God granting them
understanding, that men have been able to later perceive that they had been
visited by God himself. After Jesus was raised from the dead‚Äîaccording to
Christian scriptures‚Äîthis ancient Hebrew witness of how God reveals himself
as "Messiah" came to be seen in a very different light. It was then that Jesus'
followers began to speak widely of him as God himself, although this had
already been revealed to certain individuals during his ministry. Examples were
the Samaritan woman in Shechem and Jesus' closest apostles. This belief
gradually developed into the modern formulation of the Trinity, which is the
doctrine that God is a single entity (singular God), but that there is a
"triunity" in God, which has always been evident albeit not understood. This
mysterious "triunity" is hypostatic; that is, there are three hypostases
("personae" in Latin) or "persons" of the Godhead (though this is an often
misleading English rendering). In the traditional Christian concept, God the
Father (the Source) has only revealed himself through his eternal Word (who was
incarnated in human history as Jesus Christ). The three different hypostases
are not "Gods" because they are one, and share the same Divine Nature; they are
the one and the same God. The Father is the Begetter, the Son is the eternally
Begotten, and the Spirit eternally proceeds from both (in Catholicism and
Protestantism) or from just the Father (in Eastern Orthodoxy). Non-trinitarian
views have constructed various theological understandings, ranging from
Binitarianism to Modalism. Some non-trinitarians would understand that the
three are not three but one playing three different roles, in three different
ages or dispensations. In the Age of the Father, as Jehovah. In the Age of the
Son, as Jesus. And finally in the Age of the Holy Spirit, with a New Name, as
the Second Coming of Christ. However, it should be noted that some Christian
denominations reject the trinity and follow nontrinitarian beliefs, Jehovah
Witnesses, Oneness Pentecostalism, some Pentecostals, and Jesus-name Baptism
churches being some of the nontrinitarianism. Islam. There is only one God in
Islam. Allah is the Arabic name for God (" æilƒÅh" is the Arabic term used for
a deity or a god in general). Islamic tradition also describes the 99 names of
God. These 99 names describe attributes of God, including Most Merciful, The
Just, The Peace and Blessing, and the Guardian. Islamic belief in God is
distinct from Christianity in that God has no progeny. This belief is summed up
in chapter 112 of the Qur'an titled Al-Ikhlas, which states ""Say, he is Allah
(who is) one, Allah is the Eternal, the Absolute. He does not beget nor was he
begotten. Nor is there to Him any equivalent."." The Qur'an also draws a
similitude between Jesus and Adam‚Äîthe first human being created by
God‚Äîsaying they were both 'created without a father' by God who said the
simple word "Be" (Arabic: "kun"). Thus, both the Torah and the Gospels are
believed to be based upon divine revelation, but most Muslims believe them to
have been corrupted (both accidentally, through errors in transmission, and
intentionally by certain Jews and Christians over the centuries). Muslims
revere the Qur'an as the final uncorrupted word of God, or 'The Final
Testament' as revealed through the last prophet, Prophet Muhammad. Muhammad is
regarded as the "Seal of the Prophets" i.e. the last in a long chain, and Islam
as the final monotheist faith, perfect in all respects as taught by the Qur'an.
Religious scriptures. All these religions rely on a body of scriptures, some of
which are considered to be the word of God‚Äîhence sacred and
unquestionable‚Äîand some the work of religious men, revered mainly by
tradition and to the extent that they are considered to have been divinely
inspired, if not dictated, by the divine being. Jewish. The sacred scriptures
of Judaism are the Tanakh, a Hebrew acronym standing for "Torah" (Law or
Teachings), "Nevi'im" (Prophets) and "Ketuvim" (Writings). These are
complemented by and supplemented with various (originally oral) traditions:
"Midrash", the "Mishnah", the "Talmud" and collected rabbinical writings. The
Tanakh (or Hebrew Bible) was composed between 1,400 BCE, and 400 BCE by Jewish
prophets, kings, and priests. The Hebrew text of the Tanakh, and the Torah in
particular, is considered holy, down to the last letter: transcribing is done
with painstaking care. An error in a single letter, ornamentation or symbol of
the 300,000+ stylized letters that make up the Hebrew Torah text renders a
Torah scroll unfit for use; hence the skills of a Torah scribe are specialist
skills, and a scroll takes considerable time to write and check. Christian. The
sacred scriptures of most Christian groups are the Old Testament and The New
Testament. The Old Testament in the Protestant King James is the same as the
Hebrew Bible allowing for slight variations in grammar or slang. However, the
Catholic Bible includes certain books that are considered historical in nature
and not Inspired. The story of the Macabbees is where the miracle of Hanaukkah
is recorded, is not found in Jewish Scripture or in the Protestant King James,
but is found in the Catholic Bible. Jesus quotes from the book of Enoch and
neither Jewish or Protestant scripture includes Enoch. The New Testament
comprises four accounts of the life and teachings of Jesus (the Four Gospels,
traditionally attributed to the apostle Matthew; the apostle John; Mark, a
student of the apostle Peter; and Luke, a student of the apostle Paul), as well
as several other writings by the apostles (such as Paul). They are usually
considered to be divinely inspired, and together comprise the Christian Bible.
Thus, Christians consider the fundamental teachings of the Old Testament, in
particular the Ten Commandments, as valid (see Biblical law in Christianity for
details). However, they believe that non Jewish Christians only have to follow
the Noahic laws (e.g. idolatry, lying, adultery, theft). The coming of Jesus as
the Messiah and saviour of humankind as predicted in the Old Testament would
shed light on the true relationship between God and mankind by restoring the
emphasis of universal love and compassion, as mentioned in the Great
Commandment, above the other commandments, also de-emphasising the more
"legalistic" and material precepts of Mosaic Law (such as circumcision and the
dietary constraints and temple rites) most of which would not apply to non
Jewish Christian believers. Very few Christians believe that the link between
Old and New Testaments in the Bible means that Judaism has been superseded by
Christianity as the "new Israel", and that Jesus' teachings described Israel
not as a geographic place, but rather an association with God and promise of
salvation in Heaven, a revisionist position rejected by Jews and others. The
vast majority of Christian faiths (generally including Catholicism, Orthodox
Christianity, Anglicanism and most forms of Protestantism) derive their beliefs
from the conclusions reached by the First Council of Nicaea in 325 in a
document known as the Nicene Creed. This describes the belief that God (as a
Trinity of distinct persons with one substance) became human on earth, born as
Jesus pursuant to the Old Testament scriptures, was crucified by humanity, died
and was buried, then was resurrected by God on the third day to rise and enter
the Kingdom of Heaven and "sit at the right hand of God" with a promise to
return and establish a World to Come. Christians generally believe that faith
in Jesus is the way to achieve salvation and to enter into Heaven and/or
receive Eternal life, and that salvation is a gift given by the grace of God.
The vast majority of Christian faiths (including Catholicism, Orthodox
Christianity, and most forms of Protestantism) recognize that the Gospels were
passed on by oral tradition, and were not set to paper until decades after the
death of Jesus, and that the extant versions are copies of those originals. The
version of the Bible considered to be most valid (in the sense of best
conveying the true meaning of the word of God) has varied considerably: the
Greek Septuagint, the Syriac Peshitta, the Latin Vulgate, the English King
James Version and the Russian Synodal Bible have been authoritative to
different communities at different times. In particular, Christians usually
consult the Tanakh when preparing new translations, although some believe that
the Septuagint should be preferred, as it was the Bible of the Early Christian
Greek Church, and because they believe its translators used a different Hebrew
Bible to the ones that make up the current Masoretic Hebrew text, as there are
some variant readings of the Dead Sea Scrolls confirmed by the Septuagint. In
the same sense that the Jewish mystics viewed the Torah as something living and
existing prior to any written text, so too do Christians view the Bible and
Jesus himself as God's "Word" (or "logos" in Greek), transcending written
documents. The sacred scriptures of the Christian Bible are complemented by a
large body of writings by individual Christians and councils of Christian
leaders (see canon law). Some Christian churches and denominations consider
certain additional writings to be binding; other Christian groups consider only
the Bible to be binding (sola scriptura). Islamic. Islam's holiest book is the
Qur'an, comprising 114 Suras ("chapters of the Qur'an"). However, Muslims also
believe in the religious texts of Judaism and Christianity in their original
forms, albeit not the current versions (which they believe to be corrupted).
According to the Qur'an (and mainstream Muslim belief), the verses of the
Qur'an were revealed by Allah through the Archangel Jibrail to Muhammad on
separate occasions. These revelations were written down and also memorized by
hundreds of companions of Mohammad. These multiple sources were collected into
one official copy. After death of Mohammed, Quran was copied on several copies
and Caliph Uthman provided these copies to different cities of Islamic Empire.
The Qur'an mentions and reveres several of the Israelite prophets, including
Moses and Jesus, among others (see also: Prophets of Islam). The stories of
these prophets are very similar to those in the Bible. However, the detailed
precepts of the Tanakh and the New Testament are not adopted outright; they are
replaced by the new commandments accepted as revealed directly by Allah
(through Gabriel) to Muhammad and codified in the Qur'an. Like the Jews with
the Torah, Muslims consider the original Arabic text of the Qur'an as
uncorrupted and holy to the last letter, and any translations are considered to
be interpretations of the meaning of the Qur'an, as only the original Arabic
text is considered to be the divine scripture. Like the Rabbinic Oral Law to
the Hebrew Bible, the Qur'an is complemented by the "Hadith", a set of books by
later authors recording the sayings of the prophet Muhammad. The Hadith
interpret and elaborate Qur'anic precepts. Islamic scholars have categorized
each Hadith at one of the following levels of authenticity or isnad: genuine
("sahih"), fair ("hasan") or weak ("da'if"). By the 9th century, six major
Hadith collections were accepted as reliable to Sunni Muslims. Shia Muslims,
however, refer to other authenticated hadiths instead. They are known
collectively as The Four Books. The Hadith and the life story of Muhammad
(sira) form the Sunnah, an authoritative supplement to the Qur'an. The legal
opinions of Islamic jurists (Faqƒ´h) provide another source for the daily
practice and interpretation of Islamic tradition (see Fiqh.) The Qur'an
contains repeated references to the "religion of Abraham" (see Suras 2:130,135;
3:95; 6:123,161; 12:38; 16:123; 22:78). In the Qur'an, this expression refers
specifically to Islam; sometimes in contrast to Christianity and Judaism, as in
Sura 2:135, for example: 'They say: "Become Jews or Christians if ye would be
guided (to salvation)." Say thou (O Muslims): "Nay! (I would rather) the
Religion of Abraham the True, and he joined not gods with Allah." ' In the
Qur'an, Abraham is declared to have been a Muslim (a "hanif", more accurately a
"primordial monotheist"), not a Jew nor a Christian (Sura 3:67). End times and
afterlife. In the major Abrahamic religions, there exists the expectation of an
individual who will herald the time of the end and/or bring about the Kingdom
of God on Earth; in other words, the Messianic prophecy. Judaism awaits the
coming of the Jewish Messiah; the Jewish concept of Messiah differs from the
Christian concept in several significant ways, despite the same term being
applied to both. The Jewish Messiah is not seen as a "god", but as a mortal man
who by his holiness is worthy of that description. His appearance is not the
end of history, rather it signals the coming of the world to come. Christianity
awaits the Second Coming of Christ, though Full Preterists believe this has
already happened. Islam awaits both the second coming of Jesus (to complete his
life and die) and the coming of Mahdi (Sunnis in his first incarnation, Shi'a
as the return of Muhammad al-Mahdi). Most Abrahamic religions agree that a
human being comprises the body, which dies, and the soul, which is capable of
remaining alive beyond human death and carries the person's essence, and that
God will judge each person's life accordingly after death. The importance of
this and the focus on it, as well as the precise criteria and end result,
differs between religions. Judaism. Judaism's views on the afterlife ("the Next
World") are quite diverse. This can be attributed to the fact that although
there clearly are traditions in the Hebrew Bible of an afterlife (see Naboth
and the Witch of Endor), Judaism focuses on this life and how to lead a holy
life to please God, rather than future reward, and its attitude can be mostly
summed up by the rabbinical observation that at the start of Genesis, God
clothed the naked (Adam and Eve); at the end of Deuteronomy, he buried the dead
(Moses) and the Children of Israel mourned for 40 days before getting on with
their lives. Christianity. Christians have more diverse and definite teachings
on the end times and what constitutes afterlife. Most Christian approaches
either include different abodes for the dead (Heaven, Hell, Limbo, Purgatory)
or universal reconciliation in which all souls are made in the image of God. A
small minority teach annihilationism, the doctrine that those persons who are
not reconciled to God simply cease to exist (though the Roman Catholic Church
has no official teaching on what kind of place hell is, and indeed allows that
it might be a locale of oblivion). Islam. In Islam, God is said to be "Most
Compassionate and Most Merciful" (Qur'an 1:1, as well as the start of all suras
but one). However, God is also "Most Just"; Islam prescribes a literal Hell for
those who disobey God and commit gross sin. Those who obey God and submit to
God will be rewarded with their own place in Paradise. While sinners are
punished with fire, there are also many other forms of punishment described,
depending on the sin committed; Hell is divided into numerous levels. Those who
worship and remember God are promised eternal abode in a physical and spiritual
Paradise. Heaven is divided into seven levels, with the highest level of
Paradise being the reward of those who have been most virtuous, the prophets,
and those killed while fighting for Allah (martyrs). Upon repentance to God,
many sins can be forgiven, on the condition they are not repeated, as God is
supremely merciful. Additionally, those who believe in God, but have led sinful
lives, may be punished for a time, and then eventually released into Paradise.
If anyone dies in a state of Shirk (i.e. associating God in any way, such as
claiming that He is equal with anything or denying Him), this is not
pardonnable‚Äîhe or she will stay forever in Hell. Once a person is admitted to
Paradise, this person will abide there for eternity. Worship and religious
rites. Worship, ceremonies and religion-related customs differ substantially
among the Abrahamic religions. Among the few similarities are a seven-day cycle
in which one day is nominally reserved for worship, prayer or other religious
activities‚Äî"Shabbat", Sabbath, or "jumu'ah"; this custom is related to the
biblical story of Genesis, where God created the universe in six days, and
rested in the seventh. Judaism. Orthodox Judaism practice is guided by the
interpretation of the Torah and the Talmud. Before the destruction of the
Temple in Jerusalem, Jewish priests offered sacrifices there two times daily;
since then, the practice has been replaced, until the Temple is rebuilt, by
Jewish men being required to pray three times daily, including the chanting of
the Torah, and facing in the direction of Jerusalem's Temple Mount. Jewish
women's prayer obligations vary by denomination; in contemporary orthodox
practice, women do not read from the Torah and are only required to say certain
parts of these daily services. Other practices include circumcision, dietary
laws, Shabbat, Passover, Torah study, Tefillin, purity and others. Conservative
Judaism, Reform Judaism and the Reconstructionist movement all move away, in
different degrees, from the strict tradition of the law. All versions of
Judaism share a common, specialized calendar, containing many festivals. The
calendar is lunisolar, with lunar months and a solar year (an extra month is
added every second or third year to allow the shorter lunar year to "catch up"
to the solar year). All streams observe the same festivals, but some emphasize
them differently. As is usual with its extensive law system, the Orthodox have
the most complex manner of observing the festivals, while the Reform pay more
attention to the simple symbolism of each one. Christianity. Christian worship
varies from denomination to denomination. Individual prayer is usually not
ritualised, while group prayer may be ritual or non-ritual according to the
occasion. During church services some form of liturgy is frequently followed.
Rituals are performed during sacraments, which also vary from denomination to
denomination and usually include baptism and communion, and may also include
confirmation, confession, last rites and holy orders. Catholic worship practice
is governed by the Roman Missal and other documents. Individuals, churches and
denominations place different emphasis on ritual‚Äîsome denominations consider
most ritual activity optional, see Adiaphora, particularly since the Protestant
Reformation. Islam. The followers of Islam (Muslims) are to observe the Five
Pillars of Islam. The first pillar is the belief in the oneness of Allah, and
in Muhammad as his final and most perfect prophet. The second is to pray five
times daily (salat) towards the direction (qibla) of the Kaaba in Mecca. The
third pillar is alms giving (Zakah), a portion of one's wealth given to the
poor or to other specified causes, which means the giving of a specific share
of one's wealth and savings to persons or causes, as is commanded in the Qur'an
and elucidated as to specific percentages for different kinds of income and
wealth in the hadith. The normal share to be paid is two and a half percent of
one's earnings: this increases if labour was not required, and increases
further if only capital or possessions alone were required (i.e. proceeds from
renting space), and increases to 50% on "unearned wealth" such as treasure-
finding, and to 100% on wealth that is considered haram, as part of attempting
to make atonement for the sin, such as that gained through financial interest
(riba). Fasting (sawm) during the ninth month of the Muslim lunar calendar,
Ramadan, is the fourth pillar of Islam, to which all Muslims after the age of
puberty in good health (as judged by a Muslim doctor to be able fast without
incurring grave danger to health: even in seemingly-obvious situations, a
"competent and upright Muslim physician" is required to agree), that are not
menstruating are bound to observe‚Äîmissed days of the fast for any reason must
be made up, unless there be a permanent illness, such as diabetes, that
prevents a person from ever fasting. In such a case, restitution must be made
by feeding one poor person for each day missed. Finally, Muslims are also
required, if physically able, to undertake a pilgrimage to Mecca at least once
in one's life: it is strongly recommended to do it as often as possible,
preferably once a year. Only individuals whose financial position and health
are severely insufficient are exempt from making Hajj (e.g. if making Hajj
would put stress on one's financial situation, but would not end up in
homelessness or starvation, it is still required). During this pilgrimage, the
Muslims spend three to seven days in worship, performing several strictly-
defined rituals, most notably circumambulating the Kaaba among millions of
other Muslims and the "stoning of the devil" at Mina. At the end of the Hajj,
the heads of men are shaved, sheep and other halal animals, notably camels, are
slaughtered as a ritual sacrifice by bleeding out at the neck according to a
strictly-prescribed ritual slaughter method similar to the Jewish kashrut, to
commemorate the moment when, according to Islamic tradition, Allah replaced
Abraham's son Ishmael (contrasted with the Judaeo-Christian tradition that
Isaac was the intended sacrifice) with a sheep, thereby preventing human
sacrifice. The meat from these animals is then distributed locally to needy
Muslims, neighbours and relatives. Finally, the hajji puts of "ihram" and the
hajj is complete. Circumcision. Judaism practices circumcision for males as a
matter of religious obligation, as does Islam as part of Sunnah (the practice
is not mandated by the Qur'an). Western Christianity replaced that custom with
a baptism ceremony varying according to the denomination, but generally
including immersion, aspersion, or anointment with water. The Early Church
(Acts 15, the Council of Jerusalem) decided that circumcision is not required
for Gentile Christians. The Council of Florence in the 15th century prohibited
it. Paragraph #2297 of the Catholic Catechism calls non-medical amputation or
mutilation immoral. Many countries with majorities of Christian adherents have
low circumcision rates (with the notable exceptions of the United States and
the Philippines). Coptic Christianity and Ethiopian Orthodoxy still observe
circumcision. "See also Aposthia." Male circumcision is among the rites of
Islam and is part of the (in Arabic): fitrah, or the innate disposition and
natural character and instinct of the human creation. Food restrictions.
Judaism and Islam have strict dietary laws, with permitted food known as kosher
in Judaism, and halal in Islam. These two religions prohibit the consumption of
pork; Islam prohibits the consumption of alcoholic beverages of any kind. Halal
restrictions can be seen as a modification of the kashrut dietary laws, so many
kosher foods are considered halal; especially in the case of meat, which Islam
prescribes must be slaughtered in the name of God. Hence in Morocco Muslims
used to consume kosher food. Similarly, some foods not considered kosher are
considered halal in Islam. With rare exceptions, Christians do not consider the
Old Testament's strict food laws as relevant for today's church; see also
Biblical law in Christianity. Most Protestants have no set food laws, but there
are minority exceptions. The Roman Catholic Church believes in observing
abstinence and penance. For example, all Fridays through the year and the time
of Lent are penitential days. The law of abstinence requires a Catholic from 14
years of age until death to abstain from eating meat on Fridays in honor of the
Passion of Jesus on Good Friday. The United States Conference of Catholic
Bishops obtained the permission of the Holy See for Catholics in the U.S. to
substitute a penitential, or even a charitable, practice of their own choosing.
Eastern Rite Catholics have their own penitential practices as specified by the
Code of Canons for the Eastern Churches. The Seventh-day Adventist Church (SDA)
embraces numerous Old Testament rules and regulations such as tithing, Sabbath
observance, and Jewish Food laws. Therefore, they do not eat pork, shellfish,
or other foods considered unclean under the Old Covenant. The "Fundamental
Beliefs" of the SDA state that their members "are to adopt the most healthful
diet possible and abstain from the unclean foods identified in the Scriptures."
among others In the Christian Bible, the consumption of strangled animals and
of blood was forbidden by Apostolic Decree and are still forbidden in the Greek
Orthodox Church, according to German theologican Karl Josef von Hefele, who, in
his Commentary on Canon II of the Second Ecumenical Council held in the 4th
century at Gangra, notes: "We further see that, at the time of the Synod of
Gangra, the rule of the Apostolic Synod Council of Jerusalem of Acts 15 with
regard to blood and things strangled was still in force. With the Greeks,
indeed, it continued always in force as their Euchologies still show." He also
writes that "as late as the eighth century, Pope Gregory the Third, in 731,
forbade the eating of blood or things strangled under threat of a penance of
forty days." Jehovah's Witnesses abstain from eating blood and from blood
transfusions based on . Sabbath observance. Sabbath in the Bible is a weekly
day of rest and time of worship. It is observed differently in Judaism and
Christianity and informs a similar occasion in several other Abrahamic faiths.
Though many viewpoints and definitions have arisen over the millennia, most
originate in the same textual tradition. Though not a day of rest (creation
does not make God tired and therefore He did not rest on the 7th day in Muslim
belief), Islam holds Friday as a day of special prayer. Proselytism. Judaism.
Judaism accepts converts, but has no explicit missionaries as such since the
end of the Second Temple era. Judaism states that non-Jews can achieve
righteousness by following Noahide Laws, a set of seven universal commandments
non-Jews are expected to follow. In this context, the Rambam (Rabbi Moses
Maimonides, one of the major Jewish teachers) commented: "Quoting from our
sages, the righteous people from other nations have a place in the world to
come, if they have acquired what they should learn about the Creator". Because
the commandments applicable to the Jews are much more detailed and onerous than
Noahide laws, Jewish scholars have traditionally maintained that it is better
to be a good non-Jew than a bad Jew, thus discouraging conversion. In the U.S.,
as of 2003 28% of married Jews were married to non-Jews. "See also Conversion
to Judaism." Christianity. Christianity encourages evangelism. Many Christian
organizations, especially Protestant churches, send missionaries to non-
Christian communities throughout the world. "See also Great Commission". Forced
conversions to Catholicism have been documented at various points throughout
history. The most prominently cited allegations are the conversions of the
pagans after Constantine; of Muslims, Jews and Eastern Orthodox during the
Crusades; of Jews and Muslims during the time of the Spanish Inquisition, where
they were offered the choice of exile, conversion or death; and of the Aztecs
by Hernan Cortes. Forced conversions to Protestantism have occurred as well,
notably during the Reformation, especially in England and Ireland (see
recusancy and Popish plot). Forced conversions are condemned as sinful by major
denominations such as the Roman Catholic Church, which officially states that
forced conversions pollute the Christian religion and offend human dignity, so
that past or present offenses are regarded as a scandal (a cause of unbelief).
According to Pope Paul VI, "It is one of the major tenets of Catholic doctrine
that man's response to God in faith must be free: no one therefore is to be
forced to embrace the Christian faith against his own will." Islam. Dawah is an
important Islamic concept which denotes the preaching of Islam. Da‚Äòwah
literally means "issuing a summons" or "making an invitation". A Muslim who
practices da‚Äòwah, either as a religious worker or in a volunteer community
effort, is called a dƒÅ‚Äòƒ´, plural du‚ÄòƒÅt. A dƒÅ‚Äòƒ´ is thus a person who
invites people to understand Islam through a dialogical process, and may be
categorized in some cases as the Islamic equivalent of a missionary, as one who
invites people to the faith, to the prayer, or to Islamic life. Da'wah
activities can take many forms. Some pursue Islamic studies specifically to
perform Da'wah. Mosques and other Islamic centers sometimes spread Da'wah
actively, similar to evangelical churches. Others consider being open to the
public and answering questions to be Da'wah. Recalling Muslims to the faith and
expanding their knowledge can also be considered Da'wah. In Islamic theology,
the purpose of Da‚Äòwah is to invite people, both Muslims and non-Muslims, to
understand the commandments of Allah as expressed in the Qur'an and the Sunnah
of the Prophet, as well as to inform them about Muhammad. Da‚Äòwah produces
converts to Islam, which in turn grows the size of the Muslim Ummah, or
community of Muslims. Other Abrahamic religions. Historically, the Abrahamic
religions have been considered to be Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Some of
this is due to the age and larger size of these three. The other, similar
religions were seen as either too new to judge as being truly in the same
class, or too small to be of significance to the category. However, some of the
restriction of Abrahamic to these three is due only to tradition in historical
classification. Therefore, restricting the category to these three religions
has come under criticism. The religions listed below here claim Abrahamic
classification, either by the religions themselves, or by scholars who study
them. Bah√°'√≠ Faith. Recently the Bah√°'√≠ Faith, which dates only to the late
19th century, has sometimes been listed as Abrahamic by scholarly sources in
various fields. Though smaller and younger than the well known Abrahamic
religions, the Bah√°'√≠ Faith is significant because of its activities,
distribution and numbers. The religion is almost entirely contained in a
single, organized, hierarchical community, and is also recognized as the
second-most geographically widespread religion after Christianity. The
Association of Religion Data Archives estimated some 7.3 million Bah√°'√≠s in
2005. Bah√°'u'll√°h, the founder, affirms the highest religious station for
Abraham and generally for prophets mentioned among the other Abrahamic
religions, and has claimed a lineage of descent from Abraham through Keturah
and Sarah. Additionally Bah√°'u'll√°h actually did lose a son, M√≠rz√° Mihd√≠.
Bah√°'u'll√°h, then in prison, eulogized his son and connected the subsequent
easing of restrictions to his son's dying prayer and compared it to the
intended sacrifice of Abraham‚Äôs son. The religion also shares many of the
same commonalities of Judaism, Christianity and Islam. The religion emphasizes
monotheism and believes in one eternal transcendent God. (See God in the
Bah√°'√≠ Faith.) The religion accepts the premise, and is a victim, of the
theme of a "prophetic tradition" pattern in that it accepts the founders of the
previous major Abrahamic religions as Manifestations of God come with
revelation under one God and has been persecuted and rejected as a religion.
Bah√°'√≠s believe that Bah√°'u'll√°h is the latest, though not last, of the
series of messengers of God and that this series of interventions by God in
human history has been progressive, each revelation from God more complete and
based on the teachings of those that preceded it, and each preparing the way
for the next. Ethnographic Abrahamic religions. Sometimes small religions are
mentioned as Abrahamic‚ÄîSamaritanism, Yazidi, Druzes, Mandeans, and Rastafari
movement. These religions are regional: Samaritans largely in Israel and the
West Bank, Yazidi among the Kurds though there has been some emigration, Druze
among the Syrians, Lebanese, and Palestinian, Mandean largely in Iraq,
Rastafari mostly in Jamaica.
