Agnostic theism Agnostic theism is the philosophical view that encompasses both
theism and agnosticism. An agnostic theist "believes" in the existence of at
least one deity, but regards the truth or falsehood of this proposition as
"unknown or inherently unknowable". The agnostic theist may also or
alternatively be agnostic regarding the properties of the God(s) they believe
in. Views of agnostic theism. There are numerous beliefs that can be included
in agnostic theism, including fideism, however not all agnostic theists are
fideists. Since agnosticism is a position on knowledge and does not forbid
belief in a deity, it is compatible with most theistic positions. The classical
philosophical understanding of knowledge is that knowledge is justified true
belief. By this definition, it is reasonable to assert that one may hold a
belief, and that belief may be true, without asserting that one knows it. The
founder of logotherapy, Viktor Frankl, may have well exemplified this
definition. Seidner expands upon this example and stresses Frankl's
characterization of "unconscious". Agnostic theism could be interpreted as an
admission that it is not possible to justify one's belief in a god sufficiently
for it to be considered known. This may be because they consider faith a
requirement of their religion, or because of the influence of plausible-seeming
scientific or philosophical criticism. Furthermore, a philosopher such as
SÃ¸ren Kierkegaard believed that knowledge of God is actually impossible, and
because of that people who want to be theists must "believe": ""If I am capable
of grasping God objectively, I do not believe, but precisely because I cannot
do this I must believe."" Christian Agnostics (distinct from a Christian who is
agnostic) practice a distinct form of agnosticism that applies only to the
"properties" of God. They hold that it is difficult or impossible to be sure of
anything beyond the basic tenets of the Christian faith. They believe that God
exists, that Jesus has a special relationship with him and is in some way
divine, and that God should be worshiped. This belief system has deep roots in
Judaism and the early days of the Church.
