Akhenaten Akhenaten (; also spelled Echnaton, Akhenaton, Ikhnaton, and
Khuenaten; meaning "living spirit of Aten") known before the fifth year of his
reign as Amenhotep IV (sometimes given its Greek form, "Amenophis IV", and
meaning "Amun is Satisfied"), was a Pharaoh of the Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt
who ruled for 17 years and died perhaps in 1336 BC or 1334 BC. He is especially
noted for abandoning traditional Egyptian polytheism and introducing worship
centered on the Aten, which is sometimes described as monotheistic or
henotheistic. An early inscription likens the Aten to the sun as compared to
stars, and later official language avoids calling the Aten a god, giving the
solar deity a status above mere gods. Akhenaten tried to bring about a
departure from traditional religion, yet in the end it would not be accepted.
After his death, traditional religious practice was gradually restored, and
when some dozen years later rulers without clear rights of succession from the
Eighteenth Dynasty founded a new dynasty, they discredited Akhenaten and his
immediate successors, referring to Akhenaten himself as "the enemy" in archival
records. He was all but lost from history until the discovery, in the 19th
century, of Amarna, the site of Akhetaten, the city he built for the Aten.
Early excavations at Amarna by Flinders Petrie sparked interest in the
enigmatic pharaoh, whose tomb was unearthed in 1907 in a dig led by Edward R.
Ayrton. Interest in Akhenaten increased with the discovery in the Valley of the
Kings, at Luxor, of the tomb of King Tutankhamun, who has been proved to be
Akhenaten's son according to DNA testing in 2010. A mummy found in KV55 in 1907
has been identified as that of Akhenaten. This elder man and Tutankhamun are
related without question, but the identification of the KV55 mummy as Akhenaten
has been questioned. Modern interest in Akhenaten and his queen, Nefertiti,
comes partly from his connection with Tutankhamun, partly from the unique style
and high quality of the pictorial arts he patronized, and partly from ongoing
interest in the religion he attempted to establish. Early reign as Amenhotep
IV. The future Akhenaten was a younger son of Amenhotep III and Chief Queen
Tiye. The eldest son, Crown Prince Thutmose, was recognized as the heir of
Amenhotep III but he died relatively young and the next in line for the throne
was a prince named Amenhotep. There has been much debate among the experts
about a possible co-regency between Amenhotep III and his son Amenhotep IV. The
length of the proposed co-regency ranges anywhere from two to twelve years. At
present it is usually assumed there was no co-regency and that Amenhotep IV
succeeded his father after his death. Amenhotep IV was crowned in Thebes and
there he started a building program. He decorated the southern entrance to the
precincts of the temple of Amun-Re with scenes of himself worshipping Re-
Harakhti. He soon decreed the construction of a temple dedicated to the Aten at
the Eastern Karnak. This temple was called the Gempaaten (“The Aten is found
in the estate of the Aten”). The Gempaaten consisted of a series of
buildings, including a palace and a structure called the Hwt Benben which was
dedicated to Queen Nefertiti. Other Aten temples constructed at Karnak during
this time include the Rud-menu and the Teni-menu which may have been
constructed near the Ninth Pylon. During this time he did not repress the
worship of Amun, and the High Priest of Amun was still active in the fourth
year of his reign. The king appears as Amenhotep IV in the tombs of some of the
nobles in Thebes: Kheruef (TT192), Ramose (TT55) and the tomb of Parennefer
(TT188). In the tomb of Ramose, Amenhotep IV appears on the west wall in the
traditional style, seated on a throne with Ramose appearing before the king. On
the other side of the doorway Amenhotep IV and Nefertiti are shown in the
window of appearance with the Aten depicted as the sun disc. In the Theban tomb
of Parennefer, Amenhotep IV and Nefertiti are seated on a throne with the sun
disk depicted over the king and queen. One of the last known documents
referring to Amenhotep IV are two copies of a letter from the Steward Of
Memphis Apy (or Ipy) to the Pharaoh. The documents were found in Gurob and are
dated to regnal year 5, third month of the Growing Season, day 19. Name change
to Akhenaten. On day 13, Month 8, in the fifth year of his reign, the king
arrived at the site of the new city Akhetaten (now known as Amarna). A month
before that Amenhotep IV had officially changed his name to Akhenaten.
Amenhotep IV changed most of his 5 fold titulary in year 5. The only name he
kept was his prenomen or throne name. Religious policies. Some recent debate
has focused on the extent to which Akhenaten forced his religious reforms on
his people. Certainly, as time drew on, he revised the names of the Aten, and
other religious language, to increasingly exclude references to other gods; at
some point, also, he embarked on the wide-scale erasure of traditional gods'
names, especially those of Amun. Some of his court changed their names to
remove them from the patronage of other gods and place them under that of Aten
(or Ra, with whom Akhenaten equated the Aten). Yet, even at Amarna itself, some
courtiers kept such names as Ahmose ("child of the moon god", the owner of tomb
3), and the sculptor's workshop where the famous Nefertiti bust, and other
works of royal portraiture, were found, is associated with an artist known to
have been called Thutmose ("child of Thoth"). An overwhelmingly large number of
faience amulets at Amarna also show that talismans of the household-and-
childbirth gods Bes and Taweret, the eye of Horus, and amulets of other
traditional deities, were openly worn by its citizens. Indeed, a cache of royal
jewelry found buried near the Amarna royal tombs (now in the National Museum of
Scotland) includes a finger ring referring to Mut, the wife of Amun. Such
evidence suggests that though Akhenaten shifted funding away from traditional
temples, his policies were fairly tolerant until some point, perhaps a
particular event as yet unknown, toward the end of the reign. Following
Akhenaten's death, change was gradual at first. Within a decade a comprehensive
political, religious and artistic reformation began promoting a return of
Egyptian life to the norms it had followed during his father's reign. Much of
the art and building infrastructure created during Akhenaten's reign was
defaced or destroyed in the period following his death, particularly during the
reigns of Horemheb and the early Nineteenth Dynasty kings. Stone building
blocks from Akhenaten's construction projects were later used as foundation
stones for subsequent rulers' temples and tombs. Pharaoh and family depictions.
Styles of art that flourished during this short period are markedly different
from other Egyptian art. In some cases, representations are more naturalistic,
especially in depictions of animals and plants, of commoners, and in a sense of
action and movement—for both nonroyal and royal people. However, depictions
of members of the court, especially members of the royal family, are extremely
stylized, with elongated heads, protruding stomachs, heavy hips, thin arms and
legs, and exaggerated facial features. Questions also remain whether the beauty
of Nefertiti is portraiture or idealism. Significantly, and for the only time
in the history of Egyptian royal art, Akhenaten's family are shown taking part
in decidedly naturalistic activities, showing affection for each other, and
being caught in mid-action (in traditional art, a pharaoh's divine nature was
expressed by repose, even immobility). The depictions of action may correspond
to the emphasis on the active, creative nurturing of the Aten emphasized in the
"Great Hymn to the Aten" and elsewhere. Nefertiti also appears, both beside the
king and alone (or with her daughters), in actions usually reserved for a
Pharaoh, suggesting that she enjoyed unusual status for a queen. Early artistic
representations of her tend to be indistinguishable from her husband's except
by her regalia, but soon after the move to the new capital, Nefertiti begins to
be depicted with features specific to her. Why Akhenaten had himself
represented in the bizarre, strikingly androgynous way he did, remains a
vigorously debated question. Religious reasons have been suggested, such as to
emulate the creative nature of the Aten, who is called in Amarna tomb texts,
"mother and father" of all that is. Or, it has been suggested, Akhenaten's (and
his family's) portraiture exaggerates his distinctive physical traits. Until
Akhenaten's mummy is positively identified, such theories remain speculative.
Some scholars do identify Mummy 61074, found in KV55, an unfinished tomb in the
Valley of the Kings, as Akhenaten's. If so—or if the KV 55 mummy is that of
his close relative, Smenkhkare—its measurements tend to support the theory
that Akhenaten's depictions exaggerate his actual appearance. Though the
"mummy" consists only of disarticulated bones, the skull is long and has a
prominent chin, and the limbs are light and long. In 2007, Zahi Hawass and a
team of researchers made CT Scan images of Mummy 61074. They have concluded
that the elongated skull, cheek bones, cleft palate, and impacted wisdom tooth
suggest that the mummy is the father of Tutankhamun, and thus is Akhenaten.
Family and relations. As Amenhotep IV, Akhenaten was married to Nefertiti at
the very beginning of his reign, and six daughters were identified from
inscriptions. Recent DNA analysis has revealed that with one of his biological
sisters, the "Younger Lady" mummy, Akhenaten fathered Tutankhaten (later
Tutankhamen). The parentage of Smenkhkare, his successor, is unknown, and
Akhenaten and an unknown wife have been proposed to be his parents. A secondary
wife of Akhenaten named Kiya is known from inscriptions. Some have theorized
that she gained her importance as the mother of Tutankhamen, Smenkhkare, or
both. Inscriptions refer to a daughter of Meritaten, Meritaten-ta-sherit and
may record a daughter for Ankhesenpaaten, Ankhesenpaaten-ta-sherit, though the
latter depends on a questionable reading of a single fragmentary inscription.
The texts in question all once belonged to Kiya and were re-inscribed for the
princesses later. The daughter (or, perhaps, hoped-for future daughter) might
have replaced Kiya's daughter in those scenes. International relations.
Important evidence about Akhenaten's reign and foreign policy has been provided
by the discovery of the Amarna Letters, a cache of diplomatic correspondence
discovered in modern times at el-Amarna, the modern designation of the
Akhetaten site. This correspondence comprises a priceless collection of
incoming messages on clay tablets, sent to Akhetaten from various subject
rulers through Egyptian military outposts, and from the foreign rulers
(recognized as "Great Kings") of the kingdom of Mitanni, Babylon, Assyria and
Hatti. The governors and kings of Egypt's subject domains also wrote frequently
to plead for gold from Pharaoh, and also complained of being snubbed and
cheated by him. Moran (1992), pp.87-89 While Akhenaten was certainly not a
close friend of Tushratta, he was evidently concerned at the expanding power of
the Hittite Empire under its powerful ruler Suppiluliuma I. A successful
Hittite attack on Mitanni and its ruler Tushratta would have disrupted the
entire international balance of power in the Ancient Middle East at a time when
Egypt had made peace with Mitanni; this would cause some of Egypt's vassals to
switch their allegiances to the Hittites, as time would prove. A group of
Egypt's allies who attempted to rebel against the Hittites were captured, and
wrote letters begging Akhenaten for troops, but he did not respond to most of
their pleas. Evidence suggests that the troubles on the northern frontier led
to difficulties in Canaan, particularly in a struggle for power between Labaya
of Shechem and Abdi-Heba of Jerusalem, which required the Pharaoh to intervene
in the area by dispatching Medjay troops northwards. Akhenaten pointedly
refused to save his vassal Rib-Hadda of Byblos whose kingdom was being besieged
by the expanding state of Amurru under Abdi-Ashirta and later Aziru, son of
Abdi-Ashirta, despite Rib-Hadda's numerous pleas for help from the pharaoh.
Rib-Hadda wrote a total of 60 letters to Akhenaten pleading for aid from the
pharaoh. Akhenaten wearied of Rib-Hadda's constant correspondences and once
told Rib-Hadda: ""You are the one that writes to me more than all the (other)
mayors"" or Egyptian vassals in EA 124. What Rib-Hadda did not comprehend was
that the Egyptian king would not organize and dispatch an entire army north
just to preserve the political status quo of several minor city states on the
fringes of Egypt's Asiatic Empire. Rib-Hadda would pay the ultimate price; his
exile from Byblos due to a coup led by his brother Ilirabih is mentioned in one
letter. When Rib-Hadda appealed in vain for aid to Akhenaten and then turned to
Aziru, his sworn enemy to place him back on the throne of his city, Aziru
promptly had him dispatched to the king of Sidon where Rib-Hadda was almost
certainly executed. Moran (2003) pp.368-69 Say to Aziru, ruler of Amurru: Thus
the king, your lord (ie: Akhenaten), saying: The ruler of Gubla (ie: Byblos),
whose brother had cast him away at the gate, said to you, "Take me and get me
into the city. There is much silver, and I will give it to you. Indeed there is
an abundance of everything, but not with me ." Thus did the ruler (Rib-Hadda)
speak to you. Did you not write to the king, my lord saying, "I am your servant
like all the previous mayors (ie: vassals) in his city"? Yet you acted
delinquently by taking the mayor whose brother had cast him away at the gate,
from his city. Moran (1992), pp.248-249 This letter shows that Akhenaten paid
close attention to the affairs of his vassals in Canaan and Syria. Akhenaten
commanded Aziru to come to Egypt and proceeded to detain him there for at least
one year. In the end, Akhenaten was forced to release Aziru back to his
homeland when the Hittites advanced southwards into Amki thereby threatening
Egypt's series of Asiatic vassal states including Amurru. Sometime after his
return to Amurru, Aziru defected to the Hittite side with his kingdom. While it
is known from an Amarna letter by Rib-Hadda that the Hittites "seized all the
countries that were vassals of the king of Mitanni" (EA 75) Akhenaten managed
to preserve Egypt's control over the core of her Near Eastern Empire which
consisted of present day Palestine as well as the Phoenician coast while
avoiding conflict with the increasingly powerful Hittite Empire of Suppiluliuma
I. Only the Egyptian border province of Amurru in Syria around the Orontes
river was permanently lost to the Hittites when its ruler Aziru defected to the
Hittites. Finally, contrary to the conventional view of a ruler who neglected
Egypt's international relations, Akhenaten is known to have initiated at least
one campaign into Nubia in his regnal Year 12, where his campaign is mentioned
in Amada stela CG 41806 and on a separate companion stela at Buhen. Death,
burial and succession. The last dated appearance of Akhenaten and the Amarna
family is in the tomb of Meryra II, and dates from second month, year 12 of his
reign. After this the historical record is unclear, and only with the
succession of Tutankhamun is somewhat clarified. Akhenaten planned to relocate
Egyptian burials on the East side of the Nile (sunrise) rather than on the West
side (sunset), in the Royal Wadi in Akhetaten. His body was removed after the
court returned to Thebes, and recent genetic tests have confirmed that the body
found buried in tomb KV55 was the father of Tutankhamun, and is therefore "most
probably" Akhenaten, although this is disputed. The tomb contained numerous
Amarna era objects including a royal funerary mask which had been deliberately
destroyed. His sarcophagus was destroyed but has since been reconstructed and
now sits outside in the Cairo Museum. There is much controversy around whether
Amenhotep IV succeeded to the throne on the death of his father, Amenhotep III,
or whether there was a coregency (lasting as long as 12 years according to some
Egyptologists). Current literature by Eric Cline, Nicholas Reeves, Peter Dorman
and other scholars comes out strongly against the establishment of a long
coregency between the two rulers and in favour of either no coregency or a
brief one lasting one to two years, at the most. Other literature by Donald
Redford, William Murnane, Alan Gardiner and more recently by Lawrence Berman in
1998 contests the view of any coregency whatsoever between Akhenaten and his
father. Similarly, although it is accepted that Akhenaten himself died in Year
17 of his reign, the question of whether Smenkhkare became co-regent perhaps
two or three years earlier or enjoyed a brief independent reign is unclear. If
Smenkhkare outlived Akhenaten, and became sole Pharaoh, he likely ruled Egypt
for less than a year. The next successor was Neferneferuaten, a female Pharaoh
who reigned in Egypt for two years and one month. She was, in turn, probably
succeeded by Tutankhaten (later, Tutankhamun), with the country being
administered by the chief vizier, and future Pharaoh, Ay. Tutankhamun was
believed to be a younger brother of Smenkhkare and a son of Akhenaten, and
possibly Kiya although one scholar has suggested that Tutankhamun may have been
a son of Smenkhkare instead. DNA tests in 2010 indicated Tutankhamun was indeed
the son of Akhenaten. It has been suggested that after the death of Akhenaten,
Nefertiti reigned with the name of Neferneferuaten but other scholars believe
this female ruler was rather Meritaten. The so-called Coregency Stela, found in
a tomb in Amarna possibly shows his queen Nefertiti as his coregent, ruling
alongside him, but this is not certain as the names have been removed and
recarved to show Ankhesenpaaten and Neferneferuaten. With Akhenaten's death,
the Aten cult he had founded gradually fell out of favor. Tutankhaten changed
his name to Tutankhamun in Year 2 of his reign (1332 BC) and abandoned the city
of Akhetaten, which eventually fell into ruin. His successors Ay and Horemheb
disassembled temples Akhenaten had built, including the temple at Thebes, using
them as a source of easily available building materials and decorations for
their own temples. Finally, Akhenaten, Neferneferuaten, Smenkhkare,
Tutankhamun, and Ay were excised from the official lists of Pharaohs, which
instead reported that Amenhotep III was immediately succeeded by Horemheb. This
is thought to be part of an attempt by Horemheb to delete all trace of Atenism
and the pharaohs associated with it from the historical record. Akhenaten's
name never appeared on any of the king lists compiled by later Pharaohs and it
was not until the late 19th century that his identity was re-discovered and the
surviving traces of his reign were unearthed by archaeologists. Plague and
pandemic. This Amarna Period is also associated with a serious outbreak of a
pandemic, possibly the plague, or polio, or perhaps the world's first recorded
outbreak of influenza, which came from Egypt and spread throughout the Middle
East, killing Suppiluliuma I, the Hittite King. Influenza is a disease
associated with the close proximity of water fowl, pigs and humans, and its
origin as a pandemic disease may be due to the development of agricultural
systems that allow the mixing of these animals and their wastes. Some of the
first archaeological evidence for this agricultural system is during the Amarna
period of Ancient Egypt, and the pandemic that followed this period throughout
the Ancient Near East may have been the earliest recorded outbreak of
influenza. However, the precise nature of this Egyptian plague remains unknown
and Asia has also been suggested as a possible site of origin of pandemic
influenza in humans. The prevalence of disease may help explain the rapidity
with which the site of Akhetaten was subsequently abandoned. It may also
explain why later generations considered the gods to have turned against the
Amarna monarchs. Arielle Kozloff discusses the evidence, arguing that the
epidemic was caused by Bubonic plague over polio. However, her argument that
"polio is only fractionally as virulent as some other diseases" ignores the
evidence that diseases become less virulent the longer they are present in the
human population, as demonstrated with syphilis and tuberculosis.
Implementation of Atenism. In the early years of his reign, Amenhotep IV lived
at Thebes with Nefertiti and his 6 daughters. Initially, he permitted worship
of Egypt's traditional deities to continue but near the Temple of Karnak (Amun-
Ra's great cult center), he erected several massive buildings including temples
to the Aten. Aten was usually depicted as a sun disc. These buildings at Thebes
were later dismantled by his successors and used as infill for new
constructions in the Temple of Karnak; when they were later dismantled by
archaeologists, some 36,000 decorated blocks from the original Aton building
here were revealed which preserve many elements of the original relief scenes
and inscriptions. The relationship between Amenhotep IV and the priests of
Amun-Re gradually deteriorated. In Year 5 of his reign, Amenhotep IV took
decisive steps to establish the Aten as the exclusive, monotheistic god of
Egypt: the pharaoh "disbanded the priesthoods of all the other gods...and
diverted the income from these cults to support the Aten". To emphasize his
complete allegiance to the Aten, the king officially changed his name from
Amenhotep IV to Akhenaten or 'Living Spirit of Aten.' Akhenaten's fifth year
also marked the beginning of construction on his new capital, Akhetaten or
'Horizon of Aten', at the site known today as Amarna. Very soon afterwards, he
centralized Egyptian religious practices in Akhetaten, though construction of
the city seems to have continued for several more years. In honor of Aten,
Akhenaten also oversaw the construction of some of the most massive temple
complexes in ancient Egypt. In these new temples, Aten was worshipped in the
open sunlight, rather than in dark temple enclosures, as had been the previous
custom. Akhenaten is also believed to have composed the Great Hymn to the Aten.
Initially, Akhenaten presented Aten as a variant of the familiar supreme deity
Amun-Re (itself the result of an earlier rise to prominence of the cult of
Amun, resulting in Amun becoming merged with the sun god Ra), in an attempt to
put his ideas in a familiar Egyptian religious context. However, by Year 9 of
his reign, Akhenaten declared that Aten was not merely the supreme god, but the
only god, and that he, Akhenaten, was the only intermediary between Aten and
his people. He ordered the defacing of Amun's temples throughout Egypt and, in
a number of instances, inscriptions of the plural 'gods' were also removed.
Aten's name is also written differently after Year 9, to emphasize the
radicalism of the new regime, which included a ban on images, with the
exception of a rayed solar disc, in which the rays (commonly depicted ending in
hands) appear to represent the unseen spirit of Aten, who by then was evidently
considered not merely a sun god, but rather a universal deity. Representations
of the Aten were always accompanied with a sort of "hieroglyphic footnote",
stating that the representation of the sun as All-encompassing Creator was to
be taken as just that: a representation of something that, by its very nature
as something transcending creation, cannot be fully or adequately represented
by any one part of that creation. Speculative theories. Akhenaten's status as a
religious revolutionary has led to much speculation, ranging from bona fide
scholarly hypotheses to the non-academic fringe theories. Although many believe
that he introduced monotheism, others see Akhenaten as a practitioner of an
Aten monolatry, as he did not actively deny the existence of other gods; he
simply refrained from worshipping any but the Aten while expecting the people
to worship not Aten but him. Akhenaten and Judeo-Christian monotheism. The idea
of Akhenaten as the pioneer of a monotheistic religion that later became
Judaism has been considered by various scholars. One of the first to mention
this was Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, in his book "Moses and
Monotheism". Freud argued that Moses had been an Atenist priest forced to leave
Egypt with his followers after Akhenaten's death. Freud argued that Akhenaten
was striving to promote monotheism, something that the biblical Moses was able
to achieve. Following his book, the concept entered popular consciousness and
serious research. Other scholars and mainstream Egyptologists point out that
there are direct connections between early Judaism and other Semitic religious
traditions. They also state that two of the three principal Judaic terms for
God, Yahweh, Elohim (morphologically plural, lit. "gods"), and Adonai
(morphologically plural, lit. "my lords" ) have a connection to Aten. Freud
commented on the connection between Adonai, the Egyptian Aten and the Syrian
divine name of Adonis as a primeval unity of language between the factions; in
this he was following the argument of Egyptologist Arthur Weigall. Jan
Assmann's opinion is that 'Aten' and 'Adonai' are not linguistically related.
Akhenaten appears in history almost two centuries prior to the first
archaeological and written evidence for Judaism and Israelite culture is found
in the Levant. While such imagery is not a feature of early Israelite culture,
abundant visual imagery of the Aten disk (which celebrated the natural world)
was central to Atenism. Ahmed Osman has claimed that Akhenaten's maternal
grandfather Yuya was the same person as the Biblical Joseph. Yuya held the
title "Overseer of the Cattle of Min at Akhmin" during his life. He likely
belonged to the local nobility of Akhmim. Egyptologists hold this view because
Yuya had strong connections to the city of Akhmim in Upper Egypt. This makes it
unlikely that he was a foreigner since most Asiatic settlers tended to cloister
around the Nile Delta region of Lower Egypt. Some Egyptologists, however, give
him a Mitannian origin. It is widely accepted that there are strong
similarities between Akhenaten's Great Hymn to the Aten and the Biblical Psalm
104, though this form is found widespread in ancient Near Eastern hymnology
both before and after the period and whether this implies a direct influence or
a common literary convention remains in dispute. Others have likened some
aspects of Akhenaten's relationship with the Aten to the relationship, in
Christian tradition, of Jesus Christ with God - particularly in interpretations
that emphasise a more monotheistic interpretation of Atenism than henotheistic.
Donald B. Redford has noted that some have viewed Akhenaten as a harbinger of
Jesus. "After all, Akhenaten did call himself the son of the sole god: 'Thine
only son that came forth from thy body'." James Henry Breasted likened him to
Jesus, Arthur Weigall saw him as a failed precursor of Christ and Thomas Mann
saw him "as right on the way and yet not the right one for the way". Redford
argued that while Akhenaten called himself the son of the Sun-Disc and acted as
the chief mediator between god and creation, kings for thousands of years
before Akhenaten's time had claimed the same relationship and priestly role.
However Akhenaton's case may be different through the emphasis placed on the
heavenly father and son relationship. Akhenaten described himself as "thy son
who came forth from thy limbs", "thy child", "the eternal son that came forth
from the Sun-Disc", and "thine only son that came forth from thy body". The
close relationship between father and son is such that only the king truly
knows the heart of "his father", and in return his father listens to his son's
prayers. He is his father's image on earth and as Akhenaten is king on earth
his father is king in heaven. As high priest, prophet, king and divine he
claimed the central position in the new religious system. Since only he knew
his father's mind and will, Akhenaten alone could interpret that will for all
mankind with true teaching coming only from him. "Aspects of Monotheism",
Donald B. Redford, "Biblical Archeology Review", 1996 However, Greenberg argues
that Judaism shows signs that in its early forms it had Henotheistic
characteristics and that it later was refined into a monotheism around the time
of King Josiah, relegating that which previously were considered gods, into
gods that ought not be worshipped, i.e. angels. Possible illness. The rather
strange and eccentric portrayals of Akhenaten, with a sagging stomach, thick
thighs, larger breasts, and long, thin face — so different from the athletic
norm in the portrayal of Pharaohs — has led certain Egyptologists to suppose
that Akhenaten suffered some kind of genetic abnormality. Various illnesses
have been put forward. On the basis of his longer jaw and his feminine
appearance, Cyril Aldred suggested he may have suffered from Froelich's
Syndrome. However, this is unlikely because this disorder results in sterility
and Akhenaten is believed to have fathered numerous children — at least six
daughters by Nefertiti, and his successor Tutankhamen by a minor wife. Another
suggestion by Burridge is that Akhenaten may have suffered from Marfan's
Syndrome. Marfan's syndrome, unlike Froelich's, does not result in any lack of
intelligence or sterility. It is associated with a sunken chest, long curved
spider-like fingers (arachnodactyly), occasional congenital heart difficulties,
a high curved or slightly cleft palate, and a highly curved cornea or
dislocated lens of the eye, with the requirement for bright light to see well.
Marfan's sufferers tend towards being taller than average, with a long, thin
face, and elongated skull, overgrown ribs, a funnel or pigeon chest, and larger
pelvis, with enlarged thighs and spindly calves. Marfan's syndrome is a
dominant characteristic, and sufferers have a 50% chance of passing it on to
their children. All of these symptoms appear in depictions of Akhenaten and of
his children. Recent CT scans of Tutankhamun report a cleft palate and a fairly
long head, as well as an abnormal curvature of the spine and fusion of the
upper vertebrae, a condition associated with scoliosis, all conditions
associated with Marfan's syndrome. More recently, Homocystinuria was suggested
as a possible diagnosis. Patients suffering from homocystinuria have Marfan
habitus, however, as an autosomal recessive disease it seems to fit better into
Akhenaten's family tree - Akhenaten's parents, Amenhotep III and Tiye, were
most probably healthy. Marfan Syndrome was ruled out following DNA tests on
Tutankhamun in 2010. However, Dominic Montserrat in "Akhenaten: History,
Fantasy and Ancient Egypt" argues that "there is now a broad consensus among
Egyptologists that the exaggerated forms of Akhenaten's physical portrayal...
are not to be read literally". Montserrat and others argue that the body-shape
relates to some form of religious symbolism. Because the god Aten was referred
to as "the mother and father of all humankind" it has been suggested that
Akhenaten was made to look androgynous in artwork as a symbol of the androgyny
of the god. This required "a symbolic gathering of all the attributes of the
creator god into the physical body of the king himself", which will "display on
earth the Aten's multiple life-giving functions". Akhenaten did refer to
himself as "The Unique One of Re", and he may have used his control of artistic
expression to distance himself from the common people, though such a radical
departure from the idealised traditional representation of the image of the
Pharaoh would be truly extraordinary. Representations of other persons than
Akhenaten in the 'Amarna style' are equally unflattering — for example, a
carving of his father Amenhotep III as an overweight figure; Nefertiti is shown
in some statues as well past her prime, with a severe face and a stomach
swollen by repeated pregnancies. Another claim was made by Immanuel Velikovsky,
who hypothesized an incestuous relationship with his mother, Tiye. Velikovsky
also posited that Akhenaten had elephantiasis, producing enlarged legs. Based
on this, he identified Akhenaten as the history behind the Oedipus myth,
Oedipus being Greek for "swollen feet", and moved the setting from the Greek
Thebes to the Egyptian Thebes. As part of his argument, Velikovsky uses the
fact that Akhenaten viciously carried out a campaign to erase the name of his
father, which he argues could have developed into Oedipus killing his father.
This point seems to be disproved, however, in that Akhenaten in fact mummified
and buried his father in the honorable traditional Egyptian fashion prior to
beginning his monotheistic revolution. In the same 1960 work, "Oedipus and
Akhnaton", Velikovsky not only saw Akhenaten as the origin of Oedipus, but also
identified him with a Pharaoh mentioned only in Herodotus, "Anysis of the city
of the same name" — Akhenaten of Akhetaten. Like Oedipus, Anysis was blinded,
deposed and exiled. Some scholars have argued that Akhenaten went blind at the
end of his life and was supported by his wife Nefertiti. First
“individual”. Historian James Henry Breasted considered Akhenaten to be
“the first individual in history,” as well as the first monotheist,
romantic, and scientist. In 1899, Flinders Petrie opined, Henry Hall contended
that the pharaoh was the “first example of the scientific mind.” In
"Akhenaten: Egypts False Prophet", Nicholas Reeves construes the pharaohs
religious reformations as attempts at the centralization of his power and
solidification of his role as “divine monarch.” Smenkhkare. There has also
been interest in the identity of the Pharaoh Smenkhkare, who was the immediate
successor to Akhenaten. In particular, descriptions on a small box seemed to
refer to "Smenkhkare beloved of Akhenaten". This gave rise to the idea that
Akhenaten might have been bisexual. This theory seems to originate from objects
found in the tomb of Tutankhamen in the 1920s. The Egyptologist Percy Newberry
then linked this to one of the stele exhibited in the Berlin Museum which
pictured two rulers, naked and seated together – the older caressing the
younger and the shoulder offering support. He identified these as the rulers
Akhenaten and Smenkhkare. In the 1970s, John Harris identified the figure
pictured alongside Akhenaten as Nefertiti, arguing that she may have actually
been elevated to co-regent and perhaps even succeeded temporarily as an
independent ruler, changing her name to Smenkhkare. Nicholas Reeves and other
Egyptologists contend that Smenkhkare was the same person as Neferneferuaten,
who ruled together with Akhenaten as co-regent for the final one or two years
of Akhenaten's reign. On several monuments, the two are shown seated side by
side. However, recent academic research has established that this is not
possible since Neferneferuaten was a female ruler—she used the words
"Effective for her husband" on several items whereas Smenkhkare was a male
king.
