Alpha course The Alpha course is a course which seeks to explore the basics of
the Christian faith, described as "an opportunity to explore the meaning of
life". Alpha courses are currently being run in churches, homes, workplaces,
prisons, universities and a wide variety of other locations. The course is
being run around the world by all major Christian denominations. History. Alpha
was started in 1977 by the Reverend Charles Marnham, a curate at Holy Trinity,
Brompton, a Church of England parish in London. The name "Alpha" was suggested
by Marnham's wife, Tricia. It started as a course for church members on the
basics of the Christian faith but then began to be used as an introduction for
those interested in the faith. The Very Reverend John Irvine, at that time a
curate at Holy Trinity, Brompton, took over running the course and developed it
into the 10 week format which continues to this day. In 1990 the Reverend Nicky
Gumbel, at that time a curate at Holy Trinity, took over the running of the
course at the invitation of the Reverend Sandy Millar (the then vicar) and
oversaw its revision and expansion. In 2008 over 33,500 courses were offered in
163 countries by Anglican, Presbyterian, Lutheran, Baptist, Methodist,
Pentecostal, British New Church Movement and Orthodox churches and the Roman
Catholic Church. Over 15 million people worldwide have attended an Alpha course
(two and a half million in the UK). Structure. Attenders are issued with "The
Alpha Course Manual", which contains an outline of each talk and space for
making notes. Religion education for schools. In conjunction with Youth for
Christ, Alpha International produces two study programs designed for children
aged 11â€“14, "exploRE: The Christian Faith" a 12-week programme on the
Christian faith, and "exploRE: The Life of Jesus", a 14-lesson study of Jesus'
birth, life, death and resurrection. The capitalised RE is a reference to
religious education, part of the curriculum in the United Kingdom. The
materials are aimed at religious education teachers. Marriage programmes. Alpha
operates several marriage-related programmes. The Marriage Course is a seven-
session course for married couples, consisting of a "candlelit meal and/or
coffee, tea and dessert at a romantic table for two while listening to
practical talks that are informative and fun, either given live or played on
DVD", while the Marriage Preparation Course follows a similar format over five
sessions in preparation for married life. Unlike the Alpha Course, there are no
group sessions - the couple are to spend the time together, and relationship
details are not shared with a counsellor or other participants The site's
website makes little mention of Christianity, saying that 'while it is based on
Christian principles, it is designed for couples with or without a Christian
faith'. The courses are authored by Nicky and Sila Lee, staff at Holy Trinity
Brompton and authors of 'The Marriage Book' and 'The Parenting Book'. "God at
Work". "God at Work" is a book and course by Ken Costa, chairman of Alpha
International, 31-year veteran of UBS and now Chairman of Lazard UK. The course
consists of six hour-long sessions focusing on work, stress, ambition and other
work-related issues from a Christian perspective. Caring for Ex-Offenders.
Caring for Ex-Offenders is a follow-up to the Alpha for Prisons course,
supporting released prisoners by providing them with material assistance
including accommodation, work, food, and pastoral support through church life.
It operates in the UK, Canada, South Africa and the USA. St Paul's Theological
Centre. St Paul's Theological Centre is Alpha/Holy Trinity Brompton's
theological institution, with aims to provide lay training in theology, to
provide ordination training, to provide theological resources for theological
training in churches across the world, and to provide theological guidance for
Alpha. Doctrine. Alpha's teachings are intended to centre upon aspects of
Christian faith on which all denominations are in general agreement. Gumbel
says (quoting Fr Raniero Cantalamessa) "What unites us is infinitely greater
than what divides us." Roman Catholic distinctives, such as those concerning
the Virgin Mary and certain sacramental teachings are absent, as are Baptist
teachings on baptism. Instead, individual churches are encouraged to provide
follow-up courses of their own. The New International Version of the Bible is
quoted in the course materials. St Paul's reference to scripture being "God
breathed" (2 Timothy 3:16) is referred to, although whether this view of
scripture implies strict inerrancy is not made clear. Within evangelical
Protestantism the most controversial element of the Alpha Course is what is
considered to be its charismatic slant. Three of the fifteen sessions are given
to the person and work of the Holy Spirit and cover the infilling of the
Spirit; speaking in tongues and healing via prayer. Conversion stories in the
book of Acts (see 2:1ff, 9:17-19, 10:44-46, 19:1-6) are seen as normative.
Influences. Possibly the greatest influence has been the ministry of John
Wimber, who visited Holy Trinity Brompton a number of times during the 1980s
and 1990s. Nicky Gumbel's approach can also be linked to the ministry of E. J.
H. Nash (Bash), an influential Anglican cleric who set out to evangelise "top
boys at top schools" and who organised summer camps at Iwerne Minster in
Dorset. David Fletcher, who took responsibility for the camps after Bash,
described Alpha as: "basically the Iwerne camp talk scheme with charismatic
stuff added on.". Rob Warner addresses both, when he says: "Alpha can... be
summed up as Bash camp rationalistic conservatism combined with Wimberist
charismatic expressivism... this is a highly unusual, even paradoxical
hybrid.". Usage. Although originating from the Evangelical Anglican tradition,
it has subsequently been used by a variety of church traditions and groups. The
Alpha course has been endorsed by a number of leaders, including many Roman
Catholic cardinals, Anglican archbishops and bishops, and leading figures of
all the main Christian denominations. The current Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr
Rowan Williams was an enthusiastic supporter when he was Bishop of Monmouth and
Archbishop of Wales and has carried on his support into his new role, opening
an Alpha conference and accepting an invitation to speak at an Alpha supper in
London in 2004. He describes it as "a very special tool" and "a unique mixture
of Christian content and Christian style". His predecessor, George Carey
described the courses as "superb." Father Raniero Cantalamessa, a monk of the
Order of Friars Minor Capuchin and Preacher to the Papal Household for Pope
Benedict XVI wrote a document praising Alpha in June 2005. Critics. The Alpha
course has been criticised for a charismatic emphasis. A particular problem for
non-charismatic evangelicals is what is seen as Gumbel's emphasis upon the
person and work of the Holy Spirit. As a result, some churches have chosen to
teach a different view of the Holy Spirit, although this is discouraged in
Gumbel's book "How to Run the Alpha Course". Because it has been recommended as
supplementary reading, Gumbel's book, "Searching Issues", has become a focus of
criticism. There is a chapter criticising homosexual practice, although this is
not unique to the Alpha course but part of the wider Evangelical context. More
conservative critics (especially from a Reformed and Evangelical perspective)
have complained that the course does not adequately define sin and therefore
does not properly explain the reason for Jesus's death and resurrection. The
alternative Christianity Explored course is an attempt to go beyond what the
Alpha Course teaches on sin. The Revd John Vincent of the Urban Theology Unit
in Sheffield has suggested that Alpha presents too narrow a version of
Christianity and one too centred on what theologians have said about Jesus,
rather than allowing students the freedom to draw their own inspiration from
studying Jesus' life and teaching. "The Alpha course, because of its didactic
style, its narrow-mindedness and its closed nature, doesn't facilitate
alternative views", he says. "I happen to believe it therefore leads people
into a self-centred religion which is not the same as the genuine Christian
discipleship." The Alpha course has also been accused of using techniques
similar to brainwashing and similar to The Third Wave Roman Catholic context.
"Alpha in a Catholic Context" is a means of presenting Alpha to leaders of the
Roman Catholic Church. The 15-session course remains identical to that run in
other denominations but a team of Roman Catholics working from Alpha's
headquarters have produced a number of resources to introduce the course to
Catholic leaders and explain how it might best be used within a Catholic
context and making use of other Catholic material. This approach has drawn
harsh criticism from some catechists claiming that the course does not present
merely Christian ideas, but ideas not supported by Roman Catholic doctrine
which are corrected in the additional Roman Catholic sessions. Success.
Proponents and detractors alike indicate the open and friendly atmosphere of
the Alpha course where a participant can ask any question coupled with the
freedom to attend select talks or leave without a follow-up is a major factor
in its success. The only restriction placed is that everyone respects everyone
else at the table during discussion. In addition while there has been some
restructuring of the format of the Alpha course in the last two decades, it is
presented in the native tongue almost unchanged when run in different parts of
the world. Usually an Alpha course involves 'previous course guests' inviting
new ones, and a large number of published testimonies of guests around the
world attribute this success to their discovering an apparent relationship with
God through the figure of Jesus Christ while attending a local Alpha course
where they could proceed at their pace and freely converse about any topic.
