Altar server An altar server is a lay assistant to a member of the clergy
during a Christian religious service. An altar server attends to supporting
tasks at the altar such as fetching and carrying, ringing the altar bell and so
on. Altar servers in the Catholic Church. Formerly, only men and boys could
serve at the altar, but canon 230 of the Code of Canon Law promulgated in 1983
allowed local ordinaries to permit girls and women to do so (see Female altar
servers). In the United States, the Diocese of Lincoln, Nebraska has not
granted permission. The priest in charge of a church is not obliged to avail of
the permission, where granted. Traditionalist Catholic groups such as the FSSP
and the Institute of Christ the King and some individual priests do not. The
practice is also not accepted by those who act independently of the diocesan
bishops, as is the case with the SSPX. The term "acolyte" is sometimes applied
to altar servers, but in the proper sense means someone who has been received
the ministry of that name, usually reserved for those who are to be promoted to
the permanent or transitory diaconate. These must receive the ministry of
acolyte, which historically was classified as a minor order, at least six
months before being ordained as deacons. Duties at Mass (ordinary form of the
Roman Rite). In the ordinary (normal) form of the Roman Rite of the celebration
of Mass, provided no instituted acolyte is participating, altar servers have
the following responsibilities during If a bishop celebrates Mass solemnly, two
servers, wearing vimpas, hold the mitre and the crosier, and present them at
the appropriate times. Duties in the 1962 form. In Mass as in the 1962 Roman
Missal, which is an authorized extraordinary form of the Roman Rite (Mass),
altar servers have the following responsibilities at Low Mass and Missa
Cantata. Vestments. While ordained and instituted ministers must wear an alb
(with cincture and amice unless the form of the alb makes these unnecessary),
albs or any other appropriate attire, such as a cassock and surplice, may be
worn by servers. Black and red are the most common colours for a server's
cassock, if used. Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches. In the
Eastern Orthodox Church, altar servers assist the higher clergy during
services. They might carry the cross, candles or liturgical fans in processions
and entrances; maintain the censer, ensuring it has enough live charcoal,
loading it with incense and handing it to the priest or deacon when required;
preparing the hot water ("zeon") in time for it to be added to the chalice at
the Divine Liturgy; prepare the antidoron for the people to receive after Holy
Communion; and any other necessary tasks so that the celebrant need not be
distracted during the service. An altar server is vested in the sticharion
only. In the early Church, before someone could be a server he had to be
tonsured. Nowadays, in many places it is not necessary to be tonsured before
one is allowed to serve (since the tonsure must be done by a bishop or higher-
ranking priest). The rites of "Setting Aside a Taper-bearer" and "Tonsuring a
Reader" have now been combined into one service. It is the custom in some
traditions, such as the Greek Orthodox or Melkite Catholic, to allow tonsured
altar servers to also vest in the orarion, worn crossed over the back like that
of a subdeacon but with the ends hanging parallel in front. Among the Russians,
however, the orarion is not usually worn by servers, but only by duly ordained
subdeacons and deacons, with the exception that laymen who are blessed to
perform some of the functions of subdeacons may sometimes be blessed to wear
the orar. Before vesting, the server must fold his sticharion and bring it to
the priest for him to bless. The priest blesses and lays his hand on the folded
sticharion. The server kisses the priest's hand and the Cross on the vestment,
and then withdraws to vest. Any server who has not been tonsured must remove
the sticharion when he receives Holy Communion, because communicants receive
the Mysteries according to their order within the Church (so tonsured clergy
vest while laymen remove their vestments). Before divesting at the end of the
service, the server must receive the priest's blessing. The minimum age varies
by local circumstance, but boys must be mature enough to carry out their duties
without disrupting the sanctity of the altar. Although it is common in North
America for boys to act as altar servers, in some places this practice is
virtually unknown and these duties are always carried out by adult men. In
other places where altar servers are normally boys, adult men will not vest if
called upon to serve. In yet other places, boys are not permitted to serve in
the Altar on reaching their teens on the grounds that the young man is no
longer innocent enough to serve in the altar. Altar servers, regardless of age,
are subject to all the normal restrictions for those not of higher clerical
position. Anyone who is bleeding, or has an open sore, is not permitted to
enter the altar. They may not touch the altar table or anything on it under any
circumstances, nor the prothesis without a blessing. They may not touch the
sacred vessels, the chalice and diskos (paten) at any time. They may not stand
directly in front of the altar table or pass between the front of it and the
iconostasis, but must cross between the altar and the High Place if they need
to move to the opposite side. Women may not serve in the altar except in
women's monasteries. In that case they do not receive the clerical tonsure
(though they must be tonsured nuns), and do not vest in the sticharion, but
wear their normal religious habit for attending services, and serve at a
certain distance from the actual altar table. Normally, only older nuns may
serve in the altar; but the Hegumenia (Abbess) is permitted to enter even if
she is younger. Other churches. In lower Anglican churches, most Lutheran
Churches, and in the Methodist Church, all who serve in the above positions are
called acolytes. In Anglo-Catholic and some Episcopal Churches however, the
vast majority of roles associated with an altar server are the same as those in
the Catholic Church, and the same titles for each individual role are retained
from Catholic tradition â€“ mostly restored during the Oxford Movement in the
19th century.
