Anglo-Catholicism The terms Anglo-Catholic, Anglican Catholic and Catholic
Anglican describe people, beliefs and practices within Anglicanism which affirm
the Catholic heritage and identity of the various Anglican churches, rather
than the churches' Protestant heritage. The term "Anglo-Catholic" was coined in
the early 19th century; but, movements emphasising the Catholic nature of
Anglicanism have existed throughout history. Particularly influential in the
history of Anglo-Catholicism were the Caroline Divines of the seventeenth
century and, later, the leaders of the Oxford Movement, which began at the
University of Oxford in 1833 and ushered in a period of Anglican history known
as the "Catholic Revival". In addition, members of the personal ordinariates
for former Anglicans in the Roman Catholic Church are also sometimes referred
to as "Anglican Catholics". History. Following the passing of the Act of
Supremacy and Henry VIII's break with the Roman Catholic Church, the Church of
England continued to adhere to traditional Catholic teachings and did not
initially make any alterations to doctrine. The "Ten Articles" were published
in 1536 and constitute the first official Anglican articles of faith. The
articles for the most part concurred with the pre-Reformation teachings of the
Church in England and defended, among other things, the Real Presence of Christ
in the Eucharist, the sacrament of confession, the honouring and invocation of
saints and prayer for the dead. Belief in purgatory, however, was made non-
essential. This was followed by the "Bishops' Book" in 1537, a combined effort
by numerous clergy and theologians which, though not strongly Protestant in its
inclinations, showed a slight move towards Reformed positions and was unpopular
with conservative sections of the Church and quickly grew to be disliked by
Henry also. The "Six Articles", released two years later, moved away from all
Reformed ideas and strongly affirmed Catholic positions regarding matters such
as transubstantiation and Mass for the dead. The "King's Book", the official
article of religion written by Henry in 1543, likewise expressed Catholic
sacramental theology and encouraged prayer for the dead. A major shift in
Anglican doctrine came in the reign of Henry's son, Edward VI, who repealed the
"Six Articles" and under whose rule the Church of England became more
identifiably Protestant. Though the Church's practices and approach to the
sacraments became strongly influenced by those of continental reformers, it
nevertheless retained episcopal church structure. The Church of England was
then briefly reunited with the Roman Catholic Church under Mary, before
separating again under Elizabeth I. The Elizabethan Religious Settlement was an
attempt to end the religious divisions among Christians in England, and is
often seen as an important event in Anglican history, ultimately laying the
foundations for the ""via media"" concept of Anglicanism. The nature of early
Anglicanism was to be of great importance to the Anglo-Catholics of the 19th
century, who would argue that their beliefs and practices were common during
this period and were inoffensive to the earliest members of the Church of
England. Caroline Divines. The Caroline Divines were a group of influential
Anglican theologians active in the 17th century who opposed Calvinism and
Puritanism and stressed the importance of episcopal polity, apostolic
succession and the sacraments. The Caroline Divines also favoured elaborate
liturgy (in some cases favouring the liturgy of the pre-Reformation church) and
aesthetics. Their influence saw a revival in the use of images and statues in
churches. The leaders of the Anglo-Catholic revival in the 19th century would
draw heavily from the works of the Caroline Divines. Oxford Movement. The
modern Anglo-Catholic movement can be traced to the Oxford Movement of the
Victorian era, sometimes termed "Tractarianism". In the early 19th century,
various factors caused misgivings among English church people, including the
decline of church life and the spread of unconventional practices in the Church
of England. The British government's action in 1833 of beginning a reduction in
the number of Church of Ireland bishoprics and archbishoprics inspired a sermon
from John Keble in the University Church in Oxford on the subject of "National
Apostasy". This sermon marked the inception of what became known as the Oxford
Movement. The principal objective of the Oxford Movement was the defence of the
Church of England as a divinely-founded institution, of the doctrine of the
Apostolic Succession and of the Book of Common Prayer as a "rule of faith". The
key idea was that Anglicanism was not a Protestant denomination, but rather a
branch of the historic Catholic Church, along with the Roman Catholic Church
and the Eastern Orthodox churches. It was argued that Anglicanism had preserved
the historical apostolic succession of priests and bishops and thus the
Catholic sacraments. These ideas were promoted in a series of ninety "Tracts
for the Times". The principal leaders of the Oxford Movement were John Keble,
John Henry Newman and Edward Bouverie Pusey. The movement gained influential
support, but it was also attacked by the latitudinarians within the University
of Oxford and by bishops of the church. Within the movement there gradually
arose a much smaller group which tended towards submission to the supremacy of
the Roman Catholic Church. In 1845 the university censured the "Ideal of a
Christian Church", and its author, "Ideal Ward," i.e., the pro-Roman Catholic
theologian, W. G. Ward. 1850 saw the victory of the Evangelical clergyman
George Cornelius Gorham in a celebrated legal action against the church
authorities. A number of conversions to the Roman Catholic Church followed. The
majority of adherents of the movement, however, remained in the Church of
England and, despite hostility in the press and in government, the movement
spread. Its liturgical practices were influential, as were its social
achievements (including its slum settlements) and its revival of male and
female monasticism within Anglicanism. Recent developments. Since at least the
1970s, Anglo-Catholicism has been dividing into two distinct camps, along a
fault-line which can perhaps be traced back to Bishop Charles Gore's work in
the 19th century. The Oxford Movement had been inspired in the first place by a
rejection of liberalism and latitudinarianism in favour of the traditional
faith of the "Church Catholic", defined by the teachings of the Church Fathers
and the common doctrines of the historical eastern and western Christian
churches. Until the 1970s, therefore, most Anglo-Catholics rejected
liberalising development such as the conferral of holy orders on women.
Present-day "traditionalist" Anglo-Catholics seek to maintain tradition and to
keep Anglican doctrine in line with that of the Roman Catholic and Eastern
Orthodox churches. They often ally themselves with Evangelicals to defend
traditional teachings on sexual morality. The main organisation in the Church
of England that opposes the ordination of women, Forward in Faith, is largely
composed of Anglo-Catholics. Gore's work, however, bearing the mark of liberal
Protestant higher criticism, paved the way for an alternative form of Anglo-
Catholicism influenced by liberal theology. Thus in recent years many Anglo-
Catholics have accepted the ordination of women, the use of inclusive language
in Bible translations and the liturgy, and progressive attitudes towards
homosexuality. Such Anglicans often refer to themselves as "Liberal Catholics".
The more "progressive" or "liberal" style of Anglo-Catholicism is represented
by Affirming Catholicism. A third strand of Anglican Catholicism criticizes
elements of both liberalism and conservatism, drawing instead on the 20th
century Roman Catholic "Nouvelle Th√©ologie", especially Henri de Lubac. John
Milbank and others within this strand have been instrumental in the creation of
the ecumenical (though predominantly Anglican and Roman Catholic) movement
known as Radical Orthodoxy. Some traditionalist Anglo-Catholics have left
official Anglicanism to form "continuing Anglican churches" such as those in
the Anglican Catholic Church and Traditional Anglican Communion. Others have
left Anglicanism altogether for the Roman Catholic or Eastern Orthodox
churches, in the belief that liberal doctrinal innovations in the Anglican
churches have resulted in Anglicanism no longer being a true branch of the
"Church Catholic". Anglican ordinariates. In late 2009 with the publication of
the apostolic constitution "Anglicanorum Coetibus", traditionalist Anglicans
were invited into unity with the Holy See. This action was in response to
requests from various groups of Anglicans around the world to be received into
full communion with the Holy See while retaining liturgical, musical,
theological and other aspects of the Anglican patrimony. An apostolic
constitution is the highest level of papal legislation and is not time-limited.
In other words, groups of Anglicans may apply for reception by the Holy See at
any time and enter into what are termed "Anglican ordinariates" i.e. regional
groupings of Anglican Catholics which come under the jurisdiction of an
"ordinary", i.e. a bishop or priest appointed by Rome to oversee the community,
which, while being in a country or region which is part of the Latin Rite of
the Roman Catholic Church, retains aspects of the Anglican patrimony, e.g.
married priests, traditional English choral music and liturgy. Some have drawn
parallels with the Eastern Catholic churches, but though there are some
commonalities, Anglican ordinariates are intended to be part of the Western or
Latin Rite of the Roman Catholic Church, as they had been before the breach
with Rome following the reign of Mary I of England. The first Anglican
ordinariate, known as the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham, was
established on 15 January 2011 in the United Kingdom. The second Anglican
ordinariate, known as the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter, was
established on 1 January 2012 in the United States. The already existing
Anglican Use parishes in the United States, which have existed since the 1980s,
will form a portion of the first American Anglican ordinariate. These parishes
are already in communion with Rome and use modified Anglican liturgies approved
by the Holy See. They will be joined by other groups and parishes of
Episcopalians and some other Anglicans. Practices and beliefs. Theology. What
Anglo-Catholics believe is fiercely debated, sometimes even among Anglo-
Catholics themselves. In agreement with the Eastern Orthodox Church and
Oriental Orthodox Churches, Anglo-Catholics ‚Äî along with Old-Catholics and
Lutherans ‚Äî generally appeal to the "canon" (or rule) of St Vincent of
Lerins: "What everywhere, what always, and what by all has been believed, that
is truly and properly Catholic." The Anglican Thirty-Nine Articles make
distinctions between Anglican and Roman Catholic understandings of doctrine. As
the Articles were intentionally written in such a way as to be open to a range
of interpretations, Anglo-Catholics have defended Catholic practices and
beliefs as being consistent with them. Because of the Articles' harsh tone,
however, they have generally not been held in high regard by most Anglo-
Catholics. A recent trend in Anglo-Catholic thought related to the Thirty-Nine
Articles has included the New Perspective on Paul. Anglo-Catholic priests often
hear private confessions and anoint the sick, regarding these practices, as do
Roman Catholics, as sacraments. The classic Anglican aphorism regarding private
confession is: "All may, some should, none must." Anglo-Catholics are more
likely to offer prayers for the departed and the intercession of the saints
than low church Anglicans. C.S. Lewis, often considered an Anglo-Catholic in
his theological sensibilities, was once quoted as stating that, "Of course I
pray for the dead. The action is so spontaneous, so all but inevitable, that
only the most compulsive theological case against it would deter me. And I
hardly know how the rest of my prayers would survive if those for the dead were
forbidden. At our age, the majority of those we love best are dead. What sort
of intercourse with God could I have if what I love best were unmentionable to
him?" Anglo-Catholics share with Roman Catholics a belief in the sacramental
nature of the priesthood, the sacrificial character of the Mass and, in some
cases, the doctrine of Transubstantiation, the Roman Catholic version of the
doctrine of the Real Presence. A minority of Anglo-Catholics also encourage
priestly celibacy. Most Anglo-Catholics encourage devotion to the Blessed
Virgin Mary, particularly under her title of Our Lady of Walsingham, but not
all Anglo-Catholics adhere to a high doctrine of Mariology. A minority of
Anglo-Catholics, sometimes called Anglo-Papalists, consider themselves under
papal supremacy even though they are not in communion with the Roman Catholic
Church. Such Anglo-Catholics, especially in England, often celebrate Mass
according to the contemporary Roman Catholic rite and are concerned with
seeking reunion with the Roman Catholic Church. Liturgical practices. Many
other traditional Catholic practices are observed within Anglo-Catholicism,
including eucharistic adoration. Most of these Anglo-Catholic "innovations"
(or, rather, revivals of dormant practices) have since been accepted by
mainstream Anglican churches, if not by Evangelical or Low Church Anglicans.
Preferences for Elizabethan English and modern English texts vary within the
movement. In the United States a group of Anglo-Catholics in the Episcopal
Church published, under the rubrics of the 1979 Book of Common Prayer, an
Anglican Service Book which is "a traditional language adaptation of the 1979
Book of Common Prayer together with the Psalter or Psalms of David and
additional devotions." This book is based on the 1979 Book of Common Prayer but
includes offices and devotions in the traditional language of the 1928 Prayer
Book that are not in the 1979 edition. The book also draws from sources such as
the Anglican Missal.
