Apatheism Apatheism ( a portmanteau of "apathy" and "theism/atheism"), also
known as pragmatic atheism or (critically) as practical atheism, is acting with
apathy, disregard, or lack of interest towards belief or disbelief in a deity.
Apatheism describes the "manner" of acting towards a belief or lack of a belief
in a deity; so applies to both theism and atheism. An apatheist is also someone
who is not interested in accepting or denying any claims that gods exist or do
not exist. In other words, an apatheist is someone who considers the question
of the existence of gods as neither meaningful nor relevant to his or her life.
Apathetic agnosticism (also called pragmatic agnosticism) acknowledges that any
amount of debate can neither prove, nor disprove, the existence of one or more
deities, and if one or more deities exist, they do not appear to be concerned
about the fate of humans. Therefore, their existence has little impact on
personal human affairs and should be of little theological interest. Apatheists
hold that if it were possible to prove that God exists, their behavior would
not change. Similarly, there would be no change if someone proved that God does
not exist. History. Historically, practical atheism was considered by some
people to be associated with moral failure, willful ignorance, and impiety.
Those considered practical atheists were said to behave as though God, ethics,
and social responsibility did not exist; they abandoned duty and embraced
hedonism. According to the French Catholic philosopher Ã‰tienne Borne,
"Practical atheism is not the denial of the existence of God, but complete
godlessness of action; it is a moral evil, implying not the denial of the
absolute validity of the moral law but simply rebellion against that law." In
the 21st century, pragmatic atheism has been seen in a more positive light. The
journalist Jonathan Rauch believes that "apatheism is to be celebrated as
nothing less than a major civilizational advance. Religion, as countless acts
of violence in the name of God have underscored, remains the most divisive and
volatile of social forces... Apatheism, therefore, should not be assumed to
represent a lazy recumbency... Just the opposite: it is the product of a
determined cultural effort to discipline the religious mindset, and often of an
equally determined personal effort to master the spiritual passions. It is not
a lapse. It is an achievement." Types of apatheism. An apatheist may justify
their decision using one of these perspectives, or they may combine all of the
below to create their own attitude towards faith. Absence of religious
motivation. This apatheistic argument states that morals are present in human
society and do not rely on religion to be a part of the human experience.
Apatheists recognize that religion may provide a "comfort" for many people
around the world, but apatheists do not need religion to be content with the
morality of their lives and therefore live without it. This is known as "moral
apatheism". Indifference. Indifference is better known as indifferentism, the
belief that all religions are equal in value. Use of indifferentism in this
context was popularized by Kant in his "Critique of Pure Reason". Kant argues
that indifferentism represents an extreme form of skepticism that argues that
there is no rational ground for accepting any philosophical position. According
to the Catholic Church, this type of absolute indifferentism results in a
willingness to concede any position. It is often associated with moral
relativism. The Catholic Church ascribes indifferentism to all atheistic,
materialistic, pantheistic, and agnostic philosophies, as well as religious
pluralist philosophy, such as that espoused by Rousseau. Indifference is the
perspective exemplified by the following statement: "Since the existence of God
can never be proven, nor can it be disproven, I won't waste my time asking
questions to which there are no answers." No evidence. This argument takes a
more scientific perspective, criticizing blind faith (faith without logical
evidence to support it). It argues that if a deity or deities truly wanted
people to believe in them, then said deity or deities could demonstrate their
existence with miracles, and explain their plan(s) for humanity or the lack
thereof. Being all-powerful, if they truly wanted humans to believe, they could
send a divine sign not left up to interpretation. Since they do not seem to
care if humans believe or not, apatheists will not care until they show them a
reason to, and perhaps not even if such an event occurred. (This is in essence
the argument from nonbelief.) Quotes. The eighteenth century French philosopher
Denis Diderot, when accused of being an atheist, replied that he simply did not
care whether God existed or not. In response to Voltaire, he wrote that "It is
very important not to mistake hemlock for parsley; but not at all so to believe
or not in God." Jonathan Rauch described apatheism as "a disinclination to care
all that much about one's own religion, and an even stronger disinclination to
care about other people's".
