Ara Pacis The Ara Pacis Augustae (Latin, "Altar of Augustan Peace"; commonly
shortened to Ara Pacis) is an altar to Peace, envisioned as a Roman goddess. It
was commissioned by the Roman Senate on 4 July 13 BC to honor the return of
Augustus to Rome after three years in Hispania and Gaul, and was consecrated on
30 January 9 BC by the Senate to celebrate the peace established in the Empire
after Augustus's victories. The altar was meant to be a vision of the Roman
civil religion. It sought to portray the peace and fertile prosperity enjoyed
as a result of the "Pax Augusta" (Latin, "Augustan peace") brought about by the
military supremacy of the Roman empire, and act as a visual reminder of the
Julio-Claudian dynasty that was bringing it about. The Altar was originally
located on the northern outskirts of Rome, on the west side of the Via
Flaminia, in the northeastern corner of the Campus Martius, a formerly open
area that Augustus developed as a complex of monuments; the Ara Pacis Augustae
stood in the flood plain of the river Tiber, where it became buried under four
metres of silt over the centuries. The Altar. The "Ara Pacis" stood within an
enclosure elaborately and finely sculpted entirely in gleaming white marble,
depicting scenes of traditional Roman piety, in which the Emperor and his
family were portrayed in the act of offering sacrifices to the gods. Various
figures bring forth cattle to be sacrificed. Some have their togas drawn over
their heads, like a hood; this signifies that they are acting in their official
capacity as priests. Others wear laurel crowns, traditional symbols of victory.
Men, women, and children all approach the gods. Themes of civil peace are
linked to themes of the dynastic Julio-Claudian claims, and the importance of
religion as a civilizing force, in rites of which some were consciously being
revived for the occasion, according to Augustus himself. The Altar is
universally recognized as a masterpiece, the most famous surviving example of
Augustan sculpture; the life-sized figures in the procession are not idealized
types, as are typically found in Greek sculpture, but rather portraits of
individuals, some of them recognizable today. G. Karl Galinsky pointed out that
the sculpture of the Ara Pacis is primarily symbolic rather than decorative,
and that its iconography has several levels of significance. Studies of the Ara
Pacis and similar public Roman monuments traditionally address the potent
political symbolism of their decorative programs, that emphasizes dynastic and
other imperial policies. The Ara Pacis is seen to embody without conscious
effort the deep-rooted ideological connections among cosmic sovereignty,
military force and fertility that were first outlined by Georges DumÃ©zil,
connections which are attested in early Roman culture and more broadly in the
substructure of Indo-European culture at large. It has been suggested by Peter
Holliday that the Altar's imagery of the Golden Age, usually discussed as mere
poetic allusion, actually appealed to a significant component of the Roman
populace. The program of the Ara Pacis addressed this group's very real fears
of cyclical history, and promised that the rule of Augustus would avert the
cataclysmic destruction of the world predicted by contemporary models of
historical thought. The figures. The long friezes of the Ara Pacis (the North
and South Walls, so called today because of the modern layout) contain figures
advancing towards the West who participate in a state of thanksgiving to
celebrate the Peace created by Augustus. These figures fall into four
categories: lictors (men carrying fasces, bodyguards of magistrates); priests
(three of the four major "collegia" â€“ "Pontifices", "Septemviri", and
"Quindecimviri"): women and children (generally from the imperial family,
represented in portraiture); and attendants (a few anonymous figures necessary
for religious purposes). In addition there are two or three non-Roman children,
who may be guests (or hostages) in Rome. Their identification by their non-
Roman costume and their participation in the ceremony advertises to all that
Rome is the centre of the world, and that other nations send their young to
Rome to learn Roman ways, so great is Rome's reputation. The ceremony took
place in the summer of 13 BC, but not necessarily on 4 July, when the Senate
voted to build the Ara Pacis. The east and west walls. The East and West walls
each contain two panels, one well preserved and one represented only in
fragments. The East Wall contains a badly preserved scene of a female warrior
("bellatrix"), possibly Roma, apparently sitting on a pile of weapons
confiscated from the enemy, thus forcing peace upon them by rendering them
unable to make war. This scene has been reconstructed based on coins that
depict such a seated Roma. When the monument was being reconstructed at its
present site, Edmund Buchner and other scholars sketched what the panel may
have looked like. This interpretation, though widely accepted, can not be
proved correct, as so little of the original panel survives. The other panel is
more controversial in its subject, but far better preserved. A goddess sits
amid a scene of fertility and prosperity with twins on her lap. Scholars have
suggested that the goddess is Italia, Tellus (Earth), Venus, or Peace (other
views also circulate). Peace (Pax Augusta) makes the most sense since the
entire scene depicts the benefits of peace, and the monument is the "Altar of
Augustan Peace," not the "Altar of Italy" or "the Altar of Earth." The exact
identity of the goddess remains debated, however. The West Wall also contains
two panels. The fragmentary panel called "The Lupercal Panel" apparently
preserves the moment when Romulus and Remus were discovered by Faustulus the
shepherd, while Mars looks on. The better preserved scene depicts the sacrifice
of a pig (the standard sacrifice when Romans made a peace treaty) by an old
priest and two attendants. In 1907 this scene was identified by Johannes
Sieveking as the moment when Aeneas, newly arrived in Italy, sacrificed a sow
and her piglets to Juno, as told by Virgil and others. In the 1960s, Stephan
Weinstock challenged this identification (and the very identity of the entire
monument), citing numerous discrepancies that Sieveking and his followers had
failed to notice between Virgil's version and the panel. Subsequently, Paul
Richardson proposed, and Paul Rehak later published an alternative
identification of the scene as Numa Pompilius, the Roman king associated with
Peace and the Gates of Janus. North wall. The north wall has about 46 extant or
partially extant figures. The first two foreground figures are lictors,
carrying fasces (bundles of rods symbolizing Roman authority). The next set of
figures consists of priests from the college of the Septemviri epulones, so
identified by an incense box they carry with special symbols. One member of
this college is missing in a gap. After them follows the "collegium" of the
"quindecimviri sacris faciundis", also identified by the incense box carried by
a public slave among them. Although the name suggests this college has exactly
fifteen members, the size of the college has grown to 23, including Augustus
and Agrippa, who appear on the South Frieze. The other twenty-one members are
present here. Two very badly damaged figures in the middle are split by a gap.
From photos, the gap appears to affect a single figure, but as Koeppel, Conlin,
and Stern have proven, in-site examination reveals that one is a foreground and
the other a background figure. The last portion of the North Frieze consists of
members of the imperial family. Many scholars identify the veiled, leading
figure as Julia, daughter of Augustus. Since Julia appears on the South Frieze,
it is more likely that this figure is Octavia Minor. Other figures in the
entourage might include Marcella (a daughter of Octavia), Iullus Antonius (a
son of Mark Antony), and two boys and a girl of the imperial family. In 1894,
and again in 1902 and 1903, Eugen Petersen suggested that Gaius and Lucius
Caesar are the two boys dressed in "Trojan" costume for the equestrian event
called the Troy Game, which was held in 13Â BC for the dedication of the
Theater of Marcellus. But as Charles Brian Rose has noted, "The variable value
of the Eastern costume and the uneasy interaction of Trojan and Parthian
iconography can make it difficult to determine whether one is viewing the
founders of the Romans or their fiercest opponents." The youth wearing
Hellenistic Greek clothing suited to a Hellenistic prince is sometimes
identified as Gaius in the guise of a "camillus", an adolescent attendant of
the Flamen Dialis. This figure has also been interpreted as Ptolemy of
Mauretania representing Africa, along with a German boy (Europe) and a Parthian
prince (Asia). South wall. The South Wall has seen a great deal of scholarship
and the greatest number of academic debates. Unlike the North Wall, where most
of the heads are new (not authentic ancient heads, but modern creations), the
heads of the figures on the South Wall are mostly original. Some half dozen
figures are recognizable from looking at other surviving statues of members of
the imperial family. Nevertheless, much debate has taken place over many of
these figures, including Augustus, Agrippa, Tiberius, Julia, and Antonia.
Augustus - The figure of Augustus was not discovered until the 1903 excavation,
and his head was damaged by the cornerstone of the Renaissance palazzo built on
top of the original Ara Pacis site. Today Augustus is better recognized by his
hair style than his face. He was identified in 1903 immediately. Agrippa - In
the absence of the panel including Augustus, early scholars debated whether
this figure was Augustus or Agrippa or Lepidus. In the same 1907 article
mentioned above, Sieveking proposed that this figure was Lepidus, the "Pontifex
Maximus." Sieveking later reversed himself with a series of peculiar
suggestions. In 1926 Loewy compared the Louvre Agrippa and that in Copenhagen
(and others) to the Ara Pacis to show icongographic similarity. Aside from a
very small minority of scholars (most vehemently defending Lepidus in "Rom.
Mitt" in the 1930s was Ludwig Curtius), the rest of the academy agreed this
figure is Agrippa. Julia (Livia) - many scholars continue to see the Julia
figure as Livia under the reasoning that Livia has to be on the Ara Pacis.
Indeed Livia does appear somewhere (she could hardly be excluded), but by 13 BC
Julia had politically eclipsed Livia, as has been understood and explained by
many scholars. Furthermore, Livia has no bond to Agrippa, whereas Julia was his
wife and expected to be the unofficial empress of Rome for decades, during and
beyond Augustus' lifetime. Julia also better personified Augustus' new pro-
natalism program, having already given birth to four surviving children.
Nevertheless, a majority of scholars in 2000 preferred to see this figure as
Livia. Tiberius - This figure was Tiberius as early as 1891 by Milani, an
identification that was rarely questioned until the 1940s. Moretti, in making
the glass museum for the Ara Pacis at Mussolini's command, guessed that the two
consuls (Tiberius and Varus) of 13 flank Augustus, so he saw this figure as M.
Valerius Messalla. V.H. von Poulsen proposed Iullus Antonius. But as has been
well established, Augustus is flanked by priests, and this figure is Tiberius.
Boschung and Bonanno have both matched the face to early period Tiberius
statuary. Antonia, Drusus, and Germanicus - In 1880 H. DÃ¼tschke proposed the
correct identity for Antonia and Drusus, but saw the toddler as Claudius
(incorrectly). A. von Domaszewski amended this family identification and
correctly saw the child as Germanicus. He also suggested that the Ara Pacis is
arranged in family groups. He also correctly determined that the two-year old
child could only be Germancius, whose exact birth in 24 May 15 BC is known.
This helps prove that the ceremony is an event in 13, although a few scholars
continued to argue the ceremony was that of 9 BC. The Domitii Ahenobarbi - In
the same 1903 article, von Domaszewski also proposed that the last family on
the South Wall is that of the father of the emperor Nero (born Lucius Domitius
Ahenobarbus). This identification remains widespread today. However, there are
some dissenters from this theory. Stern claims that these figures cannot
possibly be the Domitii Ahenobarbi, on the basis of the belief that Gnaeus
Domitius Ahenobarbus, whom von Domaszewski saw as the boy of the family, was
not born until after the monument's completion. Syme claims that it is just the
identification of the children that is incorrect, preferring to identify the
boy figure as an otherwise unknown elder son and the girl figure as an
otherwise unknown elder daughter of Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus and Antonia
Major. In defence of the identification of the group as the Domitii Ahenobarbi
and of the boy as Gnaeus, Pollini has pointed out that Suetonius specifically
mentions that Nero's father went "to the East on the staff of the young Gaius
Caesar". This campaign is known to have begun in 2 BC, which means that Gnaeus
Ahenobarbus must have already been of a mature age by that year. Pollini
reasons that the subsequent career delay of Ahenobarbus is likely due to his
documented unpleasant character, and points out that the careers of other
members of the family were also affected by their display of undesirable
traits, notably Augustus' youngest grandson, Agrippa Postumus, and Germanicus'
brother, the later emperor, Claudius. Excavation and conservation. The first
fragmentary sculptures were rediscovered in 1568 beneath the basilica San
Lorenzo in Lucina, and have found their way to the Villa Medici, the Vatican,
the Uffizi and the Louvre. In 1859 further sculptural fragments were found
under Teatro Olimpia, part of the Peretti Palace in via in Lucina, close to the
Italian Parliament Building and the sculptures were recognized as having
belonged to the same monument. In 1903, when Friedrich von Duhn recognized that
the reliefs belonged to the Ara Pacis, known from Augustus' memoir, a request
was sent to the Ministry of Public Education to continue the excavations. Their
success was made possible by the generosity of Edoardo AlmagiÃ , who, as well
as giving his permission for the exploration, donated in advance whatever
should be discovered underneath the palace and made an ongoing financial
contribution to the expenses of the excavation. By July of that year, it became
clear that the conditions were extremely difficult and that the stability of
Teatro Olimpia might well be compromised. When about half the monument had been
examined and 53 fragments recovered, the excavation was called to a halt. In
February 1937, the Italian Cabinet decreed that for the 2000th anniversary of
the birth of Augustus, the excavations should recommence, using the most
advanced technology. Seventy cubic metres of ground under what was by then the
Cinema Nuovo Olimpia were frozen, whilst the altar was extracted. In 1938
Benito Mussolini built a protective building for the Altar, as it had been
reconstructed by Vittorio Ballio Morpurgo, near the Mausoleum of Augustus
(moving the Altar in the process) as part of his attempt to create an ancient
Roman "theme park" to glorify Fascist Italy. A new cover building, designed by
American architect Richard Meier, now stands on the same site as Mussolini's.
The new building opened in 2006 to controversy. Nicolai Ouroussoff, of the "New
York Times" described the new building as "a flop". The presiding right-wing
mayor Gianni Alemanno, backed since July 2008 by culture undersecretary
Francesco Maria Giro said he would tear down the new structure. Mayor Alemmano
has since changed his stance on the building and has agreed with Mr. Meier to
modifications including drastically reducing the height of the wall between an
open-air space outside the museum and a busy road along the Tiber river. The
city plans to build a wide pedestrian area along the river and run the road
underneath it. "It's an improvement," says Meier, adding that "the reason that
wall was there has to do with traffic and noise. Once that is eliminated, the
idea of opening the piazza to the river is a good one." The mayorâ€™s office
said Alemanno hopes to complete the project before the end of his term in 2013.
