Existence of God Arguments for and against the existence of God have been
proposed by philosophers, theologians, scientists, and others for thousands of
years. In philosophical terms, arguments for and against the existence of God
involve primarily the sub-disciplines of epistemology (theory of knowledge) and
ontology (nature of god) and also the theory of value, since concepts of
perfection are connected to notions of God. The debate concerning the existence
of God is one of the oldest and most discussed debates in human history. A wide
variety of arguments exist which can be categorized as metaphysical, logical,
empirical, or subjective. The existence of God is subject to lively debate in
philosophy, the philosophy of religion, and popular culture. The Western
tradition of the existence of God began with Plato and Aristotle, who made
arguments for God's existence that would now be categorized as cosmological
arguments. Later, Epicurus formulated the problem of evil: if God is
omnipotent, omniscient and omnibenevolent, why does evil exist? The field of
theodicy arose from attempts to answer this question. Other thoughts about the
existence of God have been proposed by St. Anselm, who formulated the first
ontological argument; Ibn Rushd (Averroes) and Aquinas, who presented their own
versions of the cosmological argument (the "kalam" argument and the first way),
respectively; Descartes, who said that the existence of a benevolent God was
logically necessary for the evidence of the senses to be meaningful; and
Immanuel Kant, who argued that the existence of God can be deduced from the
existence of good. Thinkers who have provided arguments against the existence
of God include David Hume, Kant, Nietzsche and Bertrand Russell. In modern
culture, the question of God's existence has been discussed by philosophers and
scientists such as Stephen Hawking, Richard Dawkins, Daniel Dennett, Richard
Swinburne, William Lane Craig, and Alvin Plantinga. Atheists maintain that
arguments for the existence of God show insufficient reason to believe. Certain
theists acknowledge that belief in the existence of God may not be amenable to
demonstration or refutation, but rests on faith alone, a position called
"fideism". The Catholic Church maintains that knowledge of the existence of God
is available in the "natural light of human reason" alone. Other religions,
such as Buddhism, do not concern themselves the existence of gods at all.
Philosophical issues. Definition of God. In modern Western societies, the
concept of 'God' typically entails a monotheistic, supreme, ultimate, and
personal being, as found in the Christian and Hebrew traditions. Classical
theism holds that God possesses every possible perfection, including
omniscience, omnipotence, and omnibenevolence. However, despite extensive
writing on the nature of God, these classical theists did not believe that God
could be 'defined.' They believed that it would contradict the transcendent
nature of God for mere humans to define him. Robert Barron explains by analogy
that it seems impossible for a two dimensional object to conceive of three
dimensional humans. Some classically theistic philosophical approaches arrive
at such perfections by beginning with a root concept of God such as "the prime
mover" or "the uncaused cause", "the ultimate creator", or "a being that than
which nothing greater can be conceived" from which the classical properties may
be deduced. By contrast, much of Eastern religious thought (chiefly Pantheist)
posits God as a force contained in every imaginable phenomenon. For example,
Spinoza and his followers use the term 'God' in a particular philosophical
sense to mean the essential substance/principles of nature. The phenomenon of
emergence could be argued to support either the Eastern or Western view. In
monotheisms outside the Abrahamic traditions, the existence of God is discussed
in similar terms. In the Advaita Vedanta school of Hinduism, reality is
ultimately seen as a single, qualityless, changeless being called nirguna
Brahman. Advaitin philosophy introduces the concept of saguna Brahman or
Ishvara as a way of talking about Brahman to people. Ishvara, in turn, is
ascribed such qualities as omniscience, omnipotence, and benevolence.
Polytheisms conceive of multiple Gods, but some soft polytheisms may have
pantheistic leanings. However, this article focuses primarily on monotheistic
concepts of God. Epistemology. Epistemology is the branch of philosophy which
studies the nature, origin, and scope of knowledge. Knowledge is, from an
epistemological standpoint, distinguished from mere belief by justification,
warrant, or other such property the having of which is conducive to getting at
the truth. Knowledge in the sense of "understanding of a fact or truth" can be
divided into "a posteriori" knowledge, based on experience or deduction (see
methodology), and "a priori" knowledge from introspection, axioms or self-
evidence. Knowledge can also be described as a psychological state, since in a
strict sense there can never be "a posteriori" knowledge proper (see
relativism). Much of the disagreement about "proofs" of God's existence is due
to different conceptions not only of the term "God" but also the terms "proof",
"truth", and "knowledge". Religious belief from revelation or enlightenment
(satori) can fall into either the first category, "a posteriori" knowledge, if
rooted in deduction or personal revelation, or the second, "a priori" class of
knowledge, if based on introspection. Different conclusions as to the existence
of God often rest on different criteria for deciding what methods are
appropriate for deciding if something is true or not, including The problem of
the supernatural. One problem posed by the question of the existence of God is
that traditional beliefs usually ascribe to God various supernatural powers.
Supernatural beings may be able to conceal and reveal themselves for their own
purposes, as for example in the tale of Baucis and Philemon. In addition,
according to concepts of God, God is not part of the natural order, but the
ultimate creator of nature and of the scientific laws. Thus, in Aristotelian
philosophy, God is viewed as part of the explanatory structure needed to
support scientific conclusions, and any powers God possesses are, strictly
speaking, of the natural orderâ€”that is, derived from God's place as
originator of nature. ("See also Monadology") Some religious apologists offer
the supernatural nature of God as the explanation for the inability of
empirical methods to decide the question of God's existence. In Karl Popper's
philosophy of science, belief in a supernatural God is outside the natural
domain of scientific investigation because all scientific hypotheses must be
falsifiable in the natural world. The Non-overlapping Magisteria view proposed
by Stephen Jay Gould also holds that the existence (or otherwise) of God is
irrelevant to and beyond the domain of science. Logical positivists, such as
Rudolf Carnap and A. J. Ayer viewed any talk of gods as literal nonsense. For
the logical positivists and adherents of similar schools of thought, statements
about religious or other transcendent experiences could not have a truth value,
and were deemed to be without meaning, because metaphysical naturalism, the
philosophical basis for logical positivism, automatically excludes the
possibility of the supernatural a priori without proof. Postivism has however
collapsed over the second half of the twentieth century since its own
verifiability criterion is destructive to science itself. As the Christian
biologist Scott C. Todd put it "Even if all the data pointed to an intelligent
designer, such a hypothesis is excluded from science because it is not
naturalistic." This argument limits the domain of science to the empirically
observable and limits the domain of God to the unprovable. Nature of relevant
proofs/arguments. Since God (of the kind to which the arguments relate) is
neither an entity in the universe nor a mathematical object, it is not obvious
what kinds of arguments/proofs are relevant to God's existence. Even if the
concept of scientific proof were not problematic, the fact that there is no
conclusive scientific proof of the existence, or non-existence, of God mainly
demonstrates that the existence of God is not a scientific question. John
Polkinghorne suggests that the nearest analogy to the existence of God in
physics are the ideas of quantum mechanics which are seemingly paradoxical but
make sense of a great deal of disparate data. Alvin Plantinga compares the
question of the existence of God to the question of the existence of other
minds, claiming both are notoriously impossible to "prove" against a determined
skeptic. One approach, suggested by writers such as Stephen D. Unwin, is to
treat (particular versions of) theism and naturalism as though they were two
hypotheses in the Bayesian sense, to list certain data (or alleged data), about
the world, and to suggest that the likelihoods of these data are significantly
higher under one hypothesis than the other. Most of the arguments for, or
against, the existence of God can be seen as pointing to particular aspects of
the universe in this way. In almost all cases it is not seriously suggested by
proponents of the arguments that they are irrefutable, merely that they make
one worldview seem significantly more likely than the other. However, since an
assessment of the weight of evidence depends on the prior probability that is
assigned to each worldview, arguments that a theist finds convincing may seem
thin to an atheist and vice-versa. Some philosophers, such as Wittgenstein,
take a view that is considered anti-realist and oppose philosophical arguments
related to God's existence. For instance, Charles Taylor contends that the real
is whatever will not go away. If we cannot reduce talk about God to anything
else, or replace it, or prove it false, then perhaps God is as real as anything
else. In George Berkeley's "A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human
Knowledge" of 1710, he argued that a "naked thought" cannot exist, and that a
perception was a thought; therefore only minds could be proven to exist, since
all else was merely an idea conveyed by a perception. This viewpoint has been
used in popular fiction, including The Matrix movie series. From this Berkeley
argued that the universe is based upon observation and is non-objective.
However, he noted that the universe includes "ideas" not perceptible to mankind
(or not always perceptible), and that there must therefore exist an omniscient
superobserver, which perceives such things. Berkeley considered this proof of
the existence of the Christian God. Outside of Western thought. Existence in
absolute truth is central to Vedanta epistemology. Traditional sense perception
based approaches were put into question as possibly misleading due to
preconceived or superimposed ideas. But though all object-cognition can be
doubted, the existence of the doubter remains a fact even in "nastika"
traditions of "mayavada" schools following Adi Shankara. The five eternal
principles to be discussed under ontology, beginning with God or Isvara, the
Ultimate Reality, cannot be established by the means of logic alone, and often
require superior proof. In Vaisnavism Vishnu, or his intimate ontological form
of Krishna, is equated to personal absolute God of the Western traditions.
Aspects of Krishna as "svayam bhagavan" in original Absolute Truth, "sat chit
ananda", are understood originating from three essential attributes of
Krishna's form, i.e., "eternal existence" or "", related to the "brahman"
aspect; "knowledge" or chit, to the "paramatman"; and "bliss" or "ananda" in
Sanskrit, to "bhagavan". Arguments for the existence of God. Aquinas' Five
Ways. In the first part of his Summa Theologica, Thomas Aquinas developed his
five arguments for God's existence. These arguments are grounded in an
Aristotelian ontology and make use of the infinite regression argument. Aquinas
did not intend to fully prove the existence of God as he is orthodoxly
conceived (with all of his traditional attributes), but proposed his Five Ways
as a first stage, which he built upon later in his work. Aquinas' Five Ways
argued from the unmoved mover, first cause, necessary being, argument from
degree, and the teleological argument. Ontological argument. Thomas Aquinas
criticized the argument for proposing a definition of God which, if God is
transcendent, should be impossible for humans. Immanuel Kant criticized the
proof from a logical standpoint: he stated that the term 'God' really signifies
two different terms: both idea of God, and God. Kant concluded that the proof
is equivocation, based on the ambiguity of the word God. This criticism however
only works if one assumes that ideas do not represent reality, a philosophical
commitment in the region of anti-realism. Kant also challenged the argument's
assumption that existence is a predicate (or perfection) because it does not
add anything to the essence of a being. If existence is not a predicate, then
it is not necessarily true that the greatest possible being exists. A common
rebuttal to Kant's critique is that although 'existence' does add something to
both the concept and the reality of God as the concept would be vastly
different if its referent was an unreal Being. Another response to Kant's is
attributed to Alvin Plantinga who explains that even if one were to grant Kant
that 'existence' is not a real predicate, 'Necessary Existence', which is the
correct formulation of an understanding of God, is a real predicate, thus
Kant's argument is refuted. Hindu arguments. Most schools of Hindu philosophy
accept the existence of a creator god (Brahma), while some do not. The school
of Vedanta argues that one of the proofs of the existence of God is the law of
karma. In a commentary to Brahma Sutras (III, 2, 38, and 41), a Vedantic text,
Adi Sankara, an Indian philosopher who consolidated the doctrine of Advaita
Vedanta, a sub-school of Vedanta, argues that the original karmic actions
themselves cannot bring about the proper results at some future time; neither
can super sensuous, non-intelligent qualities like adrstaâ€”an unseen force
being the metaphysical link between work and its resultâ€”by themselves mediate
the appropriate, justly deserved pleasure and pain. The fruits, according to
him, then, must be administered through the action of a conscious agent,
namely, a supreme being (Ishvara). A human's karmic acts result in merits and
demerits. Since unconscious things generally do not move except when caused by
an agent (for example, the axe moves only when swung by an agent), and since
the law of karma is an unintelligent and unconscious law, Sankara argues there
must be a conscious supreme Being who knows the merits and demerits which
persons have earned by their actions, and who functions as an instrumental
cause in helping individuals reap their appropriate fruits. Thus, God affects
the person's environment, even to its atoms, and for those souls who
reincarnate, produces the appropriate rebirth body, all in order that the
person might have the karmically appropriate experiences. Thus, there must be a
theistic administrator or supervisor for karma, i.e., God. The Nyaya school,
one of six orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy, states that one of the proofs
of the existence of God is karma; it is seen that some people in this world are
happy, some are in misery. Some are rich and some are poor. The Naiyanikas
explain this by the concept of karma and reincarnation. The fruit of an
individual's actions does not always lie within the reach of the individual who
is the agent; there ought to be, therefore, a dispenser of the fruits of
actions, and this supreme dispenser is God. This belief of Nyaya, accordingly,
is the same as that of Vedanta. Inductive arguments. Inductive arguments argue
their conclusions through inductive reasoning. Arguments from testimony.
Arguments from testimony rely on the testimony or experience of witnesses,
possibly embodying the propositions of a specific revealed religion. Swinburne
argues that it is a principle of rationality that one should accept testimony
unless there are strong reasons for not doing so. Arguments against the
existence of God. Each of the following arguments aims at showing either that a
particular subset of gods do not exist (by showing them as inherently
meaningless, contradictory, or at odds with known scientific or historical
facts) or that there is insufficient reason to believe in them. Some of these
arguments suggest that there is evidence of absence of a god. Empirical
arguments. Empirical arguments depend on empirical data in order to prove their
conclusions. Deductive arguments. Deductive arguments attempt to prove their
conclusions by deductive reasoning from true premises. Inductive arguments.
Inductive arguments argue their conclusions through inductive reasoning.
Subjective arguments. Similar to the arguments for the existence of God,
subjective arguments against the supernatural mainly rely on the testimony or
experience of witnesses, or the propositions of a revealed religion in general.
Hindu arguments. Atheist Hindu doctrines cite various arguments for rejecting a
creator-God or "Ishvara". The "Samkhyapravachana Sutra" of the Samkhya school
states that there is no philosophical place for a creationist God in this
system. It is also argued in this text that the existence of Ishvara cannot be
proved and hence cannot be admitted to exist. Classical Samkhya argues against
the existence of God on metaphysical grounds. For instance, Samkhya argue that
an unchanging God cannot be the source of an ever changing world. It says God
was a necessary metaphysical assumption demanded by circumstances. The Sutras
of Samkhya endeavour to prove that the idea of God is inconceivable and self-
contradictory, and some commentaries speak plainly on this subject. The
"Sankhya- tattva-kaumudi", commenting on Karika 57, argues that a perfect God
can have no need to create a world, and if God's motive is kindness, Samkhya
questions whether it is reasonable to call into existence beings who while non-
existent had no suffering. Samkhya postulates that a benevolent deity ought to
create only happy creatures, not an imperfect world like the real world.
Proponents of the school of Mimamsa, which is based on rituals and orthopraxy,
decided that the evidence allegedly proving the existence of God was
insufficient. They argue that there was no need to postulate a maker for the
world, just as there was no need for an author to compose the Vedas or a God to
validate the rituals. Mimamsa argues that the Gods named in the Vedas have no
existence apart from the "mantras" that speak their names. In that regard, the
power of the mantras is what is seen as the power of Gods. Conclusions.
Conclusions on the existence of God can be divided along numerous axes,
producing a variety of orthogonal classifications. Theism and atheism are
positions of belief (or lack of it), while gnosticism and agnosticism are
positions of knowledge (or the lack of it). Ignosticism concerns belief
regarding God's conceptual coherence. Apatheism concerns belief regarding the
practical importance of whether God exists. Theism. The theistic conclusion is
that there is sufficient reason to believe that god or gods exists, or that
arguments do not matter as much as the "personal witness of the holy spirit,"
as argued by preeminent apologist William Lane Craig. The Catholic Church,
following the teachings of Saint Paul the Apostle, Saint Thomas Aquinas, and
the First Vatican Council, which affirms that God's existence "can be known
with certainty from the created world by the natural light of human reason". In
Christian faith, theologians and philosophers make a distinction between: a.
preambles of faith and b. articles of faith. The preambles include alleged
truths contained in revelation which are nevertheless demonstrable by reason,
e.g., the immortality of the soul, the existence of God. The articles of faith,
on the other hand, contain truths that cannot be proven or reached by reason
alone and presuppose the truths of the preambles, e.g., the Holy Trinity, is
not demonstrable and presupposes the existence of God. The argument that the
existence of God can be known to all, even prior to exposure to any divine
revelation, predates Christianity. St. Paul made this argument when he said
that pagans were without excuse because "since the creation of the world
[God's] invisible nature, namely, his eternal power and deity, has been clearly
perceived in the things that have been made". In this Paul alludes to the
proofs for a creator, later enunciated by St. Thomas and others, but that had
also been explored by the Greek philosophers. Another apologetical school of
thought, including Dutch and American Reformed thinkers (such as, Abraham
Kuyper, Benjamin Warfield, Herman Dooyeweerd), emerged in the late 1920s. This
school was instituted by Cornelius Van Til, and came to be popularly called
Presuppositional apologetics (though Van Til himself felt "transcendental"
would be a more accurate title). The main distinction between this approach and
the more classical evidentialist approach is that the presuppositionalist
denies any common ground between the believer and the non-believer, except that
which the non-believer denies, namely, the assumption of the truth of the
theistic worldview. In other words, presuppositionalists do not believe that
the existence of God can be proven by appeal to raw, uninterpreted, or "brute"
facts, which have the same (theoretical) meaning to people with fundamentally
different worldviews, because they deny that such a condition is even possible.
They claim that the only possible proof for the existence of God is that the
very same belief is the necessary condition to the intelligibility of all other
human experience and action. They attempt to prove the existence of God by
means of appeal to the transcendental necessity of the beliefâ€”indirectly (by
appeal to the unavowed presuppositions of the non-believer's worldview) rather
than directly (by appeal to some form of common factuality). In practice this
school utilizes what have come to be known as transcendental arguments. In
these arguments they claim to demonstrate that all human experience and action
(even the condition of unbelief, itself) is a proof for the existence of God,
because God's existence is the necessary condition of their intelligibility.
Alvin Plantinga presents an argument for the existence of God using modal
logic. Others have said that the logical and philosophical arguments for and
against the existence of God miss the point. The word "God" has a meaning in
human culture and history that does not correspond to the beings whose
existence is supported by such arguments, assuming they are valid. The real
question is not whether a "most perfect being" or an "uncaused first cause"
exist. The real question is whether Jehovah, Zeus, Ra, Krishna, or any gods of
any religion, exist, and if so, which gods? On the other hand, many theists
equate all monotheistic or henotheistic "most perfect Beings", no matter what
name is assigned to them/him, as the one monotheistic God (one example would be
understanding the Muslim Allah, Christian Yhwh, and Chinese Shangdi as
different names for the same Being). Most of these arguments do not resolve the
issue of which of these figures is more likely to exist. These arguments fail
to make the distinction between immanent gods and a Transcendent God. Some
Christians note that the Christian faith teaches "salvation is by faith", and
that faith is reliance upon the faithfulness of God. The most extreme example
of this position is called fideism, which holds that faith is simply the will
to believe, and argues that if God's existence were rationally demonstrable,
faith in its existence would become superfluous. SÃ¸ren Kierkegaard argued that
objective knowledge, such as 1+1=2, is unimportant to existence. If God could
rationally be proven, his existence would be unimportant to humans. It is
because God cannot rationally be proven that his existence is important to us.
In "The Justification of Knowledge", the Calvinist theologian Robert L. Reymond
argues that believers should not attempt to prove the existence of God. Since
he believes all such proofs are fundamentally unsound, believers should not
place their confidence in them, much less resort to them in discussions with
non-believers; rather, they should accept the content of revelation by faith.
Reymond's position is similar to that of his mentor Gordon Clark, which holds
that all worldviews are based on certain unprovable first premises (or,
axioms), and therefore are ultimately unprovable. The Christian theist
therefore must simply choose to start with Christianity rather than anything
else, by a "leap of faith." This position is also sometimes called
presuppositional apologetics, but should not be confused with the Van Tillian
variety. Atheism. The atheistic conclusion is that the arguments and evidence
both indicate there is insufficient reason to believe that any gods exist, and
that personal subjective religious experiences (including the witness of the
holy spirit) are indistinguishable from misapprehension; therefore one should
not believe that a god exists. Strong atheism. Strong atheism (or positive
atheism) is the position that no gods exist. The strong atheist explicitly
asserts the non-existence of gods. Some strong atheists further assert that the
existence of gods is logically impossible, for example stating that the
combination of attributes which God may be asserted to have (for example:
omnipotence, omniscience, omnipresence, transcendence, omnibenevolence) are
logically contradictory, incomprehensible, or absurd, and therefore that the
existence of such a god is "a priori" false. Metaphysical naturalism is a
common worldview associated with strong atheism. It should be noted that this
viewpoint requires that one accept a negative, i.e., that there exist exactly
zero gods. This is similar to asserting that the Moon isn't made of cheese. One
can only argue this a posteriori, on evidence that it is unlikely that the Moon
is made of cheese or that gods exist. Because like Russel's Teapot, one cannot
search the entire universe to see if there are no gods. Likewise, it's possible
(but improbable) that a few meters under the surface of the Moon there is
solid, dense Moon-cheese. But in both cases, it is arguably reasonable to deny
them on the basis of inductive reasoning. Weak atheism. The term weak atheism
(or negative atheism) is used in two main senses, describing those who (a) do
not assert strong atheism ("no gods exist") but rather the more minimal
statement that for a variety of reasons (principally the lack of credible
scientific evidence) there are no good reasons and no credible grounds for
believing that gods exist ("I do not believe that any gods exist"); or (b)
neither believe that gods exist, nor believe that no gods exist. This is
orthogonal to agnosticism which states that whether gods exist is either
unknown or unknowable. Agnosticism. Agnosticism is the view that the truth
value of certain claimsâ€”especially claims about the existence of any deity,
but also other religious and metaphysical claimsâ€”is unknown or unknowable.
Agnosticism as a broad umbrella term does not define one's belief or disbelief
in gods; agnostics may still identify themselves as theists or atheists. Strong
agnosticism. Strong agnosticism is the belief that it is impossible for humans
to know whether or not any deities exist. Weak agnosticism. Weak agnosticism is
the belief that the existence or nonexistence of deities is unknown but not
necessarily unknowable. Agnostic theism. Agnostic theism is the philosophical
view that encompasses both theism and agnosticism. For theism, an agnostic
theist believes that the proposition "at least one deity exists" is true, but,
per agnosticism, believes that the existence of gods is unknown or inherently
unknowable. The agnostic theist may also or alternatively be agnostic regarding
the properties of the god(s) they believe in. Agnostic atheism. Agnostic
atheism is the view of those who do not claim to know the existence of any
deity but do not believe in any. The theologian Robert Flint explains: "If a
man have failed to find any good reason for believing that there is a God, it
is perfectly natural and rational that he should not believe that there is a
God; and if so, he is an atheist, although he assume no superhuman knowledge,
but merely the ordinary human power of judging of evidence. If he go farther,
and, after an investigation into the nature and reach of human knowledge,
ending in the conclusion that the existence of God is incapable of proof, cease
to believe in it on the ground that he cannot know it to be true, he is an
agnostic and also an atheist, an agnostic-atheistâ€”an atheist because an
agnostic." Apatheism. The apatheist concludes the question of God's existence
or nonexistence to be of little or no practical importance. Psychological
aspects. Several authors have offered psychological or sociological
explanations for belief in the existence of God. Many of these views have been
sought to give a naturalistic explanation of religion, though this does not
necessarily mean such views are exclusive to naturalism. Psychologists observe
that the majority of humans often ask existential questions such as "why we are
here" and whether life has purpose. Some psychologists have posited that
religious beliefs may recruit cognitive mechanisms in order to satisfy these
questions. William James emphasized the inner religious struggle between
melancholy and happiness, and pointed to trance as a cognitive mechanism.
Sigmund Freud stressed fear and pain, the need for a powerful parental figure,
the obsessional nature of ritual, and the hypnotic state a community can induce
as contributing factors to the psychology of religion. Pascal Boyer's "Religion
Explained" (2002), based in part on his anthropological field work, treats
belief in God as the result of the brain's tendency towards agency detection.
Boyer suggests that, because of evolutionary pressures, humans err on the side
of attributing agency where there isn't any. In Boyer's view, belief in
supernatural entities spreads and becomes culturally fixed because of their
memorability. The concept of 'minimally counterintuitive' beings that differ
from the ordinary in a small number of ways (such as being invisible, able to
fly, or having access to strategic and otherwise secret information) leave a
lasting impression that spreads through word-of-mouth. Scott Atran's "In Gods
We Trust: The Evolutionary Landscape of Religion" (2002) makes a similar
argument and adds examination of the socially coordinating aspects of shared
belief. In "Minds and Gods: The Cognitive Foundations of Religion," Todd
Tremlin follows Boyer in arguing that universal human cognitive process
naturally produces the concept of the supernatural. Tremlin contends that an
agency detection device (ADD) and a theory of mind module (ToMM) lead humans to
suspect an agent behind every event. Natural events for which there is no
obvious agent may be attributed to God (c.f. Act of God).
