Ashkenazi Jews Ashkenazi Jews, also known as Ashkenazic Jews or Ashkenazim (,
Ashkenazi Hebrew pronunciation: , singular: , Modern Hebrew: , ; also "", "The
Jews of Ashkenaz"), are an ethnic group who trace their origins to the Levant
in South Western Asia, and settled along the Rhine in Germany from Alsace in
the south to the Rhineland in the north probably during the early Middle Ages.
The name "Ashkenazi" derives from the biblical figure of Ashkenaz, the first
son of Gomer, and a Japhetic patriarch in the Table of Nations (). In the
rabbinic literature, the kingdom of Ashkenaz was first associated with the
Scythian region, then later with the Slavic territories, and, from the 11th
century onwards, with northern Europe and Germany. The Jews living in these
regions associated with Ashkenaz's kingdom thus came to call themselves the
"Ashkenazi". Later, Jews from Western and Central Europe also came to be called
Ashkenazi because the main centers of Jewish learning were located in Germany.
Many Ashkenazi Jews later migrated, largely eastward, forming communities in
non German-speaking areas, including Bohemia, Hungary, Poland, Belarus,
Lithuania, Russia, Ukraine, Romania, and elsewhere between the 11th and 19th
centuries. With them, they took and diversified Yiddish, a High German language
written using the Hebrew alphabet. It had developed in medieval times as the
"lingua franca" among Ashkenazi Jews. The Jewish communities of three cities
along the Rhine: Speyer, Worms and Mainz, created the SHUM league (SHUM after
the first Hebrew letters of Shpira, Vermayza, and Magentza). The ShUM-cities
are considered the cradle of the distinct Ashkenazi culture and liturgy.
Although in the 11th century, they composed only three percent of the world's
Jewish population, at their peak in 1931, Ashkenazi Jews accounted for 92
percent of the world's Jews. Today they make up approximately 80 percent of
Jews worldwide. Most Jewish communities with extended histories in Europe are
Ashkenazim, with the exception of those associated with the Mediterranean
region. The majority of the Jews who migrated from Europe to other continents
in the past two centuries are Ashkenazim, Eastern Ashkenazim in particular.
Definition. The exact definition of Jewishness is not universally agreed
uponâ€”neither by religious scholars (especially across different
denominations); nor in the context of politics (as applied to those who wish to
make Aliyah); nor even in the conventional, everyday sense where "Jewishness"
may be loosely understood by the casual observer as encompassing both religious
and secular Jews, or religious Jews alone. This makes it especially difficult
to define who is an Ashkenazi Jew. The people have been defined differently
from religious, cultural, or ethnic perspectives. Since the overwhelming
majority of Ashkenazi Jews no longer live in Eastern Europe, the isolation that
once favored a distinct religious tradition and culture has vanished.
Furthermore, the word "Ashkenazi" is being used in non-traditional ways,
especially in Israel. By conservative and orthodox philosophies, a person can
be considered a Jew only if his or her mother was Jewish (meaning, more
specifically, either matrilineal descent from a female believed to be present
at Mt. Sinai when the ten commandments were given, or else descent from a
female who was converted to Judaism before the birth of her children), or if he
or she has personally converted to Judaism. This means that a person can be
Ashkenazi but not considered a Jew by some of those within the Jewish
communities, making the term "Ashkenazi" more applicable as broad ethnicity
which evolved from the practice of Judaism in Europe. By religion. Religious
Jews have Minhagim, customs, in addition to Halakha, or religious law, and
different interpretations of law. Different groups of religious Jews in
different geographic areas historically adopted different customs and
interpretations. On certain issues, Orthodox Jews are required to follow the
customs of their ancestors, and do not believe they have the option of picking
and choosing. For this reason, observant Jews at times find it important for
religious reasons to ascertain who their household's religious ancestors are in
order to know what customs their household should follow. These times include,
for example, when two Jews of different ethnic background marry, when a non-Jew
converts to Judaism and determines what customs to follow for the first time,
or when a lapsed or less observant Jew returns to traditional Judaism and must
determine what was done in his or her family's past. In this sense,
"Ashkenazic" refers both to a family ancestry and to a body of customs binding
on Jews of that ancestry. In a religious sense, an Ashkenazi Jew is any Jew
whose family tradition and ritual follows Ashkenazi practice. Until the
Ashkenazi community first began to develop in the Early Middle Ages, the
centers of Jewish religious authority were in the Islamic world, at Baghdad and
in Islamic Spain. Ashkenaz (Germany) was so distant geographically that it
developed a "minhag" of its own. Ashkenazi Hebrew came to be pronounced in ways
distinct from other forms of Hebrew. In this respect, the counterpart of
Ashkenazi is Sephardic, since most non-Ashkenazi Orthodox Jews follow Sephardic
rabbinical authorities, whether or not they are ethnically Sephardic. By
tradition, a Sephardic or Mizrahi woman who marries into an Orthodox or Haredi
Ashkenazi Jewish family raises her children to be Ashkenazi Jews; conversely an
Ashkenazi woman who marries a Sephardi or Mizrahi man is expected to take on
Sephardic practice and the children inherit a Sephardic identity, though in
practice many families compromise. A convert generally follows the practice of
the beth din that converted him or her. With the integration of Jews from
around the world in Israel, North America, and other places, the religious
definition of an Ashkenazi Jew is blurring, especially outside Orthodox
Judaism. Many Sephardic and Mizrahi Jews have joined liberal movements that
originally developed within Ashkenazi Judaism. In recent decades, the
congregations which they have joined have often embraced them, and absorbed new
traditions into their "minhag". Rabbis and cantors in most non-Orthodox
movements study Hebrew in Israel, where they learn Sephardic rather than
Ashkenazi Hebrew pronunciation. Ashkenazi congregations are adopting Sephardic
or modern Israeli melodies for many prayers and traditional songs. Since the
middle of the 20th century, there has been a gradual syncretism and fusion of
traditions. This is affecting the "minhag" of all but the most traditional
congregations. New developments in Judaism often transcend differences in
religious practice between Ashkenazi and Sephardic Jews. In North American
cities, social trends such as the chavurah movement, and the emergence of
"post-denominational Judaism" often bring together younger Jews of diverse
ethnic backgrounds. In recent years, there has been increased interest in
"Kabbalah", which many Ashkenazi Jews study outside of the Yeshiva framework.
Another trend is the new popularity of ecstatic worship in the Jewish Renewal
movement and the Carlebach style minyan, both of which are nominally of
Ashkenazi origin. By culture. Culturally, an Ashkenazi Jew can be identified by
the concept of "Yiddishkeit", which means "Jewishness" in the Yiddish language.
"Yiddishkeit" is specifically the Jewishness of Ashkenazi Jews. Before the
Haskalah and the emancipation of Jews in Europe, this meant the study of Torah
and Talmud for men, and a family and communal life governed by the observance
of Jewish Law for men and women. From the Rhineland to Riga to Romania, most
Jews prayed in liturgical Ashkenazi Hebrew, and spoke Yiddish in their secular
lives. But with modernization, "Yiddishkeit" now encompasses not just Orthodoxy
and Hasidism, but a broad range of movements, ideologies, practices, and
traditions in which Ashkenazi Jews have participated and somehow retained a
sense of Jewishness. Although a far smaller number of Jews still speak Yiddish,
"Yiddishkeit" can be identified in manners of speech, in styles of humor, in
patterns of association. Broadly speaking, a Jew is one who associates
culturally with Jews, supports Jewish institutions, reads Jewish books and
periodicals, attends Jewish movies and theater, travels to Israel, visits
ancient synagogues in Prague, and so forth. It is a definition that applies to
Jewish culture in general, and to Ashkenazi Yiddishkeit in particular.
Contemporary population migrations have contributed to a reconfigured
Jewishness among Jews of Ashkenazi descent that transcends Yiddishkeit and
other traditional articulations of Ashkenazi Jewishness. As Ashkenazi Jews
moved away from Eastern Europe, settling mostly in Israel, North America, and
other English-speaking areas, the geographic isolation that gave rise to
Ashkenazim has given way to mixing with other cultures, and with non-Ashkenazi
Jews who, similarly, are no longer isolated in distinct geographic locales. For
Ashkenazi Jews living in Eastern Europe, chopped liver and gefilte fish were
archetypal Jewish foods. To contemporary Ashkenazi Jews living both in Israel
and in the diaspora, Middle Eastern foods such as hummus and falafel, neither
traditional to the historic Ashkenazi experience, have become central to their
lives as Ashkenazi Jews in the current era. Hebrew has replaced Yiddish as the
primary Jewish language for many Ashkenazi Jews, although many Hasidic and
Hareidi groups continue to use Yiddish in daily life. France's blended Jewish
community is typical of the cultural recombination that is going on among Jews
throughout the world. Although France expelled its original Jewish population
in the Middle Ages, by the time of the French Revolution, there were two
distinct Jewish populations. One consisted of Sephardic Jews, originally
refugees from the Inquisition and concentrated in the southwest, while the
other community was Ashkenazi, concentrated in formerly German Alsace, and
speaking mainly Yiddish. The two communities were so separate and different
that the National Assembly emancipated them separately in 1791. But after
emancipation, a sense of a unified French Jewry emerged, especially when France
was wracked by the Dreyfus affair in the 1890s. In the 1920s and 1930s,
Ashkenazi Jews from eastern Europe arrived in large numbers as refugees from
antisemitism, the Russian revolution, and the economic turmoil of the Great
Depression. By the 1930s, Paris had a vibrant Yiddish culture, and many Jews
were involved in radical political movements. After the Vichy years and the
Holocaust, the French Jewish population was augmented once again, first by
Ashkenazi refugees from Eastern Europe, and later by Sephardi immigrants and
refugees from North Africa, many of them francophone. Then, in the 1990s, yet
another Ashkenazi Jewish wave began to arrive from countries of the former
Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. The result is a pluralistic Jewish community
that still has some distinct elements of both Ashkenazi and Sephardic culture.
But in France, it is becoming much more difficult to sort out the two, and a
distinctly French Jewishness has emerged. By ethnicity. In an ethnic sense, an
Ashkenazi Jew is one whose ancestry can be traced to the Jews of Central and
Eastern Europe. For roughly a thousand years, the Ashkenazim were a
reproductively isolated population in Europe, despite living in many countries,
with little inflow or outflow from migration, conversion, or intermarriage with
other groups, including other Jews. Human geneticists have identified genetic
variations that have high frequencies among Ashkenazi Jews, but not in the
general European population. This is true for patrilineal markers (Y-chromosome
haplotypes) as well as for matrilineal markers (mitotypes). Since the middle of
the 20th century, many Ashkenazi Jews have intermarried, both with members of
other Jewish communities and with people of other nations and faiths, while
some Jews have also adopted children from other ethnic groups or parts of the
world and raised them as Jews. Conversion to Judaism, rare for nearly 2,000
years, has become more common. A 2006 study found Ashkenazi Jews to be a clear,
homogeneous genetic subgroup. Strikingly, regardless of the place of origin,
Ashkenazi Jews can be grouped in the same genetic cohort â€” that is,
regardless of whether an Ashkenazi Jew's ancestors came from Poland, Russia,
Hungary, Lithuania, or any other place with a historical Jewish population,
they belong to the same ethnic group. The research demonstrates the endogamy of
the Jewish population in Europe and lends further credence to the idea of
Ashkenazi Jews as an ethnic group. Moreover, though intermarriage among Jews of
Ashkenazi descent has become increasingly more common, many Haredi Jews,
particularly members of Hasidic or Hareidi sects, continue to marry exclusively
fellow Ashkenazi Jews. This trend keeps Ashkenazi genes prevalent and also
helps researchers further study the genes of Ashkenazi Jews with relative ease.
It is noteworthy that these Haredi Jews often have extremely large families.
Realignment in Israel. In Israel, the term "Ashkenazi" is now used in ways that
have nothing to do with its original meaning; it is often applied to all Jews
of European background living in Israel, including sometimes for those whose
ethnic background is actually Sephardic. Jews of any non-Ashkenazi background,
including Mizrahi, Yemenite, Kurdish and others who have no connection with the
Iberian Peninsula, have similarly come to be lumped together as Sephardic. Jews
of mixed background are increasingly common, partly because of intermarriage
between Ashkenazi and non-Ashkenazi, and partly because many do not see such
historic markers as relevant to their life experiences as Jews. Religious
Ashkenazi Jews living in Israel are obliged to follow the authority of the
chief Ashkenazi rabbi in halakhic matters. In this respect, a religiously
Ashkenazi Jew is an Israeli who is more likely to support certain religious
interests in Israel, including certain political parties. These political
parties result from the fact that a portion of the Israeli electorate votes for
Jewish religious parties; although the electoral map changes from one election
to another, there are generally several small parties associated with the
interests of religious Ashkenazi Jews. The role of religious parties, including
small religious parties which play important roles as coalition members,
results in turn from Israel's composition as a complex society in which
competing social, economic, and religious interests stand for election to the
Knesset, a unicameral legislature with 120 seats. History. History of Jews in
Europe before the Ashkenazim. Although the historical record is limited, there
is a genetic, cultural, linguistic, and scholarly consensus that places
Ashkenazi Jewish origins in the Middle East. Jews have lived in Germany, or
"Ashkenaz", at least since the early 4th century.Throughout Gaul and Germany
for this period, with the possible exception of Trier, the archeological
evidence suggests at most a fleeting presence of very few Jews, itinerant
traders or artisans. They brought with them both Rabbinic Judaism and the
Babylonian Talmudic culture that underlies it. Yiddish eventually emerged as a
pidgin language of Ashkenazi Jewry through contact with High German vernaculars
in the medieval period. It was written with Hebrew characters, and heavily
influenced by Hebrew and Aramaic. In the territory of what is now Austria,
Jewish presence is documented since at least the 3rd century CEIn Hungary,
minor Jewish presence was documented since the late Roman period. In France,
there was no substantial Jewish population in northern Gaul from late antiquity
until the Middle Ages, but Jewish communities existed in 465 CE in Brittany, in
524 CE in Valence, and in 533 CE in Orleans, although the Jewish presence in
France dates to earlier period. Jewish settlement in Romania dates back to 2nd
century,while Jewish settlement in Italy dates back to 1st century. After the
Roman empire had overpowered the Jewish resistance in the First Jewishâ€“Roman
War in Judea and destroyed the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem in 70 CE, the
complete Roman takeover of Judea followed the Bar Kochba rebellion of 132â€“135
CE. Though their numbers were greatly reduced, Jews continued to populate large
parts of Judaea province (renamed to Palaestina), remaining a majority in
Galilee for several hundred years. However, the Romans no longer recognized the
authority of the Sanhedrin or any other Jewish body, and Jews were prohibited
from living in Jerusalem. Outside the Roman Empire, a large Jewish community
remained in Mesopotamia. Other Jewish populations could be found dispersed
around the Mediterranean region, with the largest concentrations in the Levant,
Egypt, Asia Minor, Greece, and Italy, including Rome. Smaller communities are
recorded in southern Gaul (France), Spain, and North Africa. Jews were denied
full Roman citizenship until 212 CE, when Emperor Caracalla granted all free
peoples this privilege. But, as a penalty for the first Jewish Revolt, Jews
were required to pay a poll tax until the reign of Emperor Julian in 363. In
the late Roman Empire, Jews were free to form networks of cultural and
religious ties and enter into various local occupations. But, after
Christianity became the official religion of Rome and Constantinople in 380,
Jews were increasingly marginalized, and brutally persecuted. In Syria-
Palaestina and Mesopotamia, where Jewish religious scholarship was centered,
the majority of Jews were still engaged in farming, as demonstrated by the
preoccupation of early Talmudic writings with agriculture. In diaspora
communities, trade was a common occupation, facilitated by the easy mobility of
traders through the dispersed Jewish communities. Throughout this period and
into the early Middle Ages, some Jews assimilated into the dominant Greek and
Latin cultures, mostly through conversion to Christianity. A remnant of this
Greek-speaking Jewish population (the Romaniotes) survives to this day. In the
late Roman Empire, Jews are known to have lived in Cologneand Trier, as well as
in what is now France. King Dagobert I of the Franks expelled the Jews from his
Merovingian kingdom in 629. Jews in former Roman territories now faced new
challenges as harsher anti-Jewish Church rulings were enforced. In Mesopotamia,
and in Persian lands free of Roman imperial domination, Jewish life fared much
better. Since the conquest of Judea by Nebuchadnezzar II, this community had
always been the leading diaspora community, a rival to the leadership of Judea.
After conditions for Jews began to deteriorate in Roman-controlled lands, many
of the religious leaders of Judea and the Galilee fled to the east. At the
academies of Pumbeditha and Sura near Babylon, Rabbinic Judaism based on
Talmudic learning began to emerge and assert its authority over Jewish life
throughout the diaspora. Rabbinic Judaism created a religious mandate for
literacy, requiring all Jewish males to learn Hebrew and read from the Torah.
It has been suggested that this mandate led to a higher literacy rate for
Jewish minorities in both Christian and Islamic lands compared to the majority
of gentiles, a result which gave these Jews a comparative advantage in urban
commercial and financial roles which, to some extent, may explain their
relative prevalence in these fields at the time. In the Caliphate of Baghdad,
Jews took on many of the financial occupations that they would later hold in
the cities of Ashkenaz. Jewish traders from Baghdad began to travel to the
west, renewing Jewish life in the western Mediterranean region.They brought
with them Rabbinic Judaism and Babylonian Talmudic scholarship. Charlemagne's
expansion of the Frankish empire around 800, including northern Italy and Rome,
brought on a brief period of stability and unity in Western Europe. This
created opportunities for Jewish merchants to settle once again north of the
Alps. Charlemagne granted the Jews freedoms similar to those once enjoyed under
the Roman Empire. In addition, Jews from southern Italy, fleeing religious
persecution, began to move into central Europe. Returning once again to
Frankish lands, many Jewish merchants took on occupations in finance and
commerce, including money lending, or usury. (Church legislation banned
Christians from lending money in exchange for interest.) From Charlemagne's
time to the present, there is a well-documented record of Jewish life in
northern Europe, and by the 11th century, when Rashi of Troyes wrote his
commentaries, Ashkenazi Jews had emerged also as interpreters and commentators
on the Torah and Talmud. High and Late Middle Ages migrations. Historical
records show evidence of Jewish communities north of the Alps and Pyrenees as
early as the 8th and 9th century. By the end of the first millennium, Jewish
populations were well-established in Western Europe, later followed the Norman
Conquest into England in 1066, and settled in many cities of the Rhine area by
the end of the 11th century. Although the Jewish people in general were present
across a wide geographical area as described, genetic research done by Gil
Atzmon of the Longevity Genes Project at Albert Einstein College of Medicine
suggests "that Ashkenazim branched off from other Jews around the time of the
destruction of the First Temple, 2,500 years ago. . flourished during the Roman
Empire but then went through a 'severe bottleneck' as they dispersed, reducing
a population of several million to just 400 families who left Northern Italy
around the year 1000 for Central and eventually Eastern Europe." With the onset
of the Crusades, and the expulsions from England (1290), France (1394), and
parts of Germany (15th century), Jewish migration pushed eastward into Poland,
Lithuania, and Russia. Over this period of several hundred years, some have
suggested, Jewish economic activity was focused on trade, business management,
and financial services, due to several presumed factors: Christian European
prohibitions restricting certain activities by Jews, preventing certain
financial activities (such as "usurious" loans) between Christians, high rates
of literacy, near universal male education, and ability of merchants to rely
upon and trust family members living in different regions and countries. By the
15th century, the Ashkenazi Jewish communities in Poland were the largest
Jewish communities of the Diaspora. This area, which eventually fell under the
domination of Russia, Austria, and Prussia (Germany), would remain the main
center of Ashkenazi Jewry until the Holocaust. The answer to why there was so
little assimilation of Jews in Eastern Europe for so long would seem to lie in
part in the probability that the alien surroundings in Eastern Europe were not
conducive, though contempt did not prevent some assimilation. Furthermore, Jews
lived almost exclusively in shtetls, maintained a strong system of education
for males, heeded rabbinic leadership, and scorned the life-style of their
neighbors; and all of these tendencies increased with every outbreak of
antisemitism. Usage of the name. In reference to the Jewish peoples of Northern
Europe and particularly the Rhineland, the word "Ashkenazi" is often found in
medieval rabbinic literature. References to Ashkenaz in Yosippon and Hasdai ibn
Shaprut's letter to the king of the Khazars would date the term as far back as
the 10th century, as would also Saadia Gaon's commentary on Daniel 7:8. The
word "Ashkenaz" first appears in the genealogy in the Tanakh (Genesis 10) as a
son of Gomer and grandson of Japheth. It is thought that the name originally
applied to the Scythians (Ishkuz), who were called "Ashkuza" in Assyrian
inscriptions, and lake Ascanius and the region Ascania in Anatolia derive their
names from this group. "Ashkenaz" in later Hebrew tradition became identified
with the peoples of Germany, and in particular to the area along the Rhine.
Ashkenaz and the Ashkenazi contrast to the land of Knaan, a geo-ethnological
term denoting the Jewish populations living east of the Elbe river as opposed
to the Ashkenazi Jews living to the West of it, and the Sephardic Jews of
Iberian Peninsula. The autonym was usually "Yidn", however. Medieval
references. In the first half of the 11th century, Hai Gaon refers to questions
that had been addressed to him from Ashkenaz, by which he undoubtedly means
Germany. "Rashi" in the latter half of the 11th century refers to both the
language of Ashkenaz and the country of Ashkenaz. During the 12th century, the
word appears quite frequently. In the "Mahzor Vitry", the kingdom of Ashkenaz
is referred to chiefly in regard to the ritual of the synagogue there, but
occasionally also with regard to certain other observances. In the literature
of the 13th century, references to the land and the language of Ashkenaz often
occur. Examples include Solomon ben Aderet's Responsa (vol. i., No. 395); the
Responsa of Asher ben Jehiel (pp.Â 4, 6); his "Halakot" (Berakot i. 12, ed.
Wilna, p.Â 10); the work of his son Jacob ben Asher, "Tur Orach Chayim"
(chapter 59); the Responsa of Isaac ben Sheshet (numbers 193, 268, 270). In the
"Midrash" compilation "Genesis Rabbah", Rabbi Berechiah mentions Ashkenaz,
Riphath, and Togarmah as German tribes or as German lands. It may correspond to
a Greek word that may have existed in the Greek dialect of the Palestinian
Jews, or the text is corrupted from "Germanica." This view of Berechiah is
based on the Talmud (Yoma 10a; Jerusalem Talmud Megillah 71b), where Gomer, the
father of Ashkenaz, is translated by "Germamia", which evidently stands for
Germany, and which was suggested by the similarity of the sound. In later times
the word Ashkenaz is used to designate southern and Western Germany, the ritual
of which sections differs somewhat from that of Eastern Germany and Poland.
Thus the prayer-book of Isaiah Horowitz, and many others, give the piyyutim
according to the Minhag of Ashkenaz and Poland. According to 16th century
mystic Rabbi Elijah of Chelm, Ashkenazi Jews lived in Jerusalem during the 11th
century. The story is told that a German-speaking Palestinian Jew saved the
life of a young German man surnamed Dolberger. So when the knights of the First
Crusade came to siege Jerusalem, one of Dolbergerâ€™s family members who was
among them rescued Jews in Palestine and carried them back to Worms to repay
the favor. Further evidence of German communities in the holy city comes in the
form of halakhic questions sent from Germany to Jerusalem during the second
half of the 11th century. Modern history. In an essay on Sephardi Jewry, Daniel
Elazar at the Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs summarized the demographic
history of Ashkenazi Jews in the last thousand years, noting that at the end of
the 11th century, 97% of world Jewry was Sephardic and 3% Ashkenazi; in the
mid-17th century, "Sephardim still outnumbered Ashkenazim three to two", but by
the end of the 18th century, "Ashkenazim outnumbered Sephardim three to two,
the result of improved living conditions in Christian Europe versus the Ottoman
Muslim world." By 1931, Ashkenazi Jews accounted for nearly 92% of world Jewry.
Ashkenazi Jews developed the Hasidic movement as well as major Jewish academic
centers across Poland, Russia, and Belarus in the generations after emigration
from the west. After two centuries of comparative tolerance in the new nations,
massive westward emigration occurred in the 19th and 20th centuries in response
to pogroms in the east and the economic opportunities offered in other parts of
the world. Ashkenazi Jews have made up the majority of the American Jewish
community since 1750. Ashkenazi cultural growth led to the "Haskalah" or Jewish
Enlightenment, and the development of Zionism in modern Europe. The Holocaust.
Of the estimated 8.8 million Jews living in Europe at the beginning of World
War II, the majority of whom were Ashkenazi, about 6 million â€” more than two-
thirds â€” were systematically murdered in the Holocaust. These included 3
million of 3.3 million Polish Jews (91%); 900,000 of 1.5 million in Ukraine
(60%); and 50â€“90% of the Jews of other Slavic nations, Germany, Hungary, and
the Baltic states, and over 25% of the Jews in France. Sephardi communities
suffered similar depletions in a few countries, including Greece, the
Netherlands and the former Yugoslavia. As the large majority of the victims
were Ashkenazi Jews, their percentage dropped from nearly 92% of world Jewry in
1931 to nearly 80% of world Jewry today. The Holocaust also effectively put an
end to the dynamic development of the Yiddish language in the previous decades,
as the vast majority of the victims of the Holocaust, around five million, were
Yiddish speakers. Many of the surviving Ashkenazi Jews emigrated to countries
such as Israel, Canada, Argentina, Australia, and the United States after the
war. In Israel. Today, Ashkenazi Jews constitute the largest group among Jews,
and among Israeli Jews as well. They have played a prominent role in the
economy, media, and politics of Israel since its founding. During the first
decades of Israel as a state, strong cultural conflict occurred between
Sephardic and Ashkenazi Jews (mainly east European Ashkenazim). The roots of
this conflict, which still exists to a much smaller extent in present day
Israeli society, are chiefly attributed to the concept of the "melting pot".
That is to say, all Jewish immigrants who arrived in Israel were strongly
encouraged to "melt down" their own particular exilic identities within the
general social "pot" in order to become Israeli. Relationship with other Jews.
The term "Ashkenazi" also refers to the "nusach Ashkenaz" (Hebrew, "liturgical
tradition", or rite) used by Ashkenazi Jews in their "Siddur" (prayer book). A
"nusach" is defined by a liturgical tradition's choice of prayers, order of
prayers, text of prayers and melodies used in the singing of prayers. Two other
major forms of nusach among Ashkenazic Jews are Nusach Sefard (not to be
confused with Sephardi), which is the same as the general Polish (Hasidic)
Nusach; and Nusach Chabad, otherwise known as Lubavitch Chasidic, Nusach Arizal
or Nusach Ari. This phrase is often used in contrast with Sephardi Jews, also
called Sephardim, who are descendants of Jews from Spain and Portugal. There
are some differences in how the two groups pronounce certain Hebrew letters and
in points of ritual. Several famous people have Ashkenazi as a surname, such as
Vladimir Ashkenazy. However, most people with this surname hail from within
Sephardic communities, particularly from the Syrian Jewish community. The
Sephardic carriers of the surname would have some Ashkenazi ancestors since the
surname was adopted by families who were initially of Ashkenazic origins who
move to Sephardi countries and joined those communities. Ashkenazi would be
formally adopted as the family surname having started off as a nickname imposed
by their adopted communities. Some have shortened the name to Ash. The theory
that the majority of Ashkenazi Jews are mainly the descendants of the non-
Semitic converted Khazars or Europeans was advocated by various racial
theorists and antisemitic sources in the late-19th and 20th centuries,
especially following the publication of Arthur Koestler's "The Thirteenth
Tribe" and Shlomo Sand's "The Invention of the Jewish People". Such proponents
are motivated by the belief that if Ashkenazi Jews are primarily Khazar or
European and not Semitic in origin, they would have no historical claim to
Israel, nor would they be the subject of God's Biblical promise of Canaan to
the Israelites, thus undermining both the historical/ethnic/national and
theological basis of secular and religious Zionists, respectively. Despite
recent genetic evidence to the contrary, and a lack of any real mainstream
scholarly support, these beliefs are still popular among antisemites. Notable
Ashkenazim. Ashkenazi Jews have a noted history of achievement in western
societies. They have won a large number of the Nobel awards. In those societies
where they have been free to enter any profession, they have a record of high
occupational achievement, entering professions and fields of commerce where
higher education is required. For example, during the 20th century in the
United States, Ashkenazi Jews represented approximately 3% of the population,
but won 27% of the US Nobel Prizes in science, and 25% of the ACM Turing Awards
(the Nobel-equivalent in computer science). Katya Gibel Mevorach also warns
about the danger of seeking supposed inherited "genetic intelligence" in Jews
as a group in her piece: "Not an Innocent Pursuit: The Politics of a 'Jewish'
Genetic Signature." Genetics. Genetic origins. Efforts to identify the origins
of Ashkenazi Jews through DNA analysis began in the 1990s. Like most DNA
studies of human migration patterns, the earliest studies focused on two
segments of the human genome, the Y-chromosome (passed on only by males), and
the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA, passed on only by females). Both segments are
unaffected by recombination. Genome-wide association studies have also been
employed to yield findings relevant to genetic origins. Male lineages: Y-
chromosomal DNA. A study of haplotypes of the Y-chromosome, published in 2000,
addressed the paternal origins of Ashkenazi Jews. Hammer "et al." found that
the Y-chromosome of Ashkenazi and Sephardic Jews contained mutations that are
also common among Middle Eastern peoples, but uncommon in the general European
population. This suggested that the male ancestors of the Ashkenazi Jews could
be traced mostly to the Middle East. The proportion of male genetic admixture
in Ashkenazi Jews amounts to less than 0.5% per generation over an estimated 80
generations, with "relatively minor contribution of European Y chromosomes to
the Ashkenazim," and a total admixture estimate "very similar to Motulsky's
average estimate of 12.5%." This supported the finding that "Diaspora Jews from
Europe, Northwest Africa, and the Near East resemble each other more closely
than they resemble their non-Jewish neighbors." A 2001 study by Nebel "et al."
showed that both Ashkenazi and Sephardic Jewish populations share the same
overall paternal Near Eastern ancestries. In comparison with data available
from other relevant populations in the region, Jews were found to be more
closely related to groups in the north of the Fertile Crescent. The authors
also report on Eu 19 (R1a) chromosomes, which are very frequent in Eastern
Europeans (54%â€“60%) at elevated frequency (12.7%) in Ashkenazi Jews. They
hypothesized that the differences among Ashkenazim Jews could reflect low-level
gene flow from surrounding European populations and/or genetic drift during
isolation. A later 2005 study by Nebel "et al.", found a similar level of 11.5%
of male Ashkenazim belonging to R1a1a (M17+), the dominant Y-chromosome
haplogroup in Eastern Europeans, suggesting possible gene flow. Female
lineages: Mitochondrial DNA. Before 2006, geneticists largely attributed the
genesis of most of the world's Jewish populations, including Ashkenazi Jews, to
founding effects by males who migrated from the Middle East and "by the women
from each local population whom they took as wives and converted to Judaism."
In line with this model of origin, David Goldstein, now of Duke University,
reported in 2002 that, unlike male lineages, the female lineages in Ashkenazi
Jewish communities "did not seem to be Middle Eastern", and that each community
had its own genetic pattern and even that "in some cases the mitochondrial DNA
was closely related to that of the host community." In his view this suggested
"that Jewish men had arrived from the Middle East, taken wives from the host
population and converted them to Judaism, after which there was no further
intermarriage with non-Jews." "..Both the extent and location of the maternal
ancestral deme from which the Ashkenazi Jewry arose remain obscure. Here, using
complete sequences of the maternally inherited mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), we
show that close to one-half of Ashkenazi Jews, estimated at 8,000,000 people,
can be traced back to only four women carrying distinct mtDNAs that are
virtually absent in other populations, with the important exception of low
frequencies among non-Ashkenazi Jews. We conclude that four founding mtDNAs,
likely of Near Eastern ancestry, underwent major expansion(s) in Europe within
the past millennium.." In addition, Behar "et al." have suggested that the rest
of Ashkenazi mtDNA is originated from ~150 women, most of those likely of
Middle Eastern origin. However, other studies by Behar indicate that this mtDNA
is different from other Jewish populations found outside of Europe, leaving the
possibility of a separate origin or even a European origin a distinct
possibility. Genome-wide association and linkage studies. In genetic
epidemiology, a genome-wide association study (GWA study, or GWAS) is an
examination of all or most of the genes (the genome) of different individuals
of a particular species to see how much the genes vary from individual to
individual. These techniques were originally designed for epidemiological uses,
to identify genetic associations with observable traits. A 2006 study by Seldin
"et al." used over five thousand autosomal SNPs to demonstrate European genetic
substructure. The results showed "a consistent and reproducible distinction
between â€˜northernâ€™ and â€˜southernâ€™ European population groups". Most
northern, central, and eastern Europeans (Finns, Swedes, English, Irish,
Germans, and Ukrainians) showed >90% in the â€˜northernâ€™ population group,
while most individual participants with southern European ancestry (Italians,
Greeks, Portuguese, Spaniards) showed >85% in the 'southern' group. Both
Ashkenazi Jews as well as Sephardic Jews showed >85% membership in the
"southern" group. Referring to the Jews clustering with southern Europeans, the
authors state the results were "consistent with a later Mediterranean origin of
these ethnic groups". A 2007 study by Bauchet "et al." found that Ashkenazi
Jews were most closely clustered with Arabic North African populations when
compared to Global population, and in the European structure analysis, they
share similarities only with Greeks and Southern Italians, reflecting their
east Mediterranean origins. A 2010 study on Jewish ancestry by Atzmon-Ostrer
"et al." stated "Two major groups were identified by principal component,
phylogenetic, and identity by descent (IBD) analysis: Middle Eastern Jews and
European/Syrian Jews. The IBD segment sharing and the proximity of European
Jews to each other and to southern European populations suggested similar
origins for European Jewry and refuted large-scale genetic contributions of
Central and Eastern European and Slavic populations to the formation of
Ashkenazi Jewry.", as both groups â€“ the Middle Eastern Jews and European/
Syrian Jews shared common ancestors in the Middle East about 2500 years ago.
The study examines genetic markers spread across the entire genome and shows
that the Jewish groups (Ashkenazi and non Ashkenazi) share large swaths of DNA,
indicating close relationships and that each of the Jewish groups in the study
(Iranian, Iraqi, Syrian, Italian, Turkish, Greek and Ashkenazi) has its own
genetic signature but is more closely related to the other Jewish groups than
to their fellow non-Jewish countrymen. Atzmon's team found that the SNP markers
in genetic segments of 3 million DNA letters or longer were 10 times more
likely to be identical among Jews than non-Jews. Results of the analysis also
tally with biblical accounts of the fate of the Jews. The study also found that
with respect to non-Jewish European groups, the population most closely related
to Ashkenazi Jews are modern-day Italians. The study speculated that the
genetic-similarity between Ashkenazi Jews and Italians may be due to inter-
marriage and conversions in the time of the Roman Empire. It was also found
that any two Ashkenazi Jewish participants in the study shared about as much
DNA as fourth or fifth cousins. A 2010 study by Bray "et al", using SNP
microarray techniques and linkage analysis, estimated that 35 to 55 percent of
the modern Ashkenazi genome may be of European origin, and that European
"admixture is considerably higher than previous estimates by studies that used
the Y chromosome". The study assumed Druze and Palestinian Arabs populations to
represent the reference to world Jewry ancestor genome. With this reference
point, the linkage disequilibrium in the Ashkenazi Jewish population was
interpreted as "matches signs of interbreeding or 'admixture' between Middle
Eastern and European populations". In their press release, Bray stated: "We
were surprised to find evidence that Ashkenazi Jews have higher heterozygosity
than Europeans, contradicting the widely-held presumption that they have been a
largely isolated group". The authors conclude that their results will require
further investigation. The genome wide genetic study carried out in 2010 by
Behar at all examined the genetic relationship between all major Jewish groups,
including Ashkenazim, as well as genetic relationship between this Jewish
groups and non Jewish ethnic populations. The study found that contemporary
Jews (excluding Indian and Ethiopian Jews) are having close genetic
relationship with the people from the Levant. The authors explained that "The
most parsimonious explanation for these observations is a common genetic
origin, which is consistent with an historical formulation of the Jewish people
as descending from ancient Hebrew and Israelite residents of the Levant".
Medical genetics. The result is a form of ascertainment bias. This has
sometimes created an impression that Jews are more susceptible to genetic
disease than other populations. Healthcare professionals are often taught to
consider those of Ashkenazi descent to be at increased risk for colon cancer. A
study by the Albert Einstein College of Medicine examines a particular genetic
trait that increases the lifespan of the Ashkenazi population. The study
focuses on telomerase, the enzyme responsible for maintaining telomeres at the
ends of chromosomes during cell division. Genetic counseling and genetic
testing are recommended for couples where both partners are of Ashkenazi
ancestry. Some organizations, most notably Dor Yeshorim, organize screening
programs to prevent homozygosity for the genes that cause these diseases. E. L.
Abel's book "Jewish Genetic Disorders: A Layman's Guide" (McFarland, 2008: ISBN
0-7864-4087-2) is a comprehensive reference text on the topic; also see the
Chicago Center for Jewish Genetic Disorders for more information.
