Autocephaly Autocephaly (; from , meaning self-headed), is the status of a
hierarchical Christian church whose head bishop does not report to any higher-
ranking bishop (used especially in Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox
churches). When an ecumenical council or a high-ranking bishop, such as a
patriarch or other primate, releases an ecclesiastical province from the
authority of that bishop while the newly independent church remains in full
communion with the hierarchy to which it then ceases to belong, the council or
primate is granting autocephaly. For example, the Cypriot Orthodox Church was
granted autocephaly by the Canon VIII Council of Ephesus[http://www.ccel.org/
ccel/schaff/npnf214.x.xvi.xii.html] and is ruled by the Archbishop of Cyprus,
who is not subject to any higher ecclesiastical authority, although his church
remains in full communion with the other Eastern Orthodox churches. Similarly,
the Georgian Orthodox Church was granted autocephaly (independent) in 466 by
the Patriarchate of Antioch, the Tewahedo Church of Ethiopia was granted
autocephaly by the Coptic pope in 1950, and the Orthodox Church in America was
granted autocephaly by the Patriarch of Moscow in 1970. (The Greek Orthodox
Church in North America is not autocephalous. It is subject to the Patriarch of
Constantinople). Autonomy. One step short of autocephaly is "autonomy". A
church that is autonomous has its highest-ranking bishop, such as an archbishop
or metropolitan, appointed by the patriarch of the mother church, but is self-
governing in all other respects. While "autocephalous" does mean self-
governing, it literally means "self-headed". "Kephale" (κεφαλή) means
"head" in Greek. Hence, "autocephalous" (αὐτοκέφαλος) denotes self-
headed, or a head unto itself, while "autonomous" literally means "self-
legislated", or a law unto itself. "Nomos" (νόμος) is the Greek for "law'.
