Azazel Azazel or Azazael or Az√¢z√™l (Hebrew: ◊¢◊ñ◊ê◊ñ◊ú, "Azazel") is a term
used three times in the Hebrew scriptures, and later in Hebrew mythology as the
enigmatic name of a character. The meaning of Azazel is that of "who God
strengthens". The term in the Bible is limited to three uses in Leviticus 16,
where a goat is designated ◊ú÷∑◊¢÷≤◊ñ÷∏◊ê◊ñ÷µ÷Ω◊ú "la-aza'zeyl"; either "for
absolute removal" or "for Azazel" and outcast in the desert as part of Yom
Kippur. In the Hebrew Bible. Hebrew Leviticus. The ESV provides the footnote
"16:8 The meaning of Azazel is uncertain; possibly the name of a place or a
demon, traditionally a scapegoat; also verses 10, 26". Most scholars accept the
indication of some kind of demon or deity, however Judit M. Blair notes that
this is an argument without supporting contemporary text evidence. Ida Zatelli
(1998) has suggested that the Hebrew ritual parallels pagan practice of sending
a scapegoat into the desert on the occasion of a royal wedding found in two
ritual texts in archives at Ebla (24th C. BC). A she-goat with a silver
bracelet hung from her neck was driven forth into the wasteland of 'Alini' by
the community. There is no mention of an "Azazel". According to The
Expositior's Bible Commentary, Azazel is the Hebrew word for scapegoat. This is
the only place that the Hebrew word is found in the whole Hebrew Old Testament.
It says that the Book of Enoch, (extra-biblical Jewish theological literature,
dated around 200 B.C.) is full of demonology and reference to fallen angels.
The EBC (Vol 2) says that this text uses late Aramaic forms for these names
which indicates that The Book of Enoch most likely relies upon the Hebrew
Leviticus text rather than the Leviticus text being reliant upon the Book of
Enoch. This Hebrew word is simply a term meaning "a goat to go away" - in other
words a "scapegoat" - in verse 20-22 it describes what this accomplished by
symbolically placing the sins of Israel upon the goat and then sending it to
the desert and releasing it. In Greek and later translations. The translators
of the Greek Septuagint understood the Hebrew term as meaning "the sent away",
and read:"8and Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats, one lot for the Lord
and the other lot for the scapegoat (Greek "apompaios" dat.). Following the
Septuagint, the Latin Vulgate, Martin Luther and the King James Bible also give
readings such as Young's Literal Translation: 'And Aaron hath given lots over
the two goats, one lot for Jehovah, and one lot for a goat of departure;' This
is rendered "Za-za-e'il" (the strong one against/of God), according to the
Syriac Peshitta Version, as in Qumran fragment 4Q180. The rite of the scapegoat
in Rabbinical literature. The Mishnah (Yoma 39a) follows the Hebrew Bible text;
two goats were procured, similar in respect of appearance, height, cost, and
time of selection. Having one of these on his right and the other on his left,
the high priest, who was assisted in this rite by two subordinates, put both
his hands into a wooden case, and took out two labels, one inscribed "for
Yahweh" and the other "for absolute removal" (or "for Azazel"). The high priest
then laid his hands with the labels upon the two goats and said, "A sin-
offering to Yahweh" (thus speaking the Tetragrammaton); and the two men
accompanying him replied, "Blessed be the name of His glorious kingdom for ever
and ever." He then fastened a scarlet woolen thread to the head of the goat
"for Azazel"; and laying his hands upon it again, recited the following
confession of sin and prayer for forgiveness: "O Lord, I have acted
iniquitously, trespassed, sinned before Thee: I, my household, and the sons of
Aaron Thy holy ones. O Lord, forgive the iniquities, transgressions, and sins
that I, my household, and Aaron's children, Thy holy people, committed before
Thee, as is written in the law of Moses, Thy servant, 'for on this day He will
forgive you, to cleanse you from all your sins before the Lord; ye shall be
clean.'" This prayer was responded to by the congregation present. A man was
selected, preferably a priest, to take the goat to the precipice in the
wilderness; and he was accompanied part of the way by the most eminent men of
Jerusalem. Ten booths had been constructed at intervals along the road leading
from Jerusalem to the steep mountain. At each one of these the man leading the
goat was formally offered food and drink, which he, however, refused. When he
reached the tenth booth those who accompanied him proceeded no further, but
watched the ceremony from a distance. When he came to the precipice he divided
the scarlet thread into two parts, one of which he tied to the rock and the
other to the goat's horns, and then pushed the goat down (Yoma vi. 1‚Äì8). The
cliff was so high and rugged that before the goat had traversed half the
distance to the plain below, its limbs were utterly shattered. Men were
stationed at intervals along the way, and as soon as the goat was thrown down
the precipice, they signaled to one another by means of kerchiefs or flags,
until the information reached the high priest, whereat he proceeded with the
other parts of the ritual. The scarlet thread is symbolically referenced in ;
and the Talmud states (ib. 39a) that during the forty years that Simon the Just
was high priest, the thread actually turned white as soon as the goat was
thrown over the precipice: a sign that the sins of the people were forgiven. In
later times the change to white was not invariable: a proof of the people's
moral and spiritual deterioration, that was gradually on the increase, until
forty years before the destruction of the Second Temple, when the change of
color was no longer observed (l.c. 39b). Personification of impurity. The
medieval mystic Nachmanides (1194‚Äì1270) identified the Hebrew text as
referring to a demon, and identified this "Azazel" with Samael. However, he did
not see the sending of the goat as honouring Azazel as a deity, but as a
symbolic expression of the idea that the people's sins and their evil
consequences were to be sent back to the spirit of desolation and ruin, the
source of all impurity. The very fact that the two goats were presented before
God, before the one was sacrificed and the other sent into the wilderness, was
proof that Azazel was not ranked alongside God, but regarded simply as the
personification of wickedness in contrast with the righteous government of God.
Maimonides (1134‚Äì1204) says that as sins cannot be taken off one‚Äôs head and
transferred elsewhere, the ritual is symbolic, enabling the penitent to discard
his sins: ‚ÄúThese ceremonies are of a symbolic character and serve to impress
man with a certain idea and to lead him to repent, as if to say, ‚ÄòWe have
freed ourselves of our previous deeds, cast them behind our backs and removed
them from us as far as possible‚Äô.‚Äù The rite, resembling, on one hand, the
sending off of the basket with the woman embodying wickedness to the land of
Shinar in the vision of Zechariah (), and, on the other, the letting loose of
the living bird into the open field in the case of the leper healed from the
plague (), was, indeed, viewed by the people of Jerusalem as a means of ridding
themselves of the sins of the year. So would the crowd, called Babylonians or
Alexandrians, pull the goat's hair to make it hasten forth, carrying the burden
of sins away with it (Yoma vi. 4, 66b; "Epistle of Barnabas," vii.), and the
arrival of the shattered animal at the bottom of the valley of the rock of Bet
·∏§adudo, twelve miles away from the city, was signalized by the waving of
shawls to the people of Jerusalem, who celebrated the event with boisterous
hilarity and amid dancing on the hills (Yoma vi. 6, 8; Ta'an. iv. 8). Evidently
the figure of Azazel was an object of general fear and awe rather than, as has
been conjectured, a foreign product or the invention of a late lawgiver. More
as a demon of the desert, it seems to have been closely interwoven with the
mountainous region of Jerusalem. Azazel in Jewish mythology. Pre-Jewish
sources. Despite the expectation of Brandt (1889) to date no evidence has
surfaced of Azazel as a demon or god prior to the earliest Jewish sources among
the Dead Sea Scrolls. Dead Sea Scrolls and 1 Enoch. In the Dead Sea Scrolls the
name Azazel occurs in the line 6 of 4Q203, the Book of the Giants. This is a
part of the Enochic literature about fallen angels found at Qumran. According
to the Book of Enoch, which brings Azazel into connection with the Biblical
story of the fall of the angels, located on Mount Hermon, a gathering-place of
demons from of old (Enoch xiii.; compare Brandt, "Mand√§ische Theologie," 1889,
p.¬ 38). Azazel is represented in the Book of Enoch as one of the leaders of
the rebellious Watchers in the time preceding the flood; he taught men the art
of warfare, of making swords, knives, shields, and coats of mail, and women the
art of deception by ornamenting the body, dying the hair, and painting the face
and the eyebrows, and also revealed to the people the secrets of witchcraft and
corrupted their manners, leading them into wickedness and impurity; until at
last he was, at the Lord's command, bound hand and foot by the archangel
Raphael and chained to the rough and jagged rocks of Duduael (= Beth ·∏§adudo),
where he is to abide in utter darkness until the great Day of Judgment, when he
will be cast into the fire to be consumed forever (Enoch viii. 1, ix. 6, x.
4‚Äì6, liv. 5, lxxxviii. 1; see Geiger, "J√ºd. Zeit." 1864, pp.¬ 196‚Äì204).
The corruption brought on by Azazel and the Grigori degrades the human race,
and the four archangels (Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and Phanuel) ‚Äúsaw much
blood being shed upon the earth and all lawlessness being wrought upon the
earth [‚Ä¶] The souls of men their suit, saying, "Bring our cause before the
Most High; [‚Ä¶ Thou seest what Azazel hath done, who hath taught all
unrighteousness on earth and revealed the eternal secrets which were in heaven,
which men were striving to learn." God sees the sin brought about by Azazel and
has Raphael ‚Äúbind Azazel hand and foot and cast him into the darkness: and
make an opening in the desert ‚Äì which is in Dudael ‚Äì and cast him therein.
And place upon him rough and jagged rocks, and cover him with darkness, and let
him abide there forever, and cover his face that he may not see light.‚Äù
Several scholars have previously discerned that some details of Azazel's
punishment are reminiscent of the scapegoat ritual. Thus, Lester Grabbe points
to a number of parallels between the Azazel narrative in 1 Enoch and the
wording of Leviticus 16, including ‚Äúthe similarity of the names Asael and
Azazel; the punishment in the desert; the placing of sin on Asael/Azazel; the
resultant healing of the land.‚Äù Daniel St√∂kl also observes that ‚Äúthe
punishment of the demon resembles the treatment of the goat in aspects of
geography, action, time and purpose.‚Äù Thus, the place of Asael‚Äôs punishment
designated in 1 Enoch as Dudael is reminiscent of the rabbinic terminology used
for the designation of the ravine of the scapegoat in later rabbinic
interpretations of the Yom Kippur ritual. St√∂kl remarks that ‚Äúthe name of
place of judgment (Dudael) is conspicuously similar in both traditions and can
likely be traced to a common origin.‚Äù Azazel's fate is foretold near the end
of 1 Enoch 2:8, where God says, ‚ÄúOn the day of the great judgement he shall
be cast into the fire. [‚Ä¶] The whole earth has been corrupted through the
works that were taught by Azazel: to him ascribe all sin." In 3 Enoch. In the
5th Century 3 Enoch, Azazel is one of the three angels (Azza and Uzza [Ouza are
the other two) who opposed Enoch's high rank when he became the angel Metatron.
Whilst they were fallen at this time they were still in Heaven, but Metatron
held a dislike for them, and had them cast out. They were thenceforth known as
the 'three who got the most blame' for their involvement in the fall of the
angels marrying women. It should be remembered that Azazel and Shemhazai were
said to be the leaders of the 200 fallen, and Uzza and Shemhazai were tutelary
guardian angels of Egypt with both Shemhazai and Azazel and were responsible
for teaching the secrets of heaven as well. The other angels dispersed to
'every corner of the Earth.' In the Apocalypse of Abraham. In the
extracanonical text the Apocalypse of Abraham (c.1stC AD), Azazel is portrayed
as an unclean bird who came down upon the sacrifice which Abraham prepared.
(This is in reference to Genesis 15:11: "Birds of prey came down on the
carcasses, but Abram drove them away" [NIV]). He is also associated with the
serpent and hell. In Chapter 23, verse 7, he is described as having seven
heads, 14 faces, "hands and feet like a man's on his back six wings on the
right and six on the left." Abraham says that the wicked will "putrefy in the
belly of the crafty worm Azazel, and be burned by the fire of Azazel's tongue"
(Abr. 31:5), and earlier says to Azazel himself, "May you be the firebrand of
the furnace of the earth! Go, Azazel, into the untrodden parts of the earth.
For your heritage is over those who are with you" (Abr. 14:5‚Äì6). Here there
is the idea that God's heritage (the created world) is largely under the
dominion of evil ‚Äì i.e., it is "shared with Azazel" (Abr. 20:5), again
identifying him with Satan, who was called "the prince of this world" by Jesus.
( niv) Azazel in Christianity. Cyril of Alexandria sees the "apompaios" (sent-
away one, scapegoat) as a foretype of Christ. Origen ("Contra Celsum," vi. 43)
identifies Azazel with Satan. Adventists teach that the scapegoat, or "Azazel",
is a symbol for Satan. It has been interpreted to be a prefigure of the final
judgment by which sin is removed forever from the universe. Through the
sacrifice of Jesus, the sins of the believers are forgiven them, but the fact
that sins were committed still exist on record in the "Books" of heaven (see ).
After the final judgment, the responsibility for all those forgiven sins are
accredited to the originator of sin, Satan. After which, Satan is destroyed in
the Lake of Fire. Sin no longer will exist anywhere. They believe that Satan
will finally have to bear the responsibility for the sins of the believers of
all ages, and that this was foreshadowed on the Day of Atonement when the high
priest confessed the sins of Israel over the head of the scapegoat. () Some
critics have accused Adventists of giving Satan the status of sin-bearer
alongside Jesus Christ. Adventists have responded by insisting that Satan is
not a saviour, nor does he provide atonement for sin; Christ alone is the
substitutionary sacrifice for sin, but holds no responsibility for it. In the
final judgment, responsibility for sin is passed back to Satan who first caused
mankind to sin. As the responsible party, Satan receives the wages for his sin
and the sins of all the saved ‚Äì namely, death. Thus, the unsaved are held
responsible for their own sin, while the saved are no longer held responsible
for theirs. Azazil in Islam. Azazil (Arabic: ÿπÿ≤ÿßÿ≤ŸÑ "‚ÄòAzƒÅzƒ´l") does not
feature in the Qur'an, but is said to be the original name of Iblis, or Satan.
Iblis was the Jinn (or spirit) who worshiped Allah (God) from amongst the ranks
of the angels. He denied Allah's command to bow down before Adam and later
tempted Adam to eat from the forbidden tree. He made a promise to tempt mankind
into sin and lead them all astray ‚Äì those who are heedless of the signs of
Allah (God). The word Iblis means "to despair" and Azazil despaired of the
Mercy of God, thus earning him that title. Ibn Abbas said and Ibn Masoud and
some companions :that Iblis was the main chief between Angels in the 1st sky
close to the earth and Ibn Abbas said: Iblis name was Azazel ÿπÿ≤ÿßÿ≤ŸäŸÑ then
Allah change him to Satan as the story mentioned in The Quran.(from book of
prophets stories for Ibn Kathiir). The Quran does mention the story of two
angels Harut and Marut, who were confined within the land of Babylon, teaching
magic and other forbidden knowledge to those who seek such knowledge. As a
request for dispensing any such information, they were required to declare that
they were only there for the trial of men who inquired for knowledge of magic;
anything they have taught (magic) can only harm and not profit the student at
all. The Quran also mention some underlying correlation with the king Sulaiman
(Solomon) without elaborating furthermore. There is no mention of any penalty
for the actions of the two angels, although the penalty mentioned for magic is
the same as that for being a disbeliever in God, namely everlasting hellfire.
Azazil is referenced as another name for Iblis in the "Tawasin", the collection
by the 10th Century Sufi writer and martyr, Mansur Al-Hallaj. Chapter Six of
that writing is dedicated to the self-defence of Iblis, and in one section,
Hallaj explains how each of the letters of Azazil's name relate to his
personality.
