Biblical canon A biblical canon, or canon of scripture, is a list of books
considered to be authoritative scripture by a particular religious community.
The word "canon" comes from the Greek "Œ∫Œ±ŒΩœéŒΩ", meaning "rule" or
"measuring stick". The term was first coined in reference to scripture by
Christians, but the idea is said to be Jewish. The textual basis of the canon
can also be specified. For example, the Hebrew/Aramaic text as vocalized and
pointed (cf. "niqqud") in the medieval era by the Masoretes, the Masoretic
text, is the canonical text for Judaism. A modern example of this closing of a
textual basis, in a process analogous to the closing of the canon itself, is
the King James Only movement, which takes either the actual English text of
various redactions of the actual King James Bible itself, or alternately, the
textual basis of the King James Version ‚Äî Bomberg's Masoretic text for the
Old Testament and the "Textus Receptus" in various editions, those of Erasmus,
Beza, and Stephanus, alongside the Complutensian polyglot, for the New
Testament ‚Äî as the specified, correct, and inspired textual tradition.
Similarly, certain groups specify their particular self-published version or
translation of the Bible as the most reliable. Among these are Jehovah's
Witnesses, who produce the New World Translation. Most of the canons listed
below are considered "closed" (i.e., books cannot be added or removed),
reflecting a belief that public revelation has ended and thus the inspired
texts may be gathered into a complete and authoritative canon, which scholar
Bruce Metzger defines as "an authoritative collection of books." In contrast,
an "open canon", which permits the addition of books through the process of
continuous revelation, Metzger defines as "a collection of authoritative
books." (A table of Biblical scripture for both Testaments, with regard to
canonical acceptance in Christendom's various major traditions, appears below.
For a further listing of canons used and enumeration of the books included in
them, with distinct regard to the original language in which they were written,
see Wikipedia's article on the books of the Bible.) These canons have been
developed through debate and agreement by the religious authorities of their
respective faiths. Believers consider canonical books to be inspired by God or
to express the authoritative history of the relationship between God and his
people. Books, such as the Jewish-Christian gospels, have been excluded from
the canon altogether, but many disputed books considered non-canonical or even
apocryphal by some are considered to be Biblical apocrypha or Deuterocanonical
or fully canonical by others. There are differences between the Jewish Tanakh
and Christian biblical canons, and between the canons of different Christian
denominations. The differing criteria and processes of canonization dictate
what the various communities regard as inspired scripture. In some cases where
there are varying strata of scriptural inspiration, it becomes prudent even to
discuss texts that only have an elevated status within a particular tradition.
This becomes even more complex when considering the open canons of the various
Latter Day Saint sects ‚Äî which may be viewed as extensions of both
Christianity and thus Judaism ‚Äî and the scriptural revelations purportedly
given to several leaders over the years within that movement. Jewish canon.
Rabbinic Judaism (Hebrew: ◊ô◊î◊ì◊ï◊™ ◊®◊ë◊ ◊ô◊™) recognizes the twenty-four
books of the Masoretic Text, commonly called the Tanakh (Hebrew:
◊™÷∑÷º◊ ÷∑"◊ö÷∞) or "Hebrew Bible." Evidence suggests that the process of
canonization occurred between 200 BC and 200 AD, indeed a popular position is
that the Torah was canonized c. 400 BC, the Prophets c. 200 BC, and the
Writings c. 100 AD perhaps at a hypothetical Council of Jamnia ‚Äî however,
this position is increasingly criticised by modern scholars. The book of
Deuteronomy includes a prohibition against adding or subtracting (, ) which
might apply to the book itself (i.e. a "closed book", a prohibition against
future scribal editing) or to the instruction received by Moses on Mt. Sinai.
The book of 2 Maccabees, itself not a part of the Jewish canon, describes
Nehemiah (c. 400 BC) as having "founded a library and collected books about the
kings and prophets, and the writings of David, and letters of kings about
votive offerings" (). The Book of Nehemiah suggests that the priest-scribe Ezra
brought the Torah back from Babylon to Jerusalem and the Second Temple ()
around the same time period. Both I and II Maccabees suggest that Judas
Maccabeus (c. 167 BC) likewise collected sacred books (, , ), indeed some
scholars argue that the Jewish canon was fixed by the Hasmonean dynasty.
However, these primary sources do not suggest that the canon was at that time
"closed"; moreover, it is not clear that these sacred books were identical to
those that later became part of the canon. The Great Assembly, also known as
the Great Synagogue, was, according to Jewish tradition, an assembly of 120
scribes, sages, and prophets, in the period from the end of the Biblical
prophets to the time of the development of Rabbinic Judaism, marking a
transition from an era of prophets to an era of Rabbis. They lived in a period
of about two centuries ending c. 70 AD. Among the developments in Judaism that
are attributed to them are the fixing of the Jewish Biblical canon, including
the books of Ezekiel, Daniel, Esther, and the Twelve Minor Prophets; the
introduction of the triple classification of the oral Torah, dividing its study
into the three branches of midrash, halakot, and aggadot; the introduction of
the Feast of Purim; and the institution of the prayer known as the Shemoneh
'Esreh as well as the synagogal prayers, rituals, and benedictions. In addition
to the Tanakh, mainstream Judaism considers the Talmud (Hebrew:
◊™÷∑÷º◊ú÷∞◊û◊ï÷º◊ì ) to be another central, authoritative text. It takes the
form of a record of rabbinic discussions pertaining to Jewish law, ethics,
philosophy, customs, and history. The Talmud has two components: the Mishnah
(c. 200 AD), the first written compendium of Judaism's oral Law; and the Gemara
(c. 500 AD), an elucidation of the Mishnah and related Tannaitic writings that
often ventures onto other subjects and expounds broadly on the Tanakh. The
Talmud is the basis for all codes of rabbinic law and is often quoted in other
rabbinic literature. Samaritan canon. Another version of the Torah in the
Samaritan alphabet, also exists. This text is associated with the Samaritans
(Hebrew: ◊©◊ï◊û◊®◊ï◊ ◊ô◊ù; Arabic: ÿßŸÑÿ≥ÿßŸÖÿ±ŸäŸàŸÜ), a people of whom the
Jewish Encyclopedia states: "Their history as a distinct community begins with
the taking of Samaria by the Assyrians in 722 BC." The Samaritan Pentateuch's
relationship to the Masoretic Text is still disputed. Some differences are
minor, such as the ages of different people mentioned in genealogy, while
others are major, such as a commandment to be monogamous, which only appears in
the Samaritan version. More importantly, the Samaritan text also diverges from
the Masoretic in stating that Moses received the Ten Commandments on Mount
Gerizim ‚Äî not Mount Sinai ‚Äî and that it is upon this mountain (Gerizim)
that sacrifices to God should be made ‚Äî not in Jerusalem. Scholars
nonetheless consult the Samaritan version when trying to determine the meaning
of text of the original Pentateuch, as well as to trace the development of
text-families. Some scrolls among the Dead Sea scrolls have been identified as
proto-Samaritan Pentateuch text-type. Comparisons have also been made between
the Samaritan Torah and the Septuagint version. Samaritans consider the Torah
to be inspired scripture, but do not accept any other parts of the Bible ‚Äî
probably a position also held by the Sadducees. They did not expand their canon
by adding any Samaritan compositions. There is a Samaritan Book of Joshua,
however this is a popular chronicle written in Arabic and is not considered to
be scripture. Other non-canonical Samaritan religious texts include the Memar
Markah (Teaching of Markah) and the Defter (Prayerbook) ‚Äî both from the 4th
century or later. The people of the remnants of the Samaritans in modern-day
Israel/Palestine retain their version of the Torah as fully and authoritatively
canonical. They regard themselves as the true "guardians of the Law." This
assertion is only re-enforced by the claim of the Samaritan community in Nablus
(an area traditionally associated with the ancient city of Shechem) to possess
the oldest existing copy of the Torah ‚Äî one that they believe to have been
penned by Abisha, a grandson of Aaron. Christian biblical canons. Early Church.
Earliest Christian communities. Though the Early Church used the Old Testament
according to the canon of the Septuagint (LXX), perhaps as found in the
Bryennios List or Melito's canon, the Apostles did not otherwise leave a
defined set of new scriptures; instead, the New Testament developed over time.
Writings attributed to the apostles circulated amongst the earliest Christian
communities. The Pauline epistles were circulating in collected forms by the
end of the 1st century AD. Justin Martyr, in the early 2nd century, mentions
the "memoirs of the Apostles," which Christians (Greek: ŒßœÅŒπœÉœÑŒπŒ±ŒΩœåœÇ)
called "gospels," and which were considered to be authoritatively equal to the
Old Testament. Marcion's canon. Marcion of Sinope was the first Christian
leader in recorded history (though later, considered heretical) to propose and
delineate a uniquely Christian canon (c. 140 AD). This included 10 epistles
from St. Paul, as well as a version of the Gospel of Luke, which today is known
as the Gospel of Marcion. In so doing, he established a particular way of
looking at religious texts that persists in Christian thought today. After
Marcion, Christians began to divide texts into those that aligned well with the
"canon" (measuring stick) of accepted theological thought and those that
promoted heresy. This played a major role in finalizing the structure of the
collection of works called the Bible. It has been proposed that the initial
impetus for the proto-orthodox Christian project of canonization flowed from
opposition to the canonization of Marcion. Apostolic Fathers. A four-gospel
canon (the "Tetramorph") was asserted by Irenaeus in the following quote: "It
is not possible that the gospels can be either more or fewer in number than
they are. For, since there are four quarters of the earth in which we live, and
four universal winds, while the church is scattered throughout all the world,
and the 'pillar and ground' of the church is the gospel and the spirit of life,
it is fitting that she should have four pillars breathing out immortality on
every side, and vivifying men afresh‚Ä¶ Therefore the gospels are in accord
with these things‚Ä¶ For the living creatures are quadriform and the gospel is
quadriform‚Ä¶ These things being so, all who destroy the form of the gospel are
vain, unlearned, and also audacious; those mean who represent the aspects of
the gospel as being either more in number than as aforesaid, or, on the other
hand, fewer." By the early 3rd century, Christian theologians like Origen of
Alexandria may have been using ‚Äî or at least were familiar with ‚Äî the same
27 books found in modern New Testament editions, though there were still
disputes over the canonicity of some of the writings (see also Antilegomena).
Likewise by 200, the Muratorian fragment shows that there existed a set of
Christian writings somewhat similar to what is now the New Testament, which
included four gospels and argued against objections to them. Thus, while there
was a good measure of debate in the Early Church over the New Testament canon,
the major writings were accepted by almost all Christians by the middle of the
3rd century. Eastern Church. Alexandrian Fathers. Origen of Alexandria was an
early figure in the codification of the Biblical canon. He was a scholar well
educated in the realm of both theology and pagan philosophy but was
posthumously condemned at the Second Council of Constantinople in 553. Origen
decided to make his canon include all of the books in the current Catholic
canon except for four books: James, 2nd Peter, and the 2nd and 3rd epistles of
John. He also included the Shepherd of Hermas which was later rejected. The
religious scholar Bruce Metzger described Origen's efforts, saying ‚ÄúThe
process of canonization represented by Origen proceeded by way of selection,
moving from many candidates for inclusion to fewer.‚Äù This was one of the
first major attempts at the compilation of certain books and letters as
authoritative and inspired teaching for the Early Church at the time, although
it is unclear whether Origen intended for his list to be authoritative itself.
In his Easter letter of 367, Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, gave a list of
exactly the same books that would become the New Testament‚Äì27 book‚Äìproto-
canon, and he used the phrase "being canonized" ("kanonizomena") in regard to
them. Athanasius also included the Book of Baruch, as well as the Letter of
Jeremiah, in his Old Testament canon. However, from this canon, he omitted the
book of Esther. Eastern canons. The eastern churches had, in general, a weaker
feeling than those in the west for the necessity of making a sharp delineation
with regard to the canon. It was more conscious of the gradation of spiritual
quality among the books that it accepted (e.g. the classification of Eusebius,
see also Antilegomena) and was less often disposed to assert that the books
which it rejected possessed no spiritual quality at all. For example, the
Trullan Synod of 691-692, which was rejected by Pope Constantine (see also
Pentarchy), endorsed the following lists of canonical writings: the Apostolic
Canons (c. 385), the Synod of Laodicea (c. 363), the Third Synod of Carthage
(c. 397), and the 39th Festal Letter of Athanasius (367). And yet, these lists
do not agree. Similarly, the New Testament canons of the national churches of
Syria, Armenia, Georgia, Egypt (The Coptic Church), and Ethiopia all have minor
differences. The Revelation of John is one of the most uncertain books; it was
not translated into Georgian until the 10th century, and it has never been
included in the official lectionary of the Greek Church, whether Byzantine or
modern. Western Church. Latin Fathers. The first council that accepted the
present Catholic canon (the Canon of Trent) may have been the Synod of Hippo
Regius in North Africa (393); the acts of this council, however, are lost. A
brief summary of the acts was read at and accepted by the Councils of Carthage
in 397 and 419. These councils were under the authority of St. Augustine, who
regarded the canon as already closed. Pope Damasus I's Council of Rome in 382,
if the "Decretum Gelasianum" is correctly associated with it, issued a biblical
canon identical to that mentioned above, or if not, the list is at least a 6th
century compilation. Likewise, Damasus' commissioning of the Latin Vulgate
edition of the Bible, c. 383, was instrumental in the fixation of the canon in
the West. In 405, Pope Innocent I sent a list of the sacred books to a Gallic
bishop, Exsuperius of Toulouse. When these bishops and councils spoke on the
matter, however, they were not defining something new, but instead "were
ratifying what had already become the mind of the Church." Thus, from the 4th
century, there existed unanimity in the West concerning the New Testament canon
(as it is today), and by the 5th century the East, with a few exceptions, had
come to accept the Book of Revelation and thus had come into harmony on the
matter of the New Testament canon. Luther's canon. Martin Luther (1483‚Äì1546)
made an attempt to remove the books of Hebrews, James, Jude and Revelation from
the canon (echoing the consensus of several Catholics, also labeled Christian
Humanists ‚Äî such as Cardinal Ximenez, Cardinal Cajetan, and Erasmus ‚Äî and
partially because they were perceived to go against certain Protestant
doctrines such as sola scriptura and sola fide), but this was not generally
accepted among his followers. However, these books are ordered last in the
German-language Luther Bible to this day. In addition, Luther moved the books
that later became the Deuterocanonicals into a section he called the Apocrypha.
Protestant canon. Protestants accept the original texts in Hebrew and Aramaic
as the inspired Hebrew Bible, rather than the Septuagint translation into
Greek, though many recognize the latter's wide use by Greek-speaking Jews in
the 1st century. They note that early Christians evidenced a knowledge of a
canon of Scripture, based upon internal evidence, as well as by the existence
of a list of Old Testament books by Melito of Sardis, compiled around 170 AD
(see Melito's canon). It is sometimes difficult to apply these criteria to all
of the books in the accepted canon, however, and one can point to writings that
Protestants consider to be unscriptural, which would fulfill these
requirements. In practice, most Protestants hold to the Jewish Tanakh for the
Old Testament and the Roman Catholic canon for the New Testament. Canons of
various Christian traditions. Full dogmatic articulations of the canons were
not made until the Council of Trent of 1546 for Roman Catholicism, the Thirty-
Nine Articles of 1563 for the Church of England, the Westminster Confession of
Faith of 1647 for Calvinism, and the Synod of Jerusalem of 1672 for the Greek
Orthodox. Other traditions, while also having closed canons, may not be able to
point to the exact years in which their respective canons were considered to be
complete. The following tables reflect the current state of various Christian
canons. Old Testament. All of the major Christian traditions accept the books
of the Hebrew protocanon in its entirety as divinely inspired and
authoritative. Furthermore, all of these traditions, with the exception of the
Protestants, add to this number various deuterocanonical books. However, in
some Protestant Bibles ‚Äî especially the English King James Bible and the
Lutheran Bible ‚Äî many of these deuterocanonical books are retained as part of
the tradition in a section called the "Apocrypha." Some books listed here, like
the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs for the Armenian Apostolic Church, may
have once been a vital part of a Biblical tradition, may even still hold a
place of honor, but are no longer considered to be part of the Bible. Other
books, like the Prayer of Manasseh for the Roman Catholic Church, may have been
included in manuscripts, but never really attained a high level of importance
within that particular tradition. The levels of traditional prominence for
others, like Psalms 152‚Äì155 and the Psalms of Solomon of the Syriac churches,
remain unclear. In so far as the Ethiopian Orthodox canon is concerned, some
points of clarity should be made. First, the books of Lamentations, Jeremiah,
and Baruch, as well as the Letter of Jeremiah and 4 Baruch, are all considered
canonical by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church. It is not always clear as to how
these writings are arranged or divided in the Ethiopian canon, however. In some
lists, they may simply fall under the title "Jeremiah," while in others, they
are divided various ways into separate books. Moreover, the book of Proverbs is
divided into two books ‚Äî Messale (Prov. 1‚Äì24) and T√§gsas (Prov. 25‚Äì31).
Additionally, while the books of Jubilees and Enoch are fairly well-known among
western scholars, 1, 2, and 3 Meqabyan are not. The three books of Meqabyan are
often called the "Ethiopian Maccabees," but are completely different in content
from the books of Maccabees that are known and/or have been canonized in other
traditions. Finally, the Book of Joseph ben Gurion, or Pseudo-Josephus, is a
history of the Jewish people thought to be based upon the writings of Josephus.
The Ethiopic version (1‚Äì8 Yos√´f w√§ld√§ Koryon) has eight parts and is
included in the Ethiopian broader canon. New Testament. Among the various
Christian denominations, the New Testament canon is a generally agreed-upon
list of 27 books. However, the way in which those books are arranged may vary
from tradition to tradition. For instance, in the Lutheran, Slavonic,
Ethiopian, Syriac, and Armenian traditions, the New Testament is ordered
differently from what is considered to be the standard arrangement. Protestant
Bibles in Russia and Ethiopia usually follow the local Orthodox order for the
New Testament. The Syriac Orthodox Church and the Assyrian Church of the East
both adhere to the Peshitta liturgical tradition, which historically excludes
five books of the New Testament Antilegomena: 2 John, 3 John, 2 Peter, Jude,
and Revelation. However, those books are included in certain Bibles of the
modern Syriac traditions. Other New Testament works that are generally
considered apocryphal nonetheless appear in some Bibles and manuscripts. For
instance, the Epistle to the Laodiceans was included in numerous Latin Vulgate
manuscripts, in the eighteen German Bibles prior to Luther's translation, and
also a number of early English Bibles, such as Gundulf's Bible and John
Wycliffe's English translation ‚Äî even as recently as 1728, William Whiston
considered this epistle to be genuinely Pauline. Likewise, the Third Epistle to
the Corinthians was once considered to be part of the Armenian Orthodox Bible,
but is no longer printed in modern editions. Within the Syriac Orthodox
tradition, the Third Epistle to the Corinthians also has a history of
significance. Both Aphrahat and Ephraem of Syria held it in high regard and
treated it as if it were canonical. However, it was left-out of the Peshitta
and ultimately excluded from the canon altogether. The Didache, The Shepherd of
Hermas, and other writings attributed to the Apostolic Fathers, were once
considered scriptural by various early Church fathers. They are still being
honored in some traditions, though they are no longer considered to be
canonical. However, certain canonical books within the Ethiopian Orthodox
tradition find their origin in the writings of the Apostolic Fathers as well as
the Ancient Church Orders. The Ethiopian Orthodox Church recognizes these eight
additional New Testament books in its broader canon. They are as follows: the
four books of Sinodos, the two books of the Covenant, Ethiopic Clement, and the
Ethiopic Didascalia. Latter Day Saint canons. The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. The Pearl of Great Price contains five sections: "Selections
from the Book of Moses", "The Book of Abraham", "Joseph Smith‚ÄîMatthew",
"Joseph Smith‚ÄîHistory" and "The Articles of Faith". The Book of Moses and
Joseph Smith‚ÄîMatthew are portions of the Book of Genesis and the Book of
Matthew (respectively) from the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. The
manuscripts of the unfinished Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible (JST) state
that "the Song of Solomon is not inspired scripture." However, it is still
printed in every version of the King James Bible published by the church. The
Standard Works are printed and distributed by the LDS church in a single
binding called a "Quadruple Combination" or a set of two books, with the Bible
in one binding, and the other three books in a second binding called a "Triple
Combination". Current editions of the Standard Works include a bible
dictionary, photographs, maps and gazetteer, topical guide, index, footnotes,
cross references, excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible and
other study aids. Other Latter Day Saint sects. Canons of various Latter Day
Saint denominations diverge from the LDS Standard Works. For instance, the
Bickertonite sect does not consider the Pearl of Great Price or Doctrines and
Covenants to be scriptural. Rather, they believe that the New Testament
scriptures contain a true description of the church as established by Jesus
Christ. Both the King James Bible and Book of Mormon are considered to be the
inspired word of God, as all doctrines and faith of the church are referenced
with these two books. The Community of Christ points to Jesus Christ as the
living Word of God, and it affirms the Bible, along with the Book of Mormon, as
well as its own version of the Doctrine and Covenants as scripture for the
church. While it publishes a version of the Joseph Smith Translation ‚Äî which
includes material from the Book of Moses ‚Äî the Community of Christ also
accepts the use of other translations of the Bible, such as the standard King
James Version and the New Revised Standard Version. Like the aforementioned
Bickertonites, the Church of Christ (Temple Lot) rejects the Doctrine and
Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price, as well as the Joseph Smith Translation
of the Bible, preferring to use only the King James Bible and the Book of
Mormon as doctrinal standards. The Book of Commandments is accepted as being
superior to the Doctrine and Covenants as a compendium of Joseph Smith's early
revelations, but is not accorded the same status as the Bible or Book of
Mormon. The Word of the Lord and The Word of the Lord Brought to Mankind by an
Angel are two related books considered to be scriptural by certain (Fettingite)
factions that separated from the Temple Lot church. Both books contain
revelations allegedly given to former Church of Christ (Temple Lot) Apostle
Otto Fetting by an angelic being who claimed to be John the Baptist. The latter
title (120 messages) contains the entirety of the former's material (30 msgs.)
with additional revelations (90 msgs.) purportedly given to William A. Draves
by this same being, after Fetting's death. Neither are accepted by the larger
Temple Lot body of believers. The Strangite sect consider the Bible (when
correctly translated), the Book of Mormon, and editions of the Doctrine and
Covenants published prior to Joseph Smith's death (which contained the Lectures
on Faith) to be inspired scripture. They also hold the Joseph Smith Translation
of the Bible to be inspired, but do not believe modern publications of the text
are accurate. Other portions of The Pearl of Great Price, however, are not
considered to be scriptural ‚Äî though are not necessarily fully rejected
either. The Book of Jasher was consistently used by both Joseph Smith and James
Strang, but as with other Latter Day Saint denominations and sects, there is no
official stance on its authenticity, and it is not considered canonical. An
additional work called The Book of the Law of the Lord is also accepted as
inspired scripture by the Strangites. They likewise hold as scriptural several
prophecies, visions, revelations, and translations printed by James Strang, and
published in the "Revelations of James J. Strang". Among other things, this
text contains his purported "Letter of Appointment" from Joseph Smith and his
translation of the Voree plates. Many Latter Day Saint denominations have also
either adopted the Articles of Faith or at least view them as a statement of
basic theology. (They are considered scriptural by the larger LDS church and
are included in The Pearl of Great Price.) At times, the Articles have been
adapted to fit the respective belief systems of various faith communities.
