Blood libel Blood libel (also blood accusation) is a false accusation or claim
that religious minorities, usually Jews, murder children to use their blood in
certain aspects of their religious rituals and holidays. Historically, these
claimsâ€”alongside those of well poisoning and host desecrationâ€”have been a
major theme in European persecution of Jews. Blood libels typically allege that
Jews require human blood for the baking of matzos for Passover, although this
element was absent in the earliest cases that claimed (the contemporary) Jews
reenacted the crucifixion. The accusations often assert that the blood of
Christian children is especially coveted, and, historically, blood libel claims
have been made to account for otherwise unexplained deaths of children. In some
cases, the alleged victim of human sacrifice has become venerated as a martyr,
a holy figure around whom a martyr cult might arise. Four of these have been
previously canonized as saints, namely William of Norwich, Little Saint Hugh of
Lincoln, Simon of Trent (Simon was decanonized in the 20th century), and
Gavriil Belostoksky who remains canonized in the Russian Orthodox Church.
Walter Laqueur (2006): "The Changing Face of Antisemitism: From Ancient Times
to the Present Day", Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-530429-2. p.56 Actual
Jewish practices regarding blood and sacrifice. The supposed torture and human
sacrifice alleged in the blood libels run contrary to the teachings of Judaism.
According to the Bible, God commanded Abraham in the Binding of Isaac to
sacrifice his son, but ultimately provided a ram as a substitute. The Ten
Commandments in the Torah forbid murder. In addition, the use of blood (human
or otherwise) in cooking is prohibited by the kosher dietary laws (kashrut).
Blood from slaughtered animals may not be consumed, and must be drained out of
the animal and covered with earth. () According to the book of Leviticus, blood
from sacrificed animals may only be placed on the altar of the Great Temple in
Jerusalem (which no longer existed at the time of the Christian blood libels).
Furthermore, consumption of human flesh would violate kashrut. While animal
sacrifice was part of the practice of ancient Judaism, the Tanakh (Old
Testament) and Jewish teaching portray human sacrifice as one of the evils that
separated the pagans of Canaan from the Hebrews (, ). Jews were prohibited from
engaging in these rituals and were punished for doing so (, , , ). In fact,
ritual cleanliness for priests prohibited even being in the same room as a
human corpse (). Suggested origins of the myth. Professor Israel Jacob Yuval of
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem published an article in 1993 that argues
that blood libel may have originated in the 12th century from Christian views
of Jewish behavior during the First Crusade. Some Jews committed suicide and
killed their own children rather than be subjected to forced conversions. Yuval
investigated Christian reports of these events and found that they were greatly
distorted with claims that if Jews could kill their own children they could
also kill Christian children. Yuval rejects the blood libel story as a fantasy
of some Christians which could not contain any elements of truth because of the
precarious nature of the Jewish minority's existence in Christian Europe.
Notable instances. There have been many blood libel accusations and trials of
Jews, beginning in the 1st century and continuing through modern times. A few
of them are discussed here. Antiquity. The origins of the blood libel are found
in the writings of to the Graeco-Egyptian author Apion, who claimed that Jews
sacrificed Greek victims in their temple. Apion repeated anti-Jewish slurs and
"absurd calumnies" first made by Posidonius and Apollonius Molon in the 1st
century BCE. This resulted in an attack on Jews in Alexandria in 38 CE in which
thousands of Jews died. Socrates Scholasticus (fl. 5th Century) reported that
some Jews in a drunken frolic bound a Christian child on a cross in mockery of
the death of Christ and scourged him until he died. Middle Ages. In England in
1144 Jews of Norwich were accused of ritual murder after a boy, William of
Norwich, was found dead with stab wounds in the woods. The legend was turned
into a cult, with William acquiring the status of martyr and crowds of pilgrims
bringing wealth to the local church. This was followed by similar accusations
in Gloucester (1168), Bury St Edmunds (1181) and Bristol (1183). In 1189, the
Jewish deputation attending the coronation of Richard the Lionheart was
attacked by the crowd. Massacres of Jews at London and York soon followed. On
Feb 6 1190, the Norwich Jews were butchered in their homes, only those who
found refuge in the castle survived. The remains of 17 bodies thrown in a well
in Norwich between the 12th and 13th century (5 that were shown by DNA testing
to likely be members of a single Jewish family) were very possibly killed as
part of one of these pogroms. Jews would later be expelled from all of England
in 1290 and not allowed to return until 1655. In 1171, Blois was the site of a
blood libel accusation against its Jewish community that led to 31 Jews (by
some accounts 40) being burned to death. An early blood libel appears in "Bonum
Universale de Apibus" ii. 29, Â§ 23, by Thomas of CantimprÃ© (a monastery near
Cambray). Thomas wrote "It is quite certain that the Jews of every province
annually decide by lot which congregation or city is to send Christian blood to
the other congregations." A very learned Jew, who in our day has been converted
to the (Christian) faith, informs us that one enjoying the reputation of a
prophet among them, toward the close of his life, made the following
prediction: 'Be assured that relief from this secret ailment, to which you are
exposed, can only be obtained through Christian blood (""solo sanguine
Christiano"").' This suggestion was followed by the ever-blind and impious
Jews, who instituted the custom of annually shedding Christian blood in every
province, in order that they might recover from their malady. Thomas added that
the Jews had misunderstood the words of their prophet, who by his expression
""solo sanguine Christiano"" had meant not the blood of any Christian, but that
of Jesusâ€”the only true remedy for all physical and spiritual suffering.
Thomas did not mention the name of the "very learned" proselyte, but it may
have been Nicholas Donin of La Rochelle, who in 1240 had a disputation on the
Talmud with Yechiel of Paris, and who in 1242 caused the burning of numerous
Talmudic manuscripts in Paris. It is known that Thomas was personally
acquainted with this Nicholas. The case of Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln is
mentioned by Chaucer, and thus has become well-known. A child of eight years,
named Hugh, son of a woman named Beatrice, disappeared at Lincoln on 31 July
1255. His body was discovered on 29 August, covered with filth, in a pit or
well belonging to a Jewish man named Copin or Koppin. On being promised by John
of Lexington, a judge, who happened to be present, that his life should be
spared, Copin is said to have confessed that the boy had been crucified by the
Jews, who had assembled at Lincoln for that purpose. King Henry III, on
reaching Lincoln at the beginning of October, refused to carry out the promise
of John of Lexington, and had Copin executed and 91 of the Jews of Lincoln
seized and sent up to London, where 18 of them were executed. The rest were
pardoned at the intercession of the Franciscans (Jacobs, "Jewish Ideals",
pp.Â 192â€“224). At Pforzheim, Baden, the corpse of a seven-year-old girl was
found in the river by fishermen. The Jews were suspected, and when they were
led to the corpse, blood allegedly began to flow from the wounds; led to it a
second time, the face of the child became flushed, and both arms were raised.
In addition to these miracles, there was the testimony of the daughter of the
wicked woman who had sold the child to the Jews. A regular judicial examination
did not take place; it is probable that the above-mentioned "wicked woman" was
the murderess. That a judicial murder was then and there committed against the
Jews in consequence of the accusation is evident from the manner in which the
Nuremberg "Memorbuch" and the synagogal poems refer to the incident (Siegmund
Salfeld, "Das Martyrologium des NÃ¼rnberger Memorbuches" (1898), pp.Â 15, 128-
130). At Weissenburg, a miracle alone decided the charge against the Jews.
According to the accusation, the Jews had suspended a child (whose body was
found in the Lauter river) by the feet, and had opened every artery in his body
to obtain all the blood. Again, supernatural claims were made: the child's
wounds were said to have bled for five days afterward, despite its treatment.
At Oberwesel, "miracles" again constituted the only evidence against the Jews.
The corpse of the 11-year-old Werner of Oberwesel was said to have floated up
the Rhine (against the current) as far as Bacharach, emitting radiance, and
being invested with healing powers. In consequence, the Jews of Oberwesel and
many other adjacent localities were severely persecuted during the years 1286-
89. Emperor Rudolph I, to whom the Jews had appealed for protection, issued a
public proclamation to the effect that great wrong had been done to the Jews,
and that the corpse of Werner was to be burned and the ashes scattered to the
winds. The statement was made, in the "Chronicle" of Konrad Justinger of 1423,
that at Bern in 1294 the Jews tortured and murdered a boy called Rudolph. The
historical impossibility of this widely credited story was demonstrated by
Jakob Stammler, pastor of Bern, in 1888. It has been speculated whether the
Kindlifresserbrunnen ("Child Eater Fountain") in Bern might refer to the
alleged ritual murder of 1294. Renaissance and Baroque. Simon of Trent, aged
two, disappeared, and his father alleged that he had been kidnapped and
murdered by the local Jewish community. Fifteen local Jews were sentenced to
death and burned. Simon was regarded as a saint, and was canonized by Pope
Sixtus V in 1588. His status as a saint was removed in 1965 by Pope Paul VI,
though his murder is still promoted as a fact by a handful of extremists.
Christopher of Toledo, also known as Christopher of La Guardia or "the Holy
Child of La Guardia," was a four-year-old Christian boy supposedly murdered by
two Jews and three Conversos (converts to Christianity). In total, eight men
were executed. It is now believed that this case was constructed by the Spanish
Inquisition to facilitate the expulsion of Jews from Spain. He was canonized by
Pope Pius VII in 1805. Christopher has since been removed from the canon,
though once again, a handful of individuals still claim the validity of this
case. In a case at Tyrnau (Nagyszombat, today Trnava, Slovakia), the absurdity,
even the impossibility, of the statements forced by torture from women and
children shows that the accused preferred death as a means of escape from the
torture, and admitted everything that was asked of them. They even said that
Jewish men menstruated, and that the latter therefore practiced the drinking of
Christian blood as a remedy. At BÃ¶sing (Bazin, today Pezinok, Slovakia), it
was charged that a nine-year-old boy had been bled to death, suffering cruel
torture; thirty Jews confessed to the crime and were publicly burned. The true
facts of the case were disclosed later, when the child was found alive in
Vienna. He had been stolen by the accuser, Count Wolf of Bazin, as a fiendish
means of ridding himself of his Jewish creditors at Bazin. At Rinn, near
Innsbruck, a boy named Andreas Oxner (also known as Anderl von Rinn) was said
to have been bought by Jewish merchants and cruelly murdered by them in a
forest near the city, his blood being carefully collected in vessels. The
accusation of drawing off the blood (without murder) was not made until the
beginning of the 17th century, when the cult was founded. The older inscription
in the church of Rinn, dating from 1575, is distorted by fabulous
embellishmentsâ€”for example, that the money paid for the boy to his godfather
turned into leaves, and that a lily blossomed upon his grave. The cult
continued until officially prohibited in 1994 by the Bishop of Innsbruck. 19th
century. The only child-saint in the Russian Orthodox Church is the six-year-
old boy Gavriil Belostoksky from the village Zverki. According to the legend
supported by the church, the boy was kidnapped from his home during the holiday
of Passover while his parents were away. Shutko, who was a Jew from BiaÅ‚ystok,
was accused of bringing the boy to BiaÅ‚ystok, poking him with sharp objects
and draining his blood for nine days, then bringing the body back to Zverki and
dumping it at a local field. A cult developed, and the boy was canonized in
1820. His relics are still the object of pilgrimage. On All Saints Day, July
27, 1997, the Belorussian state TV showed a film alleging the story is true.
The revival of the cult in Belarus was cited as a dangerous expression of
antisemitism in international reports on human rights and religious freedoms
which were passed to the UNHCR. Views of the Catholic Church. The attitude of
the Roman Catholic Church towards these accusations and the cults venerating
children supposedly killed by Jews has varied over time. The papacy generally
opposed them, although it had problems in enforcing its opposition. In 1911,
the "Dictionnaire apologÃ©tique de la foi catholique", an important French
Catholic encyclopedia, published an analysis of the blood libel accusations.
This may be taken as being broadly representative of educated Catholic opinion
in continental Europe at that time. The article noted that the popes had
generally refrained from endorsing the blood libel, and it concluded that the
accusations were unproven in a general sense, but it left open the possibility
that some Jews had committed ritual murders of Christians. Other contemporary
Catholic sources (notably the Jesuit periodical "CiviltÃ  cattolica") took a
more hostile view. Today, the accusations are almost entirely discredited in
Catholic circles, and the cults associated with them have fallen into
disfavour. For example, Simon of Trent was deleted from the Calendar of Saints
in 1965 and does not appear in the current (2000) edition of the Roman
Martyrology. Views of Muslim authorities. In late 1553 or 1554, Suleiman the
Magnificent, the reigning Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, issued a firman (royal
decree) formally denouncing blood libels against the Jews. In 2003, the
Egyptian newspaper Al-Ahram published a series of articles by Osama Al-Baz, a
senior advisor to then Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. Among other things,
Osam Al-Baz explained the origins of the blood libel against the Jews. He said
that Arabs and Muslims have never been antisemitic, as a group, but accepted
that a few Arab writers and media figures attack Jews "on the basis of the
racist fallacies and myths that originated in Europe". He urged people not to
succumb to "myths" such as the blood libel.
