Book of Genesis The Book of Genesis (from the Latin Vulgate, in turn borrowed
or transliterated from Greek Î³Î­Î½ÎµÏƒÎ¹Ï‚, meaning "origin"; , "BereÊ¾Å¡yt",
"In beginning"), is the first book of the Hebrew Bible (the Tanakh) and the
Christian Old Testament. The basic narrative expresses the central theme: God
creates the world and appoints man as his regent, but man proves disobedient
and God destroys his world through the Flood. The new post-Flood world is
equally corrupt, but God does not destroy it, instead calling one man, Abraham,
to be the seed of its salvation. At God's command Abraham descends from his
home into the land of Canaan, given to him by God, where he dwells as a
sojourner, as does his son Isaac and his grandson Jacob. Jacob's name is
changed to Israel, and through the agency of his son Joseph, the children of
Israel descend into Egypt, 70 people in all with their households, and God
promises them a future of greatness. Genesis ends with Israel in Egypt, ready
for the coming of Moses and the Exodus. The narrative is punctuated by a series
of covenants with God, successively narrowing in scope from all mankind (the
covenant with Noah) to a special relationship with one people alone (Abraham
and his descendants through Isaac and Jacob). The book's author or authors
appear to have structured it around ten "toledot" sections (the "these are the
generations of..." phrases), but many modern commentators see it in terms of a
"primeval history" (chapters 1â€“11) followed by the cycle of Patriarchal
stories (chapters 12â€“50). For Jews and Christians alike, the theological
importance of Genesis centers on the covenants linking God to his Chosen People
and the people to the Promised Land. Christianity has interpreted Genesis as
the prefiguration of certain cardinal Christian beliefs, primarily the need for
salvation (the hope or assurance of all Christians) and the redemptive act of
Christ on the Cross as the fulfillment of covenant promises as the Son of God.
Tradition credits Moses as the author of Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers
and most of Deuteronomy, but modern scholars increasingly see it as a product
of the 6th and 5th centuries BC. Structure. Genesis appears to be structured
around the recurring phrase "elleh toledot", meaning "these are the
generations," with the first use of the phrase referring to the "generations of
heaven and earth" and the remainder marking individualsâ€”Noah, the "sons of
Noah", Shem, etc., down to Jacob. It is not clear, however, what this meant to
the original authors, and most modern commentators divide it into two parts
based on subject matter, a "primeval history" (chapters 1â€“11) and a
"patriarchal history" (chapters 12â€“50). While the first is far shorter than
the second, it sets out the basic themes and provides an interpretive key for
understanding the entire book. The "primeval history" has a symmetrical
structure hinged around chapter 6â€“9, the flood story, with the events before
the flood mirrored by the events after. The "patriarchal history" recounts the
events of the major patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to whom God reveals
himself and to whom the promise of descendants and land is made, while the
story of Joseph serves to take the Israelites into Egypt in preparation for the
next book, Exodus. Summary. God creates the world in six days and consecrates
the seventh after giving mankind his first commandment: "be fruitful and
multiply". God pronounces the world "very good", but it becomes corrupted by
the sin of man and God sends a deluge (a great flood) to destroy it, saving
only the righteous (Noah) and his family, from whose seed the world is
repopulated. Man sins again, but God has promised that he will not destroy the
world a second time with water. God instructs Abram (the future Abraham) to
travel from his home in Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) to the land of Canaan. There
God makes a covenant with Abram promising that his descendants shall be as
numerous as the stars in the heavens, but that they shall suffer oppression in
a foreign land for four hundred years, after which they shall inherit the land
"from the river of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates." Abram's name
is changed to Abraham and that of his wife Sarai to Sarah, and circumcision of
all males is instituted as the sign of the covenant. Sarah is barren, and tells
Abraham to take her Egyptian handmaiden, Hagar, as a concubine. Through Hagar,
Abraham becomes the father of Ishmael. Abraham asks God that Ishmael "might
live in Thy sight," (that is, be favored), but God replies that Sarah will bear
a son, who will be named Isaac, through whom the covenant will be established.
At Sarah's insistence Ishmael and his mother Hagar are driven out into the
wilderness, but God saves them and promises to make Ishmael a great nation. God
resolves to destroy the city of Sodom for the sins of its people. Abraham
protests that it is not just "to slay the righteous with the wicked," and asks
if the whole city can be spared if even ten righteous men are found there. God
replies: "For the sake of ten I will not destroy it." Abraham's nephew Lot is
saved from the destruction of Sodom, and through incest with his daughters
becomes the ancestor of the Moabites and Ammonites. God tests Abraham by
demanding that he sacrifice Isaac. As Abraham is about to lay the knife upon
his son, God restrains him, promising him numberless descendants. On the death
of Sarah, Abraham purchases Machpelah (modern Hebron) for a family tomb and
sends his servant to Mesopotamia to find among his relations a wife for Isaac,
and Rebekah is chosen. Other children are born to Abraham by another wife,
Keturah, among whose descendants are the Midianites, and he dies in a
prosperous old age and is buried in his tomb at Hebron. Isaac's wife Rebekah is
barren, but Isaac prays to God and she gives birth to the twins Esau, father of
the Edomites, and Jacob. Through deception, Jacob becomes the heir instead of
Esau and gains his father's blessing. He flees to his uncle where he prospers
and earns his two wives. Jacob's name is changed to Israel, and by his wives
Rachel and Leah and their handmaidens he has twelve sons, the ancestors of the
twelve tribes of the Children of Israel. Joseph, Jacob's favourite son, is sold
into slavery in Egypt by his jealous brothers. But Joseph prospers, and when
famine comes he brings his father and his brothers and their households,
seventy persons in all, to Egypt, where Pharaoh assigns to them the land of
Goshen. Jacob calls his sons to his bedside and reveals their future to them
before he dies and is interred in the family tomb at Machpelah. Joseph lives to
see his great-grandchildren, and on his death-bed he exhorts his brethren, if
God should remember them and lead them out of the country, to take his bones
with them. The book ends with Joseph's remains being "put in a coffin in
Egypt." Composition. Origins. For much of the 20th century most scholars agreed
that the five books of the Pentateuchâ€”Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and
Deuteronomyâ€”came from four sources, the Yahwist, the Elohist, the
Deuteronomist and the Priestly source, each telling the same basic story, and
joined together by various editors. Since the 1970s there has been a revolution
in scholarship: the Elohist source is now widely regarded as no more than a
variation on the Yahwist, while the Priestly source is increasingly seen not as
a document but as a body of revisions and expansions to the Yahwist (or "non-
Priestly") material. (The Deuteronomistic source does not appear in Genesis).
In composing the Patriarchal history the Yahwist drew on four separate blocks
of traditional stories about Abraham, Jacob, Judah and Joseph, combining them
with genealogies, itineraries and the "promise" theme to create a unified
whole. Similarly, when composing the "primeval history" he drew on Greek and
Mesopotamian sources, editing and adding to them to create a unified work that
fit his theological agenda. The Yahwistic work was then revised and expanded
into the final edition by the authors of the Priestly source. This leaves the
question of when these works were created. Scholars in the first half of the
20th century came to the conclusion that the Yahwist was produced in the
monarchic period, specifically at the court of Solomon, and the Priestly work
in the middle of the 5th century BC (the author was even identified as Ezra),
but more recent thinking is that the Yahwist was written either just before or
during the Babylonian exile of the 6th century, and the Priestly final edition
was made late in the Exilic period or soon after. As for why the book was
created, a theory which has gained considerable interest, although still
controversial is "Persian imperial authorisation". This proposes that the
Persians, after their conquest of Babylon in 538Â BC, agreed to grant Jerusalem
a large measure of local autonomy within the empire, but required the local
authorities to produce a single law code accepted by the entire community. The
two powerful groups making up the communityâ€”the priestly families who
controlled the Temple and who traced their foundation-myth to Moses and the
wilderness wanderings, and the major landowning families who made up the
"elders" and who traced their own origins to Abraham, who had "given" them the
landâ€”were in conflict over many issues, and each had its own "history of
origins", but the Persian promise of greatly increased local autonomy for all
provided a powerful incentive to cooperate in producing a single text. Genre.
Genesis is perhaps best seen as an example of "antiquarian history", a type of
literature telling of the first appearance of humans, the stories of ancestors
and heroes, and the origins of culture, cities and so forth. The most notable
examples are found in the work of Greek historians of the 6th century BC: their
intention was to connect notable families of their own day to a distant and
heroic past, and in doing so they did not distinguish between myth, legend, and
facts. Professor Jean-Louis Ska of the Pontifical Biblical Institute calls the
basic rule of the antiquarian historian the "law of conservation": everything
old is valuable, nothing is eliminated. Ska also points out the purpose behind
such antiquarian histories: antiquity is needed to prove the worth of Israel's
traditions to the nations (the neighbours of the Jews in early Persian
Palestine), and to reconcile and unite the various factions within Israel
itself. Themes. Promises to the ancestors. In 1978 David Clines published his
influential "The Theme of the Pentateuch" â€“ influential because he was one of
the first to take up the question of the theme of the entire five books.
Clines' conclusion was that the overall theme is "the partial fulfillment â€“
which implies also the partial nonfulfillment â€“ of the promise to or blessing
of the Patriarchs." (By calling the fulfillment "partial" Clines was drawing
attention to the fact that at the end of Deuteronomy the people are still
outside Canaan). The patriarchs, or ancestors, are Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
with their wives (Joseph is normally excluded). Through the patriarchs God
announces the election of Israel, meaning that he has chosen Israel to be his
special people and committed himself to their future. God tells the patriarchs
that he will be faithful to their descendants (i.e. to Israel), and Israel is
expected to have faith in God and his promise. ("Faith" in the context of
Genesis and the Hebrew bible means agreement to the promissory relationship,
not a body of belief). The promise itself has three parts: offspring,
blessings, and land. The fulfilment of the promise to each patriarch depends on
having a male heir, and the story is constantly complicated by the fact that
each prospective mother â€“ Sarah, Rebekah and Rachel â€“ is barren. The
ancestors, however, retain their faith in God and God in each case gives a son
â€“ in Jacob's case, twelve sons, the foundation of the chosen Israelites. All
three promises are more richly fulfilled in each succeeding generation, until
through Joseph "all the world" is saved from famine, and by bringing the
children of Israel down to Egypt he becomes the means through which the promise
can be fulfilled. God's chosen people. Scholars generally agree that the theme
of divine promise unites the patriarchal cycles, but many would dispute the
idea that a single theme (or theology) runs through Genesis â€“ a theology of
the Abraham cycle or the Jacob cycle or the Joseph cycle might be possible, or
a theology of the Yahwist or the Priestly source, but not a single theology or
overarching theme for all of Genesis. The problem lies in finding a way to
unite the patriarchal theme of divine promise to the primeval history, with its
theme of God's continuing mercy in the face of man's sinful nature. One
solution is to see the patriarchal stories as resulting from God's decision not
to remain alienated from mankind: God creates the world and mankind, mankind
rebels, and God "elects" (chooses) Abraham. To this basic plot (which comes
from the Yahwist) the Priestly source has added a series of covenants dividing
history into stages, each with its own distinctive "sign". The first covenant
is between God and all living creatures, and is marked by the sign of the
rainbow; the second is with the descendants of Abraham (Ishmaelites and others
as well as Israelites), and its sign is circumcision; and the last, which
doesn't appear until the book of Exodus, is with Israel alone, and its sign is
Sabbath. Each covenant is mediated by a great leader (Noah, Abraham, Moses),
and at each stage God progressively reveals himself by his name (Elohim with
Noah, El Shaddai with Abraham, Yahweh with Moses).
