Books of the Bible Different religious groups include different books in their
Biblical canons, in different orders, and sometimes divide or combine books, or
incorporate additional material into canonical books. Christian Bibles range
from the sixty-six books of the Protestant canon to the eighty-one books of the
Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church canon. The Hebrew Bible, or "Tanakh",
contains twenty-four books divided into three parts; the five books of the
"Torah" ("teaching" or "law"), the "Nevi'im" ("prophets"), and the "Ketuvim"
("writings"). The first part of Christian Bibles is the Old Testament, which
contains, at minimum, the twenty-four books of the Hebrew Bible divided into
thirty-nine books and ordered differently than the Hebrew Bible. The Catholic
Church and Eastern Christian churches also hold certain deuterocanonical books
and passages to be part of the Old Testament canon. The second part is the New
Testament, containing twenty-seven books; the four Canonical gospels, Acts of
the Apostles, twenty-one Epistles or letters and the Book of Revelation. The
Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Eastern Catholic churches may have
minor differences in their lists of accepted books. The list given here for
these churches is the most inclusive: if at least one Eastern church accepts
the book it is included here. Hebrew Bible/Old Testament. Hebrew Bible.
Rabbinic Judaism recognizes the 24 books of the Masoretic Text, commonly called
the "Tanakh" or Hebrew Bible, as authoritative. Evidence suggests that the
process of canonization occurred between 200 BCE and 200 CE. A popular former
theory is that the Torah was canonized c. 400 BCE, the Prophets c. 200 BCE, and
the Writings c. 100 CE, perhaps at a hypothetical Council of Jamnia, but this
position is increasingly rejected by modern scholars. Christian Old Testament.
Protestants and Catholics use the Masoretic Text as the textual basis for their
translations of the protocanonical books (those which are accepted as canonical
by both Jews and all Christians), with various changes derived from a
multiplicity of other ancient sources (such as the Septuagint, the Vulgate, the
Dead Sea Scrolls, etc.), while generally using the Septuagint and Vulgate, now
supplemented by the ancient Hebrew and Aramaic manuscripts, as the textual
basis for the deuterocanonical books. The Eastern Orthodox use the Septuagint
as the textual basis for the entire Old Testament, in books both protocanonical
and deuteroncanonical, to be used both in the Greek for liturgical purposes,
and as the basis for translations into the vernacular. Most of the quotations
(300 of 400) of the Old Testament in the New Testament, while differing more or
less from the version presented by the Masoretic text, align with that of the
Septuagint. Intertestamental books. The intertestamental books, largely written
during the intertestamental period, are called the Biblical apocrypha ("hidden
things") by Protestants, the deuterocanon ("second canon") by Catholics, and
the deuterocanon or "anagignoskomena" ("worthy of reading") by Orthodox. These
are works recognized by the Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Oriental
Orthodox Churches as being part of scripture (and thus deuterocanonical rather
than apocryphal), but Protestants do not recognize them as divinely inspired.
Many other Christians recognize them as good, but not on the level of the other
books of the Bible. Anglicanism considers the apocrypha to be "read for example
of life" but not used "to establish any doctrine". Luther made a parallel
statement in calling them: "not considered equal to the Holy Scriptures, but
are useful and good to read." The difference in canons derives from the
difference in the Masoretic Text and the Septuagint. Books found in both the
Hebrew and the Greek are accepted by all denominations, and by Jews, these are
the protocanonical books. Catholics and Orthodox also accept those books
present in manuscripts of the Septuagint, an ancient Greek translation of the
Old Testament with great currency among the Jews of the ancient world, with the
coda that Catholics consider 3 Esdras and 3 Maccabees apocryphal. Most
quotations of the Old Testament in the New Testament, differing by varying
degrees from the Masoretic Text, are taken from the Septuagint. When the Jews
closed the Old Testament canon, two criteria were used, that the book be
written in Hebrew or Aramaic, and that it be no younger than the time of Ezra.
This process led to the 24/39 books of the Tanakh and Old Testament (even
though Daniel was written several hundred years after the time of Ezra, and
since that time several books of the Septuagint have been found in the original
Hebrew, in the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Cairo Geniza, and at Masada, including a
Hebrew text of Sirach (Qumran, Masada) and an Aramaic text of Tobit (Qumran);
the additions to Esther and Daniel are also in their respective Semitic
languages. The unanimous consensus of modern (and ancient) scholars consider
several other books, including 1 Maccabees and Judith, to have been composed in
Hebrew or Aramaic. Opinion is divided on the book of Baruch, while it is
acknowledged that the Epistle of Jeremiah, the Wisdom of Solomon, and 2
Maccabees are originally Greek compositions. The Ethiopian Tewahedo church
accepts all of the deuterocanonical books of Catholicism and anagignoskomena of
Eastern Orthodoxy except for the four Books of Maccabees. It accepts the 24/39
books of the Masoretic Text along with the following books, called the "narrow
canon". The enumeration of books in the Ethiopic Bible varies greatly between
different authorities and printings. Table. The table uses the spellings and
names present in modern editions of the Bible, such as the New American Bible
Revised Edition, Revised Standard Version and English Standard Version. The
spelling and names in both the 1609â€“1610 Douay Old Testament (and in the 1582
Rheims New Testament) and the 1749 revision by Bishop Challoner (the edition
currently in print used by many Catholics, and the source of traditional
Catholic spellings in English) and in the Septuagint differ from those
spellings and names used in modern editions which are derived from the Hebrew
Masoretic text. For the Orthodox canon, Septuagint titles are provided in
parentheses when these differ from those editions. For the Catholic canon, the
Douaic titles are provided in parentheses when these differ from those
editions. Likewise, the King James Version references some of these books by
the traditional spelling when referring to them in the New Testament, such as
"Esaias" (for Isaiah). In the spirit of ecumenism more recent Catholic
translations (e.g. the New American Bible, Jerusalem Bible, and ecumenical
translations used by Catholics, such as the Revised Standard Version Catholic
Edition) use the same "standardized" (King James Version) spellings and names
as Protestant Bibles (e.g. 1 Chronicles as opposed to the Douaic 1
Paralipomenon, 1-2 Samuel and 1-2 Kings instead of 1-4 Kings) in those books
which are universally considered canonical, the protocanonicals. The Talmud in
Bava Batra 14b gives a different order for the books in "Nevi'im" and
"Ketuvim". This order is also quoted in Mishneh Torah Hilchot Sefer Torah 7:15.
The order of the books of the Torah are universal through all denominations of
Judaism and Christianity. The disputed books, included in one canon but not in
others, are often called the Biblical apocrypha, a term that is sometimes used
specifically to describe the books in the Catholic and Orthodox canons that are
absent from the Jewish Masoretic Text and most modern Protestant Bibles.
Catholics, following the Canon of Trent (1546), describe these books as
deuterocanonical, while Greek Orthodox Christians, following the Synod of
Jerusalem (1672), use the traditional name of "anagignoskomena", meaning "that
which is to be read." They are present in a few historic Protestant versions;
the German Luther Bible included such books, as did the English 1611 King James
Version. Empty table cells indicate that a book is absent from that canon. New
Testament. In general, among Christian denominations, the New Testament canon
is an agreed-upon list of 27 books, although book order can vary. The book
order is the same in the Greek Orthodox, Catholic, and Protestant tradition.
The Slavonic, Armenian and Ethiopian traditions have different New Testament
book orders to this.
