Brahman In Hinduism, Brahman ( "") is the one supreme, universal Spirit that is
the origin and support of the phenomenal universe. Brahman is sometimes
referred to as the Absolute or Godhead which is the Divine Ground of all
matter, energy, time, space, being, and everything in and beyond this universe.
Brahman is conceived as personal ("with qualities"), impersonal ("without
qualities") and/or supreme depending on the philosophical school. The sages of
the Upanishads teach that Brahman is the ultimate essence of material phenomena
(including the original identity of the human self) that cannot be seen or
heard but whose nature can be known through the development of self-knowledge
("atma jnana"). According to Advaita, a liberated human being ("jivanmukta")
has realised Brahman as his or her own true self (see "atman"). The Isha
Upanishad says: Au·πÉ¬ ‚Äì That supreme "Brahman" is infinite, and this
conditioned "Brahman" is infinite. The infinite proceeds from infinite. If you
subtract the infinite from the infinite, the infinite remains alone. Etymology.
Sanskrit "Brahman" (an "n"-stem, nominative ') from a root ' " to swell,
expand, grow, enlarge" is a neutral noun to be distinguished from the masculine
""‚Äîdenoting a person associated with Brahman, and from BrahmƒÅ, the creator
God of the Hindu Trinity, the Trimurti. Brahman is thus a gender-neutral
concept that implies greater impersonality than masculine or feminine
conceptions of the deity. The further origin of "" is unclear. According to the
"Indogermanisches etymologisches W√∂rterbuch" (IEW, "Indo-European Etymological
Dictionary"), written by the Austrian-German comparative linguist and Celtic
languages expert Julius Pokorny, IE root "bhreu-, bhreu-d-" denotes "to swell,
sprout" (cf Slovenian "brsteti"¬ ‚Äì to sprout). It could be from PIE
"*bherg'h-" "to rise, high, eminent", cognate to Old Norse "Bragi". Some,
including Georges Dum√©zil, have said that the Latin word "flƒÅmen" "priest"
may also be cognate. However, the standard Indo-Aryan etymological dictionary
by M. Mayrhofer (1986‚Äì2000, vol. II, p.¬ 236-8) derives brahman 'formulation
(of truth) poetry, from Indo-Iranian *bhrajh-man < Indo-European *bhreg'h-men;
cf. Old Persian brahm, Middle Persian Zurvan 'form', Nuristani (Ashkun) blamade
'a god' ( from *brahma-daeva?), Old Norse bragr 'poetical art', etc., and
argues against connection with Latin flamen. Conceptualization. In the early
Vedic religion "Brahman" was the name given to the power that made the
sacrifice effective, namely the spiritual power of the sacred utterances
pronounced by the vedic priests who were by virtue of this known as "brahmins".
Connected with the ritual of pre-Vedantic Hinduism, "Brahman" signified the
power to grow, the expansive and self-altering process of ritual and sacrifice,
often visually realized in the sputtering of flames as they received the all
important ghee (clarified butter) and rose in concert with the mantras of the
Vedas. The Rig Veda says that by desire (RV 10.12.94), the initial
manifestation of the material universe came into being from Hiranyagarbha
(literally "golden womb"), out of which the world, organisms and divine beings
(devas) arose:"Great indeed are the devas who have sprung out of Brahman."¬ ‚Äî
Atharva Veda The later Vedic religion produced a series of profound
philosophical reflections in which Brahman is now considered to be the one
Absolute Reality behind changing appearances; the universal substrate from
which material things originate and to which they return after their
dissolution. The sages of the Upanishads made their pronouncements on the basis
of personal experience (revelation or sruti) as an essential component of their
philosophical reflection. The earlier Upanisads were written during a time of
intensely fertile philosophical and religious revival in which the old dogmas
were being questioned and individual personal experiential knowledge was
increasingly emphasised over uncritical acceptance of the old myths. The
polytheism that characterises the vedic hymns gives way increasingly to a
search for what is common in the diverse forms of nature. The unitive concepts
that arise from this tendency are those of "dharma" and "brahman". The
Upanisads recount the teachings of gurus to celibate pupils (Brahmacaryas) who
are seeking knowledge of Brahman, the absolute, the origin of things, whose
knowledge brings peace. This knowledge of brahman is not mere epistemic
knowledge (knowing "about" something) but a direct, unambiguous knowing that is
liberating in its experience. This culture of acquiring personal knowledge and
its concomitant liberation is now referred to as sramanic culture and has
constituted an important influence on the development of mainstream Hinduism.
In the Upanisads the sages teach that brahman is infinite Being, infinite
Consciousness, and infinite Bliss (saccidananda). It is said that Brahman
cannot be known by empirical means¬ ‚Äî that is to say, as an object of our
consciousness¬ ‚Äî because Brahman is our very consciousness and being.
Therefore it may be said that moksha, yoga, samƒÅdhi, nirvana, etc. do not
merely mean to know Brahman, but rather to realise one's "brahman-hood", to
actually realise that one is and always was Brahman. Indeed, closely related to
the Self concept of Brahman is the idea that it is synonymous with "jiva-atma",
or individual souls, our atman (or soul) being readily identifiable with the
greater soul ("paramatma") of Brahman. Generally, Vedanta rejects the notion of
an evolving Brahman since Brahman contains within it the potentiality and
archetypes behind all possible manifest phenomenal forms. The Vedas, though
they are in some respects historically conditioned, are considered by Hindus to
convey a knowledge eternal, timeless and always contemporaneous with Brahman.
This knowledge is considered to have been handed down by realised yogins to
students many generations before the Vedas were committed to writing. Written
texts of the Vedas are a relatively recent phenomenon. The term "Brahmin" in
the Vedic period actually meant one who has realized Brahman. However, later on
"Brahmin" came to be identified with the highest of the four castes, the
Brahmins, who by virtue of their purity and priesthood were held proprietors of
rituals. Among Hindu sects, Advaita Vedanta espouses monism. The closest
interpretation of the term can be found in the "Taittiriya Upanishad" (II.1)
where "Brahman" is described as "satyam jnanam anantam brahman" ("Brahman is of
the nature of truth, knowledge and infinity"). Thus, "Brahman" is the origin
and end of all things, material or otherwise. "Brahman" is the root source and
Divine Ground of everything that exists, and is the only thing that exists
according to Shankara. It is defined as unknowable and "Satchitananda" ("Truth-
Consciousness-Bliss"). Since it is eternal and infinite, it comprises the only
truth. The goal of Vedanta is to realize that the soul ("Atman") is actually
nothing but "Brahman". The Hindu pantheon of gods is said, in the "Vedas" and
"Upanishads", to be only higher manifestations of "Brahman". For this reason,
""ekam sat"" ("Truth is one"), and all is "Brahman". This explains the Hindu
view that "All paths lead to the one Truth, though many sages religions call
upon it by different names." As mentioned before, Brahman is proclaimed to be
the reality behind everything in this universe, the cause which sustains the
effect. So, from the perspective of the Body, Atma (Soul or Self) is Brahman.
From the perspective of the World, Brahma (the "Creator" deity)is deemed as the
Brahman. From the perspective of Brahma, Isvarah (Personal Godhead according to
the Dvaitis) is the (Param) Brahman. From the perspective of Knowledge, Veda is
Brahman. So, in one sense whatever we see around is all Brahman. Brahman is
hence not an unidimensional aspect. It needs to be viewed and understood from
varied perspectives. Different schools try to establish the primacy or
supremacy of the personal or impersonal (or equality) nature of Brahman.
Advaita argues the latter and dvaita the former. Semantics and pronunciation.
In Vedic Sanskrit:- In later Sanskrit usage:- Brahman and Atman. Some
Upanishadic statements identify the Atman, the inner essence of the human
being, with Brahman. While Advaita philosophy considers Brahman to be without
form, qualities, or attributes, Visishtadvaita and Dvaita philosophies
understand Brahman as one with infinite auspicious qualities. In Advaita, the
ultimate reality is expressed as Nirguna Brahman. Nirguna means formless,
attributeless, mega-soul, or spirit-only. Advaita considers all personal forms
of God including Vishnu and Shiva as different aspects of God in personal form,
Saguna Brahman i.e. God with attributes. In Visishtadvaita and Dvaita, God is
Saguna Brahman with infinite attributes and is the source of the impersonal
Nirguna Brahman, and God's energy is regarded as Devi, the Divine Mother. The
phrase that is seen to be the only possible (and still thoroughly inadequate)
description of Brahman that humans, with limited minds and being, can entertain
is the Sanskrit word "SacchidƒÅnanda", which is combined from "sat-chit-
ƒÅnanda", meaning "Being¬ ‚Äî Consciousness¬ ‚Äî Bliss". sarvam hyetad
brahmƒÅyamƒÅtmƒÅ brahma soyamƒÅtmƒÅ chatushpƒÅt'" ‚Äì Mandukya Upanishad,
verse-2 sarvam (‡§∏‡§∞‡•ç‡§µ‡§Æ‡•ç)- whole/all/everything; hi (‡§π‡§ø)- really/
surely/indeed; etad (‡§è‡§§‡§¶‡•ç)- this here/this; brahma
(‡§¨‡•ç‡§∞‡§π‡•ç‡§Æ)- Brahma/Brahman; ayam (‡§Ö‡§Ø‡§Æ‡•ç)- this/here; ƒÅtmƒÅ
(‡§Ü‡§§‡•ç‡§Æ‡§æ)- atma/atman; sah(‡§∏‡§É)- he; ayam (‡§Ö‡§Ø‡§Æ‡•ç)- this/here;
chatus(‡§ö‡§§‡•Å‡§∏‡•ç)- four/quadruple; pƒÅt(‡§™‡§æ‡§§‡•ç)- step/foot/quarter
sarvam hi etad brahma ayam ƒÅtmƒÅ brahm sah ayam ƒÅtmƒÅ chatus paat All indeed
is this Brahman; He is Atman; He has four steps/quarters. Vishnu is
traditionally derived from the root "Vish" which means to enter or pervade, and
He is called Vishnu because He pervades the whole universe. Brahmanda Purana
(1.4.25) says that He is called as Vishnu because He has entered into
everything in the universe. The most important aspect is that the whole
universe is covered by only three steps of Vishnu which is referred to several
times in the Vedas (Rig Veda 1.22.17, 1.154. 3, 1.155.4, Atharva Veda 7.26.5,
Yajur Veda 2.25). "In His three steps rests the whole universe" (Rig Veda
1.154.2, Yajur Veda 23.49). All indeed is Brahman, which can thus be identified
with Vishnu, based on the Vedas. Enlightenment and Brahman. While Brahman lies
behind the sum total of the objective universe, the human mind boggles at any
attempt to explain it with only the tools provided by reason. Gital explains
the concept of (Bhagavad Gita 5.21) "beyond the senses, beyond the mind, beyond
intelligence, beyond imagination." Yajur Veda "Mundakopanishad" 3.2.4 reads:
"This Self is not attained by one devoid of strength, nor through delusion, nor
through knowledge unassociated with monasticism. But the Self of that knower,
who strives through these means, enters into the abode that is Brahman." Yajur
Veda "Mundakopanishad" 3.2.6 reads: "Those to whom the entity presented by the
Vedantic knowledge has become fully ascertained, and who endeavour assiduously
with the help of the Yoga of monasticism, become pure in mind. At the supreme
moment of final departure all of them become identified with the supreme
Immortality in the worlds that are Brahman, and they become freed from the
cycle of Birth and Death." Material concept of Brahman. There is reference in
Bhagavad-Gita to material nature (mahat-tattva), comprising three gunas
(sattva, rajas and tamas) as Brahman: "The total material substance, called
Brahman, is the source of birth, and it is that Brahman that I impregnate,
making possible the births of all living beings, O son of Bharata." It should
also be properly understood that Brahman is actually ""total substance of the
material cause, in which there are three modes of nature"", so material nature
is Brahman, but whole Absolute Truth is transcendental and it includes
'material Brahman with three modes of nature' as well. Strictly speaking,
Brahman is Supreme Personality of Godhead (Vishnu, Siva, Sakthi..). Advaita
Vedanta. The universe does not simply possess consciousness, it "is"
consciousness, and this consciousness is Brahman. According to Adi Shankara,
knowledge of brahman springs from inquiry into the words of the Upanishads, and
the knowledge of brahman that shruti provides cannot be obtained in any other
way. In Advaita Vedanta, Brahman is without attributes and strictly impersonal.
It can be best described as "infinite Being, infinite Consciousness, and
infinite Bliss". It is pure knowing itself, similar to a source of infinite
radiance. Since the Advaitins regard Brahman to be the Ultimate Truth, so in
comparison to Brahman, every other thing, including the material world, its
distinctness, the individuality of the living creatures are all untrue. Brahman
is the effulgent cause of everything that exists and can possibly exist. Since
it is beyond human comprehension, it is without any attributes, for assigning
attributes to it would be distorting the true nature of Brahman. Advaitins
believe in the existence of both Saguna (with qualities, attributes) Brahman
and Nirguna (without qualities, or attributes) Brahman, however they consider
Nirguna Brahman to be the Absolute Truth. When man tries to know the
attributeless Brahman with his mind, under the influence of an illusionary
power of Brahman called Maya, Brahman becomes (Ishvara), which is the
reflection of the Brahman in the environment of illusion (Maya). Just like
reflection of moon, in a pool of water. The material world also appears as such
due to Maya. (Ishvara) is Saguna Brahman, or Brahman with attributes. He
(gender neutral; "He" only for explanatory purposes) is Omniscient,
Omnipresent, Incorporeal, Independent, Creator of the world, its ruler and also
destroyer. He is eternal and unchangeable. He is both immanent and transcedent,
as well as full of love and justice. He may be even regarded to have a
personality. He is the subject of worship. He is the basis of morality and
giver of the fruits of one's Karma. He rules the world with his Maya. However,
while God is the Lord of Maya and she (i.e. Maya) is always under his control,
living beings (jƒ´va, in the sense of humans) are the servants of Maya (in the
form of ignorance). This ignorance is the cause of all material experiences in
the mortal world. While God is Infinite Bliss, humans, under the influence of
Maya consider themselves limited by the body and the material, observable
world. This misperception of Brahman as the observed Universe results in human
emotions such as happiness, sadness, anger and fear. The ultimate reality
remains Brahman and nothing else. The Advaita equation is simple. It is due to
Maya that the one single Atman (the individual soul) appears to the people as
many Atmans, each in a single body. Once the curtain of maya is lifted, the Atm
Thus, due to true knowledge, an individual loses the sense of ego (Ahamkara)
and achieves liberation, or Moksha. "The indestructible, transcendental living
entity is called Brahman, and its eternal nature is called adhyatma, the self."
(Bhagavad Gita 8.3) "Similar to a person who is not attached to external
pleasures but enjoys happiness in the Atman (soul), the person who perceives
Brahman (all-pervading consciousness) in everybody feels everlasting joy."
(Bhagavad Gita 5.21) Spiritual (non-material) concepts of Brahman. According to
four Vaisnava vedanta philosophies, Brahman is personal and is Narayana
(Vishnu) Himself, who has own abode (Vaikunthaloka or Brahmaloka-sanatana).
Visishtadvaita Vedanta. Brahman of Visishtadvaita is synonymous with Narayana,
who is the transcendent and immanent reality. Brahman or Narayana is Saguna
Brahman with infinite auspicious qualities, and not the Advaita concept of
attributeless Nirguna Brahman. "Sarvam khalvidam brahma, tajjalaniti santa
upasita": According to Ramanuja, considering the appearance of the word
"tajjalan iti" (Roots: tat + ja = born + la = dissolved), this statement from
the Chandogya Upanishad does not simply mean that the universe is Brahman, but
that it is pervaded by, born from and dissolves into Brahman. An analogy: fish
is born in water, lives in water, and is ultimately dissolved into water; yet
the fish is not water. The concept of Brahman in Visishtadvaita is explained as
an inseparable triad of Ishwara-Chit-Achit. Ishvara, the Supreme Self
(Paramatman) is the indwelling spirit (Antaryami) in all. Both the Chit
(sentient) and Achit (insentient) entities are pervaded and permeated by
Ishvara. Brahman is the material and efficient cause of the universe. The
concept of Brahman in Visishtadvaita can be seen as a hybrid of Advaita and
Dvaita positions. Like all other Vaishnava schools of thought, Visishtadvaita
is also panentheistic unlike the pantheism of Advaita. It also proposes a
qualified attributive monism approach as opposed to the absolute monism of
Advaita. 1. The Sarira-Sariri Concept The key concept of Visishtadvaita is the
Sarira-Sariri Bhaava, the body-soul relationship between the universe and
Ishvara. There are three realities, namely, Ishvara (the Lord), Jiva
(individual souls), and Jagat (insentient matter). They are not separate
entities but together they form an organic whole. This is similar to the
concept of body-soul relationship, but on a cosmic scale. Thus, Ishvara has the
Chit (sentient) and Achit (insentient) entities for His body and being the
Supreme Self, exercises complete control over it. 2. Substance-Attribute
Concept In Visishtadvaita, Ishvara is the original substance, of which Jiva and
Prakriti are attributes. An attribute cannot have an existence independent of
an underlying substance. The substance-attribute concept establishes an
uninterrupted, non-reciprocal relationship between Ishvara and the two modes.
Followers of Visishtadvaita refute Advaita thought that if it is indeed true
that the one undivided Brahman, whose very nature is pure spirit, is the
foundation of Maya and also embodies the liberating force of knowledge, then it
is illogical to say that the very same Brahman falls under the influence of the
illusory power of Maya and gets covered by ignorance. Thus establishing that
Jiva and Ishvara are indeed separate entities. Since both their identities and
capabilities are different, the Jiva and the Lord are essentially distinct. In
other words, if Brahman is indivisible, changeless, and supreme, then a force
of Maya cannot appear within Brahman, modify it, and put it into ignorance.
Bhakti Yoga is the sole means of liberation in Visishtadvaita. Through Bhakti
(devotion), a Jiva ascends to the realm of the Lord to serve Him. Karma Yoga
and Jnana Yoga are natural outcomes of Bhakti, total surrender, as the devotee
acquires the knowledge that the Lord is the inner self. A devotee realizes his
own state as dependent on, and supported by, and being led by the Lord, who is
the Master. One is to lead a life as an instrument of the Lord, offering all
his thought, word, and deed to the feet of the Lord. One is to see the Lord in
everything and everything in Him. This is the unity in diversity achieved
through devotion. "I (Ishvara) am the basis of the impersonal Brahman, which is
immortal, imperishable and eternal and is the constitutional position of
ultimate happiness." (Bhagavad Gita 14.27) "I (Ishvara) am transcendental,
beyond both kshara (the fallible, perishable world) and akshara (the
infallible)." (Bhagavad Gita 15.18) Dvaita Vedanta. Brahman of Dvaita
(substantial monism) is synonymous with Hari or Vishnu, who is the most exalted
Para Brahman (Supreme Brahman), superior to liberated souls and even the
impersonal Brahman. Dvaita holds that the individual soul is dependent
(paratantra) on God, since it is unable to exist without the energizing support
of the universal spirit, just as a tree cannot survive without its sap. "The
form of Brahman is unmanifest, but even the form of Brahman becomes directly
visible to one who worships devoutly" ("tat avyaktam aha, api samradhane
pratyaksa anumanabhyam"). (Vedanta Sutra 3.2.23) "Within His divine realm,
devotees see other divine manifestations which appear even as physical objects
in a city" ("antara bhuta gramavat svatmanah"). (Vedanta Sutra 3.3.36) The
Acintya Bheda Abheda philosophy is similar to Dvaitadvaita (differential
monism). All Vaishnava schools are panentheistic and perceive the Advaita
concept of identification of Atman with the impersonal Brahman as an
intermediate step of self-realization, but not Mukti, or final liberation of
complete God-realization through Bhakti Yoga. Abode of Brahman in Gaudiya-
Vaishnavism. ".."satyalokas tu brahmaloka·∏• sanƒÅtana·∏•" ..
m≈´rdhabhi·∏•¬ ‚Äî by the head; satyaloka·∏•¬ ‚Äî the Satyaloka planetary
system; "tu¬ ‚Äî but; brahmaloka·∏•¬ ‚Äî the spiritual planets;
sanƒÅtana·∏•¬ ‚Äî eternal". From the forefront of the chest up to the neck of
the universal form of the Lord are situated the planetary systems named
Janaloka and Tapoloka, whereas Satyaloka, the topmost planetary system, is
situated on the head of the form. "The spiritual planets, however, are
eternal." PURPORT ... Sometimes Satyaloka, the planet in which BrahmƒÅ resides,
is also called Brahmaloka. But the Brahmaloka mentioned here is not the same as
the Satyaloka planetary system. This Brahmaloka is eternal, whereas the
Satyaloka planetary system is not eternal. And to distinguish between the two,
the adjective sanƒÅtana has been used in this case. According to ≈örƒ´la Jƒ´va
GosvƒÅmƒ´, this Brahmaloka is the loka or abode of Brahman, or the Supreme
Lord. ... ≈örƒ´la ≈örƒ´dhara SvƒÅmƒ´, therefore, rightly .. says that the
Brahmaloka mentioned here (in ≈örƒ´mad BhƒÅgavatam 2.5.39) is Vaiku·πá·π≠ha,
the kingdom of God, which is sanƒÅtana, or eternal, and is therefore not
exactly like the material creations described above." (≈örƒ´mad BhƒÅgavatam
2.5.39) So, Brahman is not just impersonal, but also personal. That Brahman is
Supreme Personality of Godhead, though on first stage of realization (by
process called jnana) of Absolute Truth, He is realized (usually by advaita-
vedantists, followers of Shankaracarya) as impersonal Brahman, then (by actual
Shankaracarya followers and vaishnavas) as personal Brahman having eternal
Vaikuntha abode (also known as Brahmalokah sanatana), then as Paramatma (by
process of yoga-meditation on Supersoul, Vishnu-God in heart)¬ ‚Äì Vishnu
(Narayana, also in everyone's heart) who has many abodes known as Vishnulokas
(Vaikunthalokas), and finally (Absolute Truth is realized by bhakti) as
Bhagavan, Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is source of both Paramatma and
Brahman (personal and/or impersonal). In Gaudiya-vaisnavism, philosophers who
try to establish that everything is Brahman or Maya are called Brahmavadis
(impersonalists) or Mayavadis. Thought they are still considered to be
transcendentalists, but of other group (so-called followers of Shankaracarya,
because he himself, as avatara of Shiva accepted Brahman to be Vishnu, not
impersonal brahmajyoti as God). "Never was there a time when I (Ishvara) did
not exist, nor you, nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us
cease to be." (Bhagavad Gita 2.12) In Dvaita, liberation (Moksha) is achieved
by flawless devotion and correct understanding. Devotion to a personal form of
God, Saguna Brahman, indicated here is the transcendental form of Krishna or
Vishnu (see Vaishnavism). This conclusion is corroborated by the Bhagavata
Purana, written by Vyasa as his commentary on Vedanta Sutra. "O my Lord,
Krishna, son of Vasudeva, O all-pervading Lord, I offer my respectful
obeisances unto You, the Absolute Truth and the primeval cause of all causes of
the creation, sustenance and destruction of the manifested universes" ("om namo
bhagavate vasudevaya janmady asya yatah 'nvayad itaratas cartheshv abhijnah
svarat"). (Bhagavata Purana 1.1.1) Vyasa employs the words "janma-adi¬ ‚Äì
creation, sustenance and destruction; asya¬ ‚Äì of the manifested universes;
yatah¬ ‚Äì from whom;", in the first verse of the Bhagavata Purana to establish
that Krishna is the Absolute Truth. This is clear testimony of the author's own
conclusion that the ultimate goal of all Vedic knowledge is Krishna. Brahman in
Buddhism. In favor of idea of Brahman. Buddhaghosa in his "Digha" says that the
"Tathagata (Buddha) is dhammakaya brahmakaya dhammabhuta brahmabhuta." It is
said that the cultivation of compassion in its purest form is ""called the
divine life in this world (Brahman item viharam idhmahu)."" In this context
Brahma is interpreted to mean divine. While BrahmƒÅ in Buddhist scripture
refers to the non-eternal demigod, Brahma or Brahman is believed by scholars to
refer to the eternal perfect being, and the highest stage any person can
achieve is labelled as Brahma. For example Buddha's eight-told path is not only
called as Astanga Marga (eight-fold path) and Dharmayana but also as
Brahmayana. As the "Samyutta Nikaya" says, V, 5-6, ""This Ariyan eightfold Way
may be spoken of as Brahmayana or as Dhammayana." Again the Buddha Dharma is
equated with Brahma when "...he has become dharma, he has become brahman." In
the "Suttanipata", 656, the Buddha says that he who has won the three-fold lore
(self-denial, holy life, and control) and who will never be reborn is Brahma.
The Buddha Dharma is compared to Brahma. In the "Majjhima Nikaya", I, 60 the
Dharmachakra of "wheel of law" is also called the Brahmachakra. Of Nirvana, the
ultimate happiness it is written ""one who has attained Nirvana"" it is said,
""may justifiably employ theological terminology" (dhammena so Brahma- vadam
vadeyya)" Further, Brahmajala refers to the best knowledge achieved.
Bhavaviveka uses the term Brahma-Abhyasa, meaning "practicing Brahma" which
refers to the Buddhist trying to become one with Brahma. "Even so have I,
monks, seen an ancient way, an ancient road followed by the wholly awakened
ones of olden time...Along that have I done, and the matters that I have come
to know fully as I was going along it, I have told to the monks, nuns, men and
women lay-followers, even monks, this Brahma-faring brahmacharya that is
prosperous and flourishing, widespread and widely known become popular in
short, well made manifest for gods and men." Not in favor of idea of Brahman.
Buddhism rejects the Upanishadic doctrine of Brahman/atman. According to Damien
Keown, "the Buddha said he could find no evidence for the existence of either
the personal soul ("atman") or its cosmic counterpart ("brahman")". According
to David Webster, the metaphysics of Buddhism entails that desire for Brahman
leads to "dukkha" (suffering). According to Merv Fowler, some forms of Buddhism
have incorporated concepts that resemble that of Brahman. As an example, Fowler
cites the early Sarvastivada school of Buddhism, which "had come to accept a
very pantheistic religious philosophy, and are important because of the impetus
they gave to the development of Mahayana Buddhism". According to William
Theodore De Bary, in the doctrines of the Yogacara school of Mahayana Buddhism,
"the Body of Essence, the Ultimate Buddha, who pervaded and underlay the whole
universe [...] was in fact the World Soul, the Brahman of the Upanishads, in a
new form". According to Fowler, some scholars have identified the Buddhist
"nirvana", conceived of as the Ultimate Reality, with the Hindu Brahman/atman;
Fowler claims that this view "has gained little support in Buddhist circles."
Fowler asserts that the authors of a number of Mahayana texts took pains to
differentiate their ideas from the Upanishadic doctrine of Brahman.
