Brethren of the Common Life The Brethren of the Common Life (Latin: Fratres
Vitae Communis) (FVC) was a Roman Catholic pietist religious community founded
in Holland in the 14th century by Gerard Groote, formerly a successful and
worldly educator who had had a religious experience and preached a life of
simple devotion to Jesus Christ. Without taking up irrevocable vows, the
Brethren banded together in communities, giving up their worldly goods to live
chaste and strictly regulated lives in common houses, devoting every waking
hour to attending divine service, reading and preaching of sermons, labouring
productively and taking meals in common that were accompanied by the reading
aloud of Scripture: "judged from the ascetic discipline and intention of this
life, it had few features which distinguished it from life in a monastery",
observes Hans Baron. The Brethren and the "Devotio Moderna". The Brethren's
confraternity is the best known fruits of the "Devotio Moderna", the Modern
Devotion. A small band of followers attached themselves to Groote and became
his fellow-workers, thus becoming the first "Brethren of the Common Life" ().
The reformer was opposed by the clergy, whose lax lives he denounced in his
preaching as decadent and evil, but his zeal for purifying the Catholic faith
and the morality of its followers won many to his cause. The best of the
secular clergy even enrolled themselves in his brotherhood, which in due course
was approved by the Pope. Windesheim Congregation. Groote, however, did not
live long enough to finish the work he had begun. He died in 1384, and was
succeeded by Florens Radewyns, who two years later refounded the famous
monastery of Augustinian canons at Windesheim, near Zwolle, which was
thenceforth the centre of the new association. Education and activity. The
Confraternity of the Common Life were in many ways similar to the Beghard and
Beguine communities which had flourished two centuries earlier but were by then
declining. Its members took no vows, neither asked nor received alms; their
first aim was to cultivate the interior life, and they worked for their daily
bread. Books and the library were central to the communities of Brethren, whose
scrupulous copies of works of piety supported their houses and put the texts in
which they found spiritual sustenance in many hands. The houses of the brothers
and sisters occupied themselves with literature and education, and their
priests also with preaching. When Groote began, education in the Netherlands
was still rare, contrary to the situation in Italy and the southern parts of
the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation; the University of Leme of the
schools of LiÃ¨ge was only a vague memory. Apart from some of the clergy who
had studied at the universities and cathedral schools in Paris or in Cologne,
there were few scholars in the land; even amongst the higher clergy there were
many who were ignorant of the scientific study of Latin, and the ordinary
burgher of the Dutch cities was quite content if, when his children left
school, they were able to read and write the Medieval Low German and Diets.
Groote determined to change all this. The Brethren worked consistently in the
scriptorium; afterwards, with the printing press, they were able to publish
their spiritual writings widely. Amongst them are to be found the best works of
15th century Flemish prose. The Brethren spared no pains to obtain good
masters, if necessary from foreign countries, for their schools, which became
centres of spiritual and intellectual life of the Catholic Church; amongst
those whom they trained or who were associated with them were men like Thomas
Ã  Kempis, Dierick Maertens, Gabriel Biel, Jan Standonck (1454â€“1504), priest
and reformer, Master of the CollÃ¨ge de Montaigu in Paris, and the Dutch Pope
Adrian VI. Martin Luther studied under the Brethren of the Common Life at
Magdeburg before going on to the University of Erfurt. Another famous member of
the Brethren of the Common Life was Desiderius Erasmus of Rotterdam. His
mystical and scholarly efforts produced many works of literature. One of his
greatest contributions to the Christian faith was a critical Greek New
Testament (1514) which challenged the previous New Testament text translations
(specifically the Vulgate). Commonly called Erasmus, he embraced ecclesiastical
structure yet challenged the Augustinian view (people do not choose God, but
God is the only one who brings people into grace and salvation), the nature of
the human will, and the corruption and problems of the late medieval church.
Through the tradeconnections of the Dutch Hanseatic cities Deventer and Zwolle
the ideas of the Modern devotion spread over the whole of the Hanseatic trade
area. Before the fifteenth century closed, the Brethren of the Common Life had
placed in all Germany and the Netherlands schools in which teaching was offered
"for the love of God alone." Gradually the course of study, at first
elementary, embraced the humanities, philosophy, and theology. The religious
orders were not impressed, as the Brethren were neither monks nor friars, but
they were protected by Popes Eugene IV, Pius II, and Sixtus IV. Cardinal
Nicholas of Cusa had been their pupil and so became their staunch protector and
benefactor. He was also the patron of Rudolph Agricola (Rudolf de Boer), who in
his youth at Zwolle had studied under Thomas Ã  Kempis; and through this
connection the Brethren of the Common Life, through Cusa and Agricola,
influenced Erasmus and other adepts in the New Learning. More than half of the
crowded schools â€” in 1500, Deventer had over two thousand students â€” were
swept away in the religious troubles of the sixteenth century. Others
languished until the French Revolution, while the rise of universities, the
creation of diocesan seminaries, and the competition of new teaching orders
gradually extinguished the schools that regarded Deventer and Windesheim as
their parent establishments. Lutheran community in Herford. The community of
the Brethren in Herford went over bodily to the Reformation, But despite of it,
the local council threatened to close their house. The Brethren wrote to Martin
Luther 1532, who defended their community life by writing to the council of the
city. To Jacob Montanus and Gerhard Wilskamp he wrote in the end of January
1532: ""Your way of life, since you teach and live according to the Gospel,
pleases me no end"". If only ""there had been, and today there were more
convents like yours!...Abide by your way of life and use it to spread the
Gospel (as you do)!"" The house of the Brethren of the Common Life in Herford
remained in existence as a Lutheran brotherhood until 1841. Further reading.
Heiko Oberman, "The Harvest of Medieval Theology: Gabriel Biel and Late
Medieval Nominalism", Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2001.
