Calvinism Calvinism (also called Reformed tradition, or the Reformed faith, and
sometimes Reformed theology) is a type of Protestant theological system and an
alternative approach to the Christian life. This Reformed tradition was
developed by several theologians such as Martin Bucer, Heinrich Bullinger,
Peter Martyr Vermigli, and Huldrych Zwingli. This branch of Christianity bears
the name of the French reformer John Calvin (also known as Jean Cauvin in
Middle French), because of his noticeable influence and because of his role in
the confessional and ecclesiastical debates that happened throughout the 16th
century. Today, this term also refers to the doctrines and practices from the
Reformed churches, where Calvin was an early leader. Although not often, it may
refer to the individual, biblical teachings that Calvin made himself. The
system is often summarized in the Five Points of Calvinism and is best known
for its doctrines of predestination and total depravity, stressing the total
contingency of man's salvation upon the absolute sovereignty of God. Historical
background. John Calvin's international influence on the eventual development
of the doctrines of the Protestant Reformation began in 1534 when Calvin was
25. That marks his start on the first edition of "Institutes of the Christian
Religion" (published in 1536). He revised this work several times, and produced
a French vernacular translation. The "Institutes", together with Calvin's
polemical and pastoral works, his contributions to confessional documents for
use in churches, and his massive outpouring of commentary on the Bible, meant
that Calvin had a direct personal influence on Protestantism. Along with Martin
Bucer, Heinrich Bullinger, Peter Martyr Vermigli, and Huldrych Zwingli, Calvin
influenced the doctrines of the Reformed churches. He eventually became the
most prominent of those reformers. The rising importance of the Reformed
churches and of Calvin belongs to the second phase of the Protestant
Reformation. Evangelical churches began to form after Martin Luther was
excommunicated from the Catholic Church. Calvin was a French exile in Geneva.
He had signed the Lutheran Augsburg Confession as it was revised by Melanchthon
in 1540. However, his influence was first felt in the Swiss Reformation whose
leader was Huldrych Zwingli. It soon became evident that doctrine in the
Reformed churches was developing in a direction independent of Martin Luther's,
under the influence of numerous writers and reformers among whom Calvin
eventually became preeminent. Much later, when his fame was attached to the
Reformed churches, their whole body of doctrine came to be called "Calvinism".
Spread. Although much of Calvin's practice was in Geneva, his publications
spread his ideas of a "correctly" reformed church to many parts of Europe.
Calvinism became the theological system of the majority in Scotland (see John
Knox), the Netherlands, with men such as William Ames, T J Frelinghuysen and
Wilhelmus Ã  Brakel and parts of Germany (especially those adjacent to the
Netherlands) with the likes of Olevianus and his colleague Zacharias Ursinus.
It was influential in France, Hungary, then-independent Transylvania, Lithuania
and Poland. Calvinism gained some popularity in Scandinavia, especially Sweden,
but was rejected in favor of Lutheranism after the synod of Uppsala in 1593.
Most settlers in the American Mid-Atlantic and New England were Calvinists,
including the English Puritans, the French Huguenot and Dutch settlers of New
Amsterdam (New York), and the Scotch-Irish Presbyterians of the Appalachian
back country. Dutch Calvinist settlers were also the first successful European
colonizers of South Africa, beginning in the 17th century, who became known as
Boers or Afrikaners. Sierra Leone was largely colonized by Calvinist settlers
from Nova Scotia, who were largely Black Loyalists, blacks who had fought for
the British during the American War of Independence. John Marrant had organized
a congregation there under the auspices of the Huntingdon Connection. Some of
the largest Calvinist communions were started by 19th and 20th century
missionaries. Especially large are those in Indonesia, Korea and Nigeria.
Today, the World Alliance of Reformed Churches has 75 million believers.
Theology. The particulars of Calvinist theology may be stated in a number of
ways. Perhaps the best known summary is contained in the five points of
Calvinism, though these points identify the Calvinist view on soteriology
rather than summarizing the system as a whole. Broadly speaking, Calvinism
stresses the sovereignty or rule of God in all things â€“ in salvation but also
in all of life. Sovereign grace. Calvinism focuses on total depravity or, the
total inadequacy of humanity's ethical nature, necessitating the sovereign
grace of God for salvation. It states that fallen people are morally and
spiritually incapable of following God or redeeming themselves. They see
redemption as the work of God, divine intervention: God changes their unwilling
hearts from rebellion to eager obedience. In this view all the people of the
world are at the complete and total mercy of God, who would be just in
condemning all people for their sins, though God has chosen to show mercy to
some, not all. One person is saved while another person is condemned, not
because of inclination, faith or any other virtue that is in the person but
because God chose to have mercy on him (Romans 9:16-17) according to his own
purpose which is unknown (Romans 8:28). The person must believe the gospel and
repent to be saved, this compliance of faith is a gift from God, and thus God
completely and sovereignly achieves the salvation of sinners. Views range from
predestination to damnation also known as the doctrine of reprobation. They are
less uniform than the view of predestination to salvation (the doctrine of
election) that are among self-described Calvinists (see Supralapsarianism and
Infralapsarianism). During practice, Calvinists teach sovereign grace mostly
for encouragement of the church because Calvinists believe the doctrine
validates the extent of God's love for saving those who were not able to follow
him, or chose not to do so, as well as defeating pride and self-reliance and
stressing the Christian's total need for and dependence on the grace of God. In
a similar way, sanctification in the Calvinist view involves a frequent
dependence on God to eliminate the Christian's immoral heart and their sinful
nature, and from the power of sin and to extend the Christian's joy in their
new nature. Five points of Calvinism. Calvinist theology is sometimes
identified with the five points of Calvinism, also called the doctrines of
grace, which are a point-by-point response to the five points of the Arminian
Remonstrance (see History of Calvinist-Arminian debate) and which serve as a
summation of the judgments rendered by the Synod of Dort in 1619. Calvin
himself never used such a model and never combated Arminianism directly. In
fact, Calvin died in 1564 and Jacob Arminias was born in 1560, and so the men
were not contemporaries. The Articles of Remonstrance were authored by
opponents of reformed doctrine and Biblical Monergism. They were rejected in
1619 at the Synod of Dort, more than 50 years after the death of Calvin. The
five points therefore function as a summary of the differences between
Calvinism and Arminianism, but not as a complete summation of Calvin's writings
or of the theology of the Reformed churches in general. In English, they are
sometimes referred to by the acronym TULIP (see below), though this puts them
in a different order from the Canons of Dort. The central assertion of these
canons is that God is able to save every person upon whom he has mercy, and
that his efforts are not frustrated by the unrighteousness or inability of
humans. Nature of the atonement. An additional point of disagreement with
Arminianism implicit in the five points is the Calvinist understanding of the
doctrine of Jesus's substitutionary atonement as a punishment for the sins of
the elect, which was developed by St. Augustine and especially St. Anselm and
Calvin himself. Calvinists argue that if Christ takes the punishment in the
place of a particular sinner, that person must be saved since it would be
unjust for him then to be condemned for the same sins. The definitive and
binding nature of this satisfaction model has strong implications for each of
the five TULIP points, and it has led some Arminians to subscribe instead to
the governmental theory of atonement. Under that theory, no particular sins or
sinners are in view, but all of humanity are included in those whose sins have
been taken away. The atonement was not the penalty of the law, but a substitute
for the penalty, which allows God to remit the penalty by his grace when any
sinner repents and believes in Jesus as the Christ. Covenant theology. Although
the doctrines of grace have generally received the greater focus in
contemporary Calvinism, covenant theology is the historic superstructure that
unifies the entire system of doctrine. Calvinists take God's transcendence to
mean that the relationship between God and his creation must be by voluntary
condescension on God's part. This relationship he establishes is covenantal:
the terms of the relationship are unchangeably decreed by God alone. Reformed
writings commonly refer to an intra-Trinitarian covenant of redemption. The
greater focus is the relationship between God and man, which in historic
Calvinism is seen as bi-covenantal, reflecting the early Reformation
distinction between Law and Gospel. The covenant of works encompasses the moral
and natural law, dictating the terms of creation. By its terms, man would enjoy
eternal life and blessedness based on his continued personal and perfect
righteousness. With the fall of man, this covenant continues to operate, but
only to condemn sinful man. The covenant of grace is instituted at the fall,
and administered through successive historic covenants seen in Scripture for
the purpose of redemption. By its terms, salvation comes not by any personal
performance, but by promise. Peace with God comes only through a mediator, the
fulfillment of which is found in the person and work of Jesus Christ. Christ is
seen as the federal head of his elect people, and thus the covenant is the
basis of the doctrines of the substitutionary atonement and the imputation of
the active obedience of Christ. Covenant theology has recently had a resurgence
around key participants in the Scripture and Hermeneutics Seminar (SAHS), a
project first based in Theology and Religious Studies at the University of
Gloucestershire (Cheltenham, England). All through these new developments in
covenant theology we see (1) a thematic resurgence of "interpreting the Old
Testament through Christ" including the notion of Christ the Creator and now
King ; and (2) retaining, stressing, and re-exploring Genesis 1â€“3 toward a
renewed discipline of biblical interpretation in terms of the religious ground
motive of Creation, Fall, Redemption, and Communion in the Holy Spirit as the
core of the covenant in the OT, biblically speaking, plus (3) the motif of
ecumenical dialogue in this task which now includes evangelical Protestants and
Catholics as participants, and the scholarly dialogue with the Canon Criticism
school. Worship regulated by God. The regulative principle regarding worship,
which distinguishes the Calvinist approach to the public worship of God from
other views, is that only those elements that are instituted or appointed by
command or example in the New Testament are permissible in worship. In other
words, the regulative principle maintains that God institutes in the scriptures
what he requires for worship in the church, and everything else is prohibited.
As the regulative principle is reflected in Calvin's own thought, it is driven
by his evident antipathy toward the Roman Catholic Church and its worship
practices, and it associates musical instruments with icons, which he
considered violations of the Ten Commandments' prohibition of graven images. On
this basis, many early Calvinists also eschewed musical instruments and
advocated exclusive psalmody in worship, though Calvin himself allowed other
scriptural songs as well as psalms, and this practice typified presbyterian
worship and the worship of other Reformed churches for some time. The original
Lord's Day service designed by John Calvin was a highly liturgical service with
the Creed, Alms, Confession and Absolution, the Lord's supper, Doxologies,
prayers, Psalms being sung, the Lords prayer being sung, Benedictions. The
following are Orders of Service for the Lords Day as designed by John Calvin
(Collect is a short prayer; Lection is a Scripture reading; Fraction and
Delivery are the breaking of the Since the 19th century, however, some of the
Reformed churches have modified their understanding of the regulative principle
and make use of musical instruments, believing that Calvin and his early
followers went beyond the biblical requirements and that such things are
circumstances of worship requiring biblically-rooted wisdom, rather than an
explicit command. Despite the protestations of those who hold to a strict view
of the regulative principle, today hymns and musical instruments are in common
use, as are contemporary worship music styles and worship bands. Variants. Many
efforts have been undertaken to reform or expand on Calvinism, and these
variations appear to a greater or lesser degree throughout the history of
Calvinism. Lapsarianism. Within scholastic Calvinist theology, there are two
schools of thought over "when" and "whom" God predestined: supralapsarianism
(from the Latin: "supra", "above", here meaning "before" + "lapsus", "fall")
and infralapsarianism (from the Latin: "infra", "beneath", here meaning "after"
+ "lapsus", "fall"). The former view, sometimes called "high Calvinism", argues
that the Fall occurred partly to facilitate God's purpose to choose some
individuals for salvation and some for damnation. Infralapsarianism, sometimes
called "low Calvinism", is the position that, while the Fall was indeed
planned, it was not planned with reference to who would be saved.
Supralapsarians believe that God chose which individuals to save before he
decided to allow the race to fall and that the Fall serves as the means of
realization of that prior decision to send some individuals to hell and others
to heaven (that is, it provides the grounds of condemnation in the reprobate
and the need for salvation in the elect). In contrast, infralapsarians hold
that God planned the race to fall logically prior to the decision to save or
damn any individuals because, it is argued, in order to be "saved", one must
first need to be saved from something and therefore the decree of the Fall must
precede predestination to salvation or damnation. These two views vied with
each other at the Synod of Dort (1618), an international body representing
Calvinist Christian churches from around Europe, and the judgments that came
out of that council sided with infralapsarianism (Canons of Dort, First Point
of Doctrine, Article 7). The influential Westminster Confession of Faith also
teaches (in Hodge's words "clearly impl") the infralapsarian view, but is
sensitive to those holding to supralapsarianism. The Lapsarian controversy has
a few vocal proponents on each side today, but overall it does not receive much
attention among modern Calvinists. Four-point Calvinism. Another revision of
Calvinism is called "Amyraldism", "hypothetical universalism", or "four-point
Calvinism", also known as Four-point Calvinism, Moderate Calvinism, Modified
Calvinism, or Unlimited Limited Atonement. This drops the limited atonement in
favor of an unlimited atonement saying that God has provided Christ's atonement
for all alike, but seeing that none would believe on their own, he then elects
those whom he will bring to faith in Christ, thereby preserving the Calvinist
doctrine of unconditional election. This doctrine was most thoroughly
systematized by the French Reformed theologian at the Academy of Saumur, Moses
Amyraut, for whom it is named. His formulation was an attempt to bring
Calvinism more nearly alongside the Lutheran view. In England, hypothetical
universalism (which is not entirely consistent with Amyraldianism) was held by
the early 17th century theologians John Davenant and John Preston and was
propounded at the Westminster Assembly by the English Presbyterian leaders
Edmund Calamy the Elder, Lazarus Seaman and Stephen Marshall. In a different,
more idiosyncratic form, it was expounded in England by the writings of the
Reformed pastor Richard Baxter and gained strong adherence among the
Congregationalists and some Presbyterians in the American colonies, during the
17th and 18th centuries. Amyraldism can be found among various evangelical
groups in the United States and within the Anglican Diocese of Sydney. "Four
point" Calvinism is prevalent in conservative and moderate groups among
Presbyterian churches, Reformed churches, Reformed Baptists and some non-
denominational churches, and is not uncommon among evangelical members of the
Church of England. Historically, Amyraldism has been called "moderate
Calvinism", but Norman Geisler uses this term to describe his own views, which
James R. White calls "merely a modified form of historic Arminianism." R. C.
Sproul believes there is confusion about what the doctrine of limited atonement
actually teaches. While he considers it possible for a person to believe four
points without believing the fifth, he claims that a person who really
understands the other four points "must" believe in limited atonement because
of what Martin Luther called a resistless logic. Mark Driscoll calls this
"Unlimited Limited Atonement", or "Four-and-a-half point Calvinism", whereby
Jesus, "by dying for everyone, purchased everyone as His possession and He then
applies His forgiveness to the elect by grace and applies His wrath to the non-
elect. Objectively, Jesus' death was sufficient to save anyone, and,
subjectively, only efficient to save those who repent of their sin and trust in
Him." Hyper-Calvinism. Hyper-Calvinism first referred to an eccentric view that
appeared among the early English Particular Baptists in the 18th century. Their
system denied that the call of the gospel to "repent and believe" is directed
to every single person and that it is the duty of every person to trust in
Christ for salvation. The term also occasionally appears in both theological
and secular controversial contexts, where it usually connotes a negative
opinion about some variety of theological determinism, predestination, or a
version of Evangelical Christianity or Calvinism that is deemed by the critic
to be unenlightened, harsh, or extreme. Neo-orthodoxy. In the mainline Reformed
churches, Calvinism has undergone expansion and revision through the influence
of Karl Barth and neo-orthodox theology. Barth was an important Swiss Reformed
theologian who began writing early in the 20th century, whose chief
accomplishment was to counter-act the influence of the Enlightenment in the
churches. The Barmen declaration is an expression of the Barthian reform of
Calvinism. Conservative Calvinists (as well as some liberal reformers) regard
it as confusing to use the name "Calvinism" to refer to neo-orthodoxy or other
liberal revisions stemming from Calvinist churches due to their differing
theological views. Neo-Calvinism. Besides the traditional movements within the
conservative Reformed churches, several trends have arisen through the attempt
to provide a contemporary, but theologically conservative approach to the
world. A version of Calvinism that has been adopted by both theological
conservatives and liberals gained influence in the Dutch Reformed churches,
late in the 19th century, dubbed "neo-Calvinism", which developed along lines
of the theories of Dutch theologian, statesman and journalist, Abraham Kuyper.
More traditional Calvinist critics of the movement characterize it as a
revision of Calvinism, although a conservative one in comparison to modernist
Christianity or neo-orthodoxy. Neo-Calvinism, "Calvinianism", or the
"reformational movement", is a response to the influences of the Enlightenment,
but generally speaking it does not touch directly on the articles of salvation.
Neo-Calvinists intend their work to be understood as an update of the Calvinist
worldview in response to modern circumstances, which is an extension of the
Calvinist understanding of religion to scientific, social and political issues.
To show their consistency with the historic Reformed movement, supporters may
cite Calvin's "Institutes", book 1, chapters 1â€“3, and other works. In the
United States, Kuyperian neo-Calvinism is represented among others, by the
"Center for Public Justice", a faith-based political think-tank headquartered
in Washington, D.C. Neo-Calvinism branched off in more theologically
conservative movements in the United States. The first of these to rise to
prominence became apparent through the writings of Francis Schaeffer, who had
gathered around himself a group of scholars, and propagated their ideas in
writing and through L'Abri, a Calvinist study center in Switzerland. This
movement generated a reawakened social consciousness among Evangelicals.
Christian Reconstructionism. A neo-Calvinist movement called "Christian
Reconstructionism" is much smaller, more radical, and theocratic, but by some
believed to be widely influential in American family and political life.
Reconstructionism is a distinct revision of Kuyper's approach, which sharply
departs from that root influence through the complete rejection of pluralism,
and by formulating suggested applications of the sanctions of Biblical Law for
modern civil governments. These distinctives are the least influential aspects
of the movement. Its intellectual founder, the late Rousas J. Rushdoony, based
much of his understanding on the apologetical insights of Cornelius Van Til,
father of presuppositionalism and professor at Westminster Theological Seminary
(although Van Til himself did not hold to such a view). It has some influence
in the conservative Reformed churches in which it was born, and in Calvinistic
Baptist and Charismatic churches mostly in the United States, Canada, and to a
lesser extent in the UK. Reconstructionism aims toward the complete rebuilding
of the structures of society on Christian and Biblical presuppositions, not,
according to its promoters, in terms of "top down" structural changes, but
through the steady advance of the Gospel of Christ as men and women are
converted, who then live out their obedience to God in the areas for which they
are responsible. In keeping with the Theonomic Principle, it seeks to establish
laws and structures that will best instantiate the ethical principles of the
Bible, including the Old Testament as expounded in the case laws and summarized
in the Decalogue. Not a political movement, strictly speaking,
Reconstructionism has nonetheless been influential in the development of
aspects of the Christian Right that some critics have called "Dominionism".
Reconstructionism assumes that God institutes in the Scriptures everything he
requires for the ordering of self and society, extending the regulative
principle of worship to all areas of life. Calvinism Today. Calvinism has
undergone a resurgence in North America in recent years. "TIME" magazine
described the New Calvinism as one of the "10 ideas changing the world" in 2009
and cited its adherents to be largely Reformed Baptist or Presbyterians.
Figures today which are associated with Calvinism include R.C. Sproul, Mark
Dever, Mark Driscoll, Ligon Duncan, Tim Keller, C.J. Mahaney, Al Mohler, J.I.
Packer, and John Piper. Social and religious influences of Calvinism. Usury and
capitalism. One school of thought attributes Calvinism with setting the stage
for the later development of capitalism in northern Europe. In this view,
elements of Calvinism represented a revolt against the medieval condemnation of
usury and, implicitly, of profit in general. Such a connection was advanced in
influential works by R. H. Tawney (1880â€“1962) and by Max Weber (1864â€“1920).
Calvin expressed himself on usury in a 1545 letter to a friend, Claude de
Sachin, in which he criticized the use of certain passages of scripture invoked
by people opposed to the charging of interest. He reinterpreted some of these
passages, and suggested that others of them had been rendered irrelevant by
changed conditions. He also dismissed the argument (based upon the writings of
Aristotle) that it is wrong to charge interest for money because money itself
is barren. He said that the walls and the roof of a house are barren, too, but
it is permissible to charge someone for allowing him to use them. In the same
way, money can be made fruitful. He qualified his view, however, by saying that
money should be lent to people in dire need without hope of interest, while a
modest interest rate of 5% should be permitted in relation to other borrowers.
Arminianism. A theological and political movement in opposition to Calvinism,
now called "Arminianism", was founded by Dutch theologian Jacob Arminius and
revised and pursued by the Remonstrants. Arminius rejected several tenets of
the Calvinist doctrines of salvation â€“ namely, the latter four of what would
later be known as the five points of Calvinism. The term "Arminianism" today
often serves as an umbrella term for both Arminius's doctrine and the
Remonstrants', but Arminius's followers sometimes distinguish themselves as
"Reformed Arminians." The Remonstrants' doctrine was condemned at the Synod of
Dort held in Dordrecht, Holland, in 1618/1619, and followers of either Arminius
or the Remonstrants are not generally considered "Reformed" by most Calvinists.
Many Evangelical Christians adopted the position advocated by the Remonstrants,
and Arminius's system was revived by evangelist John Wesley and is common
today, particularly in Methodism.
