Canon law Canon law is the body of laws and regulations made or adopted by
ecclesiastical authority (Church leadership), for the government of the
Christian organization and its members. It is the internal ecclesiastical law
governing the Catholic Church (both Latin Rite and Eastern Catholic Churches),
the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox churches, and the Anglican Communion of
churches. The way that such church law is legislated, interpreted and at times
adjudicated varies widely among these three bodies of churches. In all three
traditions, a canon was originally a rule adopted by a council; these canons
formed the foundation of canon law. Etymology. Greek "kanon" / ÎºÎ±Î½ÏŽÎ½,
Arabic Qanon / Ù‚Ø§Ù†ÙˆÙ†, Hebrew kaneh / ×§× ×”, "straight"; a rule, code,
standard, or measure; the root meaning in all these languages is "reed" ("cf."
the Romance-language ancestors of the English word "cane"). Canons of the
Apostles. The "Apostolic Canons" or "Ecclesiastical Canons of the Same Holy
Apostles" is a collection of ancient ecclesiastical decrees (eighty-five in the
Eastern, fifty in the Western Church) concerning the government and discipline
of the Early Christian Church, incorporated with the Apostolic Constitutions
which are part of the Ante-Nicene Fathers Catholic Church. The Catholic Church
has what is claimed to be the oldest continuously functioning internal legal
system in Western Europe, much later than Roman law but predating evolution of
modern European civil law traditions. What began with rules ("canons") adopted
by the Apostles at the Council of Jerusalem in the first century has developed
into a highly complex legal system encapsulating not just norms of the New
Testament, but some elements of the Hebrew (Old Testament), Roman, Visigothic,
Saxon, and Celtic legal traditions. In the Roman Church, positive
ecclesiastical laws, based upon either immutable divine and natural law, or
changeable circumstantial and merely positive law, derive formal authority and
promulgation from the office of pope, who as Supreme Pontiff possesses the
totality of legislative, executive, and judicial power in his person. The
actual subject material of the canons is not just doctrinal or moral in nature,
but all-encompassing of the human condition. In the early Church, the first
canons were decreed by bishops united in "Ecumenical" councils (the Emperor
summoning all of the known world's bishops to attend with at least the
acknowledgement of the Bishop of Rome) or "local" councils (bishops of a region
or territory). Over time, these canons were supplemented with decretals of the
Bishops of Rome, which were responses to doubts or problems according to the
maxim, ""Roma locuta est, causa finita est"" ("Rome has spoken, case is
closed"). Later, they were gathered together into collections, both unofficial
and official. The first truly systematic collection was assembled by the
Camaldolese monk Gratian in the 11th century, commonly known as the "Decretum
Gratiani" ("Gratian's Decree"). Pope Gregory IX is credited with promulgating
the first official collection of canons called the "Decretalia Gregorii Noni"
or "Liber Extra" (1234). This was followed by the "Liber Sextus" (1298) of
Boniface VIII, the "Clementines" (1317) of Clement V, the "Extravagantes
Joannis XXII" and the "Extravagantes Communes", all of which followed the same
structure as the Liber Extra. All these collections, with the Decretum
Gratiani, are together referred to as the "Corpus Juris Canonici". After the
completion of the "Corpus Juris Canonici", subsequent papal legislation was
published in periodic volumes called "Bullaria". By the 19th Century, this body
of legislation included some 10,000 norms. Many these were difficult to
reconcile with one another due to changes in circumstances and practice. This
situation impelled Pope St. Pius X to order the creation of the first Code of
Canon Law, a single volume of clearly stated laws. Under the aegis of the
Cardinal Pietro Gasparri, the Commission for the Codification of Canon Law was
completed under Benedict XV, who promulgated the Code, effective in 1918. The
work having been begun by Pius X, it was sometimes called the "Pio-Benedictine
Code" but more often the 1917 Code. In its preparation, centuries of material
was examined, scrutinized for authenticity by leading experts, and harmonized
as much as possible with opposing canons and even other codes, from the Codex
of Justinian to the Napoleonic Code. Pope John XXIII initially called for a
Synod of the Diocese of Rome, an Ecumenical Council, and an updating to the
1917 Code. After the Second Ecumenical Council of the Vatican (Vatican II)
closed in 1965, it became apparent that the Code would need to be revised in
light of the documents and theology of Vatican II. After multiple drafts and
many years of discussion, Pope John Paul II promulgated the revised Code of
Canon Law (CIC) in 1983. Containing 1752 canons, it is the law currently
binding on the Latin (western) Roman Church. The canon law of the Eastern
Catholic Churches, which had developed some different disciplines and
practices, underwent its own process of codification, resulting in the Code of
Canons of the Eastern Churches promulgated in 1990 by Pope John Paul II. The
institutions and practices of canon law paralleled the legal development of
much of Europe, and consequently both modern civil law and common law bear the
influences of canon law. Edson Luiz Sampel, a Brazilian expert in canon law,
says that canon law is contained in the genesis of various institutes of civil
law, such as the law in continental Europe and Latin American countries. Sampel
explains that canon law has significant influence in contemporary society.
Currently, all Latin-Rite Catholic seminary students are expected to take
courses in canon law (c. 252.3). Some ecclesiastical officials are required to
have the doctorate (JCD) or at least the licentiate (JCL) in canon law in order
to fulfill their functions: judicial vicars (c. 1419.1), judges (c. 1421.3),
promoters of justice (c. 1435), defenders of the bond (c. 1435). In addition,
vicars general and episcopal vicars are to be doctors or at least licensed in
canon law or theology (c. 478.1), and canonical advocates must either have the
doctorate or be truly expert in canon law (c. 1483). Ordinarily, bishops are to
have advanced degrees in sacred scripture, theology, or canon law (c. 378.1.5).
St. Raymond of Penyafort (1175â€“1275), a Spanish Dominican priest, is the
patron saint of canonists, due to his important contributions to the science of
canon law. Orthodox Churches. The Greek-speaking Orthodox have collected canons
and commentaries upon them in a work known as the "PÄ“dÃ¡lion" (Greek:
Î Î·Î´Î¬Î»Î¹Î¿Î½, "Rudder"), so named because it is meant to "steer" the
Church. The Orthodox Christian tradition in general treats its canons more as
guidelines than as laws, the bishops adjusting them to cultural and other local
circumstances. Some Orthodox canon scholars point out that, had the Ecumenical
Councils (which deliberated in Greek) meant for the canons to be used as laws,
they would have called them "nÃ³moi/Î½ÏŒÎ¼Î¿Î¹" (laws) rather than "kanÃ³nes/
ÎºÎ±Î½ÏŒÎ½ÎµÏ‚" (rules), but almost all Orthodox conform to them. The dogmatic
decisions of the Councils, though, are to be obeyed rather than to be treated
as guidelines, since they are essential for the Church's unity. Anglican
Communion. In the Church of England, the ecclesiastical courts that formerly
decided many matters such as disputes relating to marriage, divorce, wills, and
defamation, still have jurisdiction of certain church-related matters (e.g.,
discipline of clergy, alteration of church property, and issues related to
churchyards). Their separate status dates back to the 12th century when the
Normans split them off from the mixed secular/religious county and local courts
used by the Saxons. In contrast to the other courts of England the law used in
ecclesiastical matters is at least partially a civil law system, not common
law, although heavily governed by parliamentary statutes. Since the
Reformation, ecclesiastical courts in England have been royal courts. The
teaching of canon law at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge was abrogated
by Henry VIII; thereafter practitioners in the ecclesiastical courts were
trained in civil law, receiving a Doctor of Civil Law (D.C.L.) degree from
Oxford, or an LL.D. from Cambridge. Such lawyers (called "doctors" and
"civilians") were centred at "Doctors Commons", a few streets south of St
Paul's Cathedral in London, where they monopolized probate, matrimonial, and
admiralty cases until their jurisdiction was removed to the common law courts
in the mid-19th century. (Admiralty law was also based on civil law instead of
common law, thus was handled by the civilians too.) Charles I repealed canon
law in 1638 after uprisings of Covenanters confronting the Bishops of Aberdeen
following the convention at Muchalls Castle and other revolts across Scotland
earlier that year. Other churches in the Anglican Communion around the world
(e.g., the Episcopal Church in the United States, and the Anglican Church of
Canada) still function under their own private systems of canon law.
Presbyterian and Reformed churches. In Presbyterian and Reformed churches,
canon law is known as "practice and procedure" or "church order", and includes
the church's laws respecting its government, discipline, legal practice and
worship. Lutheranism. The Book of Concord is the historic doctrinal statement
of the Lutheran Church, consisting of ten credal documents recognized as
authoritative in Lutheranism since the 16th century. However, the Book of
Concord is a confessional document (stating orthodox belief) rather than a book
of ecclesiastical rules or discipline, like canon law. Each Lutheran national
church establishes its own system of church order and discipline, though these
are referred to as "canons." The United Methodist Church. The Book of
Discipline contains the laws, rules, policies and guidelines for The United
Methodist Church. Its last edition was published in 2008.
