Catechism A catechism (; from "kata" = "down" + "echein" = "to sound",
literally "to sound down" (into the ears), i.e. to indoctrinate) is a summary
or exposition of doctrine, traditionally used in Christian religious teaching
from New Testament times to the present. Catechisms are doctrinal manuals often
in the form of questions followed by answers to be memorized, a format that has
been used in non-religious or secular contexts as well. Development and usage
of systematic catechisms is unique to Western Christianity. Besides some
exception, training catechumens in Eastern Christianity is carried out in case
by case. "Catechesis" [ â€”WP] is an education in the faith of children, young
people and adults which includes especially the teaching of Christian doctrine
imparted, generally speaking, in an organic and systematic way, with a view to
initiating the hearers into the fullness of Christian life. A "catechist" is
one who engages in such religious instruction. Typically, it is a lay minister
trained in the art of catechesis. It might also be a pastor or priest,
religious teacher, or other individuals in church roles (including a deacon,
religious brother or sister, or nun). The primary catechists for children are
their parents or communities. A "catechumen" is one who receives catechetical
instruction. Traditional format.  Protestant catechisms. The catechism's
question-and-answer format, with a view toward the instruction of children, was
a form adopted by the various Protestant confessions almost from the beginning
of the Reformation. Among the first projects of the Reformation, was the
production of catechisms self-consciously modelled after the older traditions
of Cyril and Augustine. These catechisms showed special admiration for
Chrysostom's view of the family as a "little church," and placed strong
responsibility on every father to teach his children, in order to prevent them
from coming to baptism or the Lord's table ignorant of the doctrine under which
they are expected to live as Christians. Lutheran. Therefore it is the duty of
every father of a family to question and examine his children and servants at
least once a week and to ascertain what they know of it, or are learning and,
if they do not know it, to keep them faithfully at it. The catechism, Luther
wrote, should consist of instruction in the rule of conduct, which always
accuses us because we fail to keep it (Ten Commandments), the rule of faith
(Apostles' Creed), the rule of prayer (Lord's Prayer), and the sacraments
(baptism, confession, and communion). However, it is not enough for them to
comprehend and recite these parts according to the words only, but the young
people should also be made to attend the preaching, especially during the time
which is devoted to the catechism, that they may hear it explained and may
learn to understand what every part contains, so as to be able to recite it as
they have heard it, and, when asked, may give a correct answer, so that the
preaching may not be without profit and fruit. You shall have no other gods. Q.
What does this mean? A. We should fear, love, and trust in God above all
things. Reformed. Calvin's 1545 preface to the Genevan catechism begins with an
acknowledgement that the several traditions and cultures which were joined in
the Reformed movement, would produce their own form of instruction in each
place. While Calvin argues that no effort should be expended on preventing
this, he adds: We are all directed to one Christ, in whose truth being united
together, we may grow up into one body and one spirit, and with the same mouth
also proclaim whatever belongs to the sum of faith. Catechists not intent on
this end, besides fatally injuring the Church, by sowing the materials of
dissension in religion, also introduce an impious profanation of baptism. For
where can any longer be the utility of baptism unless this remain as its
foundation â€” that we all agree in one faith? Wherefore, those who publish
Catechisms ought to be the more carefully on their guard, by producing anything
rashly, they may not for the present only, but in regard to posterity also, do
grievous harm to piety, and inflict a deadly wound on the Church. The scandal
of diverse instruction, is that it produces diverse baptisms and diverse
communions, and diverse faith. However, forms may vary without introducing
substantial differences, according to the Reformed view of doctrine. Genevan
Catechism. John Calvin produced a catechism while at Geneva (1541), which
underwent two major revisions (1545 and 1560). Calvin's aim in writing the
catechism of 1545, was to set a basic pattern of doctrine, meant to be imitated
by other catechists, which would not affirm local distinctions or dwell on
controversial issues, but would serve as a pattern for what was expected to be
taught by Christian fathers and other teachers of children in the church. The
catechism is organized on the topics of faith, law, prayer and sacraments. 2.
M. What reason have you for saying so? 3. M. What is the highest good of man?
Heidelberg Catechism. After Protestantism entered into the Palatinate, in 1546
the controversy between Lutherans and Calvinists broke out, and especially
while the region was under the elector Otto Heinrich (1556â€“59), this conflict
in Saxony, particularly in Heidelberg, became increasingly bitter and turned
violent. When Frederick III, Elector Palatine came into power in 1559 he put
his authority behind the Calvinistic view on the Lord's Supper, which denied
the local presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the elements of the
sacrament. He turned Sapienz College into a school of divinity, and in 1562 he
placed over it a pupil and friend of Luther's colleague, Philipp Melanchthon,
named Zacharias Ursinus. In an attempt to resolve the religious disputes in his
domain, Frederick called upon Ursinus and his colleague Caspar Olevianus
(preacher to Frederick's court) to produce a catechism. The two collaborators
referred to existing catechetical literature, and especially relied on the
catechisms of Calvin and of John Lasco. To prepare the catechism, they adopted
the method of sketching drafts independently, and then bringing together the
work to combine their efforts. "The final preparation was the work of both
theologians, with the constant co-operation of Frederick III. Ursinus has
always been regarded as the principal author, as he was afterwards the chief
defender and interpreter of the Catechism; still, it would appear that the
nervous German style, the division into three parts (as distinguished from the
five parts in the Catechism of Calvin and the previous draft of Ursinus), and
the genial warmth and unction of the whole work, are chiefly due to Olevianus."
(Schaff, in. Am. Presb. Rev. July 1863, p.Â 379). The structure of the
Heidelberg Catechism is spelled out in the second question, and the three-part
structure seen there is based on the belief that the single work of salvation
brings forward the three persons of the Trinity in turn, to make God fully and
intimately known by his work of salvation, referring back to the Apostles'
Creed as an epitome of Christian faith. Assurance of salvation is the unifying
theme throughout this catechism: assurance obtained by the work of Christ,
applied through the sacraments, and resulting in grateful obedience to the
commandments and persistence in prayer. A. Three; the first, how great my sins
and miseries are; the second, how I may be delivered from all my sins and
miseries; the third, how I shall express my gratitude to God for such
deliverance. The Heidelberg Catechism is the most widely used of the Catechisms
of the Reformed churches. Westminster Catechisms. Together with the Westminster
Confession of Faith (1647), the Westminster Assembly also produced two
catechisms, a Larger and a Shorter, which were intended for use in Christian
families and in churches. These documents have served as the doctrinal
standards, subordinate to the Bible, for Presbyterians and other Reformed
churches around the world. The Shorter Catechism shows the Assembly's reliance
upon the previous work of Calvin, Lasco, and the theologians of Heidelberg. It
comprises two main sections summarizing what the scriptures principally teach:
the doctrine of God, and the duty required of men. Questions and answers cover
the usual elements: faith, the Ten Commandments, the sacraments, and prayer. A.
The scriptures principally teach, what man is to believe concerning God, and
what duty God requires of man. Other Reformed catechisms. Oecolampadius
composed the "Basel Catechism" in 1526, Leo Juda (1534) followed by Bullinger
(1555) published catechisms in Zurich. The French Reformed used Calvin's
Genevan catechism, as well as works published by Louis Cappel (1619), and
Charles Drelincourt (1642). Baptist Catechisms. English Calvinistic Baptists
typically adopted Reformed catechisms, modifying them to reflect their own
convictions concerning the nature of the church and the sacrament of baptism.
In 1680, the Baptist minister Hercules Collins published his own revision of
the Heidelberg Catechism. Later, the General Assembly of 1677 adopted a
catechism that was largely based on the Westminster Shorter Catechism. However,
this catechism was not published until 1689, after the passing of the
Toleration Act. Anglican Catechism. The Anglican Book of Common Prayer includes
a catechism. In older editions it is a brief manual for the instruction of
those preparing to be brought before the bishop for confirmation: the baptized
first professes his baptism, and then rehearses the principal elements of the
faith into which he has been baptized: Apostles' Creed, Ten Commandments, the
Lord's Prayer, and the sacraments. Answer: My Godfathers and Godmothers in my
Baptism; wherein I was made a member of Christ, the child of God, and an
inheritor of the kingdom of heaven. The 1979 American book has a considerably
longer catechism intended as "an outline of instruction" and "a brief summary
of the Church's teaching." Socinian and other sectarian catechisms. Besides the
manuals of instruction that were published by the Protestants for use in their
families and churches, there were other works produced by sectarian groups
intended as a compact refutation of orthodoxy. For example, Socinians in Poland
published the "Racovian Catechism" in 1605, using the question and answer
format of a catechism for the orderly presentation of their arguments against
the Trinity and the doctrine of Hell, as these were understood by the Reformed
churches from which they were forced to separate. The Anabaptists have also
produced catechisms of their own, to explain and defend their distinctives.
[http://mennonitechurch.ca/about/cof/] Catholic catechisms. The "Catechism of
the Catholic Church" (see below) is the catechism that is in most widespread
use among Catholics today. It is the official catechism of the Church. For
Catholics, all the canonical books of the Bible (including the Deuterocanonical
books), the tradition of the Church and the interpretation of these by the
Magisterium (which may be outlined in a catechism, a compendium or a
declaration) constitute the complete and best resource for fully attaining to
God's revelation to mankind. Catholics believe that sacred scripture and sacred
tradition preserved and interpreted by the Magisterium are both necessary for
attaining to the fullest understanding of all of God's revelation. The term
"catechist" is most frequently used in Catholicism, often to describe a "lay
catechist" or layperson with catechetical training who engages in such teaching
and evangelization. This can be in both parish church and mission contexts.
Roman Catechism. The "Roman Catechism" (also called, the Catechism of the
Council of Trent or the Catechism of Pius V) was first published in 1566 under
the authority of the Council of Trent. It was not intended for common use by
the laity, but as a general use reference book for priests and bishops. The on-
line version is at http://www.cin.org/users/james/ebooks/master/trent/
tindex.htm Catechism of Saint Pius X. The "Catechism of Saint Pius X" is a
short catechism with questions and answers regarding the essentials of Catholic
faith and doctrine. It was issued by Pope Pius X at the beginning of the
twentieth century in Italian. This pope's intention is that all Catholic
faithful could understand easily their faith. An on-line version is at http://
www.cin.org/users/james/ebooks/master/pius/pindex.htm Baltimore Catechism.
Various editions of the "Baltimore Catechism" were the de facto standard
Catholic school text in America from 1885 to the late 1960s. It was often
taught by rote. The most common edition has a series of questions with their
answers, which are followed by explanations in more depth. These are often
accompanied by biblical quotes. There is a test at the end of every chapter. An
on-line version is at http://www.cin.org/users/james/ebooks/master/baltimore/
bindex.htm Catechism of Christian Doctrine (or "Penny Catechism"). A question
and answer format catechism that was the standard catechetical text in Great
Britain in the twentieth century. Popularly called "Penny Catechism" as the
original version only cost one penny. Various editions of the "Penny Catechism"
were issued through the century and changes were made to the text. An On-line
version is at http://www.proecclesia.com/penny%20catechism/index.htm Dutch
Catechism. The hotly debated Dutch Catechism of 1966 was the first post-Vatican
II comprehensive Catholic catechism, and reflects the teachings of the Dutch
bishops. It was commissioned and authorized by the Catholic hierarchy of the
Netherlands, "to make the message of Jesus Christ sound as new as it is." The
catechism, which sold record number of copies throughout the world, contains
controversial views, which were reviewed by a group of cardinals. They pointed
to several errors but decided to "nonetheless leave by far the greatest part of
the New Catechism untouched. So too, they support the praiseworthy intention of
the authors." Catechism of the Catholic Church. The current "catechism of the
Catholic Church" is the first complete systematic synthesis of faith issued
since the Council of Trent in 1566. It contains articles on the classical
topics of the official teaching of the Catholic Church on all matters of faith
and morals. Since the official language of the Catholic Church is Latin,
official teaching documents distributed in Latin are unlikely to change in
perceived meaning over time. The Latin language version of the catechism,
published 8 Sept 1997, is the "editio typica"â€”the normative and definitive
text. The principal source materials for this work are the Sacred Scriptures,
the Church Fathers, the liturgy, and the Magisterium. This catechism is
intended to serve "as a point of reference for the catechisms or compendia that
are composed in the various countries." â€“ Extraordinary Synod of Bishops
1985, Final Report II B a, 4. Fidei depositum is an Apostolic Constitution
which states that the catechism of the Catholic Church is for the laity in its
address to all the people of God. Compendium of the Catechism of the Catholic
Church. It originated with a request of Pope John Paul II in February 2003 and
was issued by his successor Pope Benedict XVI June 28, 2005. The English
version was printed at Libreria Editrice Vaticana in 2006. Unlike the larger
catechism, the Compendium is similar in format to the Baltimore Catechism with
598 questions and answers, providing an easier format with only the "essential"
contents of the Catechism of the Catholic Church as the title suggests. United
States Catholic Catechism for Adults. The 1992 Vatican catechism had several
aims, among them to be an "authentic reference text for teaching Catholic
doctrine and particularly for preparing local catechisms". The American bishops
responded with the 2006 United States Catholic Catechism for Adults(USCCB,
2006) â€“ similar in format to a college text book, targeting adults, contain
seven elements that bring more depth to the material than the 'Compendium',
providing more flexibility for diverse groups of people to study its contents.
Each section or chapter contains the following: story or lesson of faith,
foundation and application, sidebars, relationship to culture, discussion
questions, doctrinal statements, and meditation and prayer. The lessons of
faith stories are about individuals from the United States and allow the U.S.
reader to better relate to these individuals. This version of the catechism is
available on audio CD-ROM as well. Enchiridion symbolorum, definitionum et
declarationum de rebus fidei et morum. The Enchiridion symbolorum, definitionum
et declarationum de rebus fidei et morum also known as Enchiridion or
Denzinger, is a compendium of all basic texts of Catholic dogma and morality
since the apostles. Commissioned by Pope Pius IX, it has been in use since
1854, and has been updated periodically. It is a compendium of faith, like a
catechism. By including all relevant teachings throughout history, it is at the
same, more than a catechism. It is a search instrument for theologians,
historians and anybody interested in Christian religion. The latest updates of
the Enchiridion extend to the teachings of Pope John Paul II. The Archbishop of
Baltimore Cardinal James Gibbons is quoted in earlier versions of the
Enchiridion, that every theologian should have always two books at hand, the
Holy Bible and this "Enchiridion". The Douay Catechism. The Rev. Henry
Tuberville, D.D. wrote this catechism in 1649 at the English College of Douay
in Flanders. It is based on the Roman Catechism of the Council of Trent and was
similarly written with the purpose of teaching Christian doctrine during the
tumultuous times of the Reformation. It is a testament to Rev. Tuberville and
his colleagues at Douay that it remains one of the clearest and most direct
compendiums of Catholic teaching in the English language. The on-line version
of this catechism is at http://www.aloha.net/~mikesch/DouayCat.htm Catechism
for Filipino Catholics. The Catechism for Filipino Catholics, or CFC, is a
contextualized and inculturated Roman Catholic catechism for Filipinos prepared
by the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines and approved by the Holy
See. The draft was produced by the C.B.C.P.'s "Episcopal Commission on
Catechesis and Catholic Education." It is the present day update of the
Doctrina Cristiana, the Philippines' first published book in the early 16th
century. The Doctrina Cristiana was written in Tagalog, in both Latin script
and the commonly used Baybayin script of natives of the time, as well as
Spanish. A Catechism or Christian Doctrine. Also called, The Catechism of
Laurence Vaux or Vaux's Catechism. Laurence Vaux, B.D., a Catholic martyr,
first published his catechism in Louvain, in 1567. Six further editions in
rapid succession, emanating from Antwerp and LiÃ¨ge, testified to its
widespread popularity and effectiveness. The LiÃ¨ge, 1583, issue was reprinted
with biographical introduction for the Chetham Society by Thomas Graves Law in
1885. This edition contains also Vaux's paper "The Use and Meaning of
Ceremonies," and a few further pages of instruction added by the LiÃ¨ge
publisher. The catechism is practically formed on the same liens as its
successor of today, explaining in sequence the Apostles' Creed, the Pater and
Ave (but the latter has not the second half, Holy Mary), the Commandments
(these at considerable length), the sacraments and the offices of Christian
justice. The treatise on the ceremonies discusses the use of holy water,
candles, incense, vestments and so forth. The on-line version of this catechism
is at http://www.aloha.net/~mikesch/vaux.htm The Catechetical Instructions of
St. Thomas Aquinas. The catechetical instructions of St. Thomas were used
generally throughout the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries as manuals and
text-books for priests and teachers of religion. "The Explanations of St.
Thomas," wrote Spirago, "are remarkable for their conciseness and their
simplicity of language; they are especially noteworthy because the main parts
of the catechetical course of instruction are brought into connection with one
another so that they appear as one harmonious whole." The influence of these
works is especially prominent in the "Roman Catechism" which the Council of
Trent ordered written for parish priests and for all teachers of religion. Many
of the explanatory passages in both works are almost identical. Non-Christian
catechisms. A. Fused into one, O Master of my Life. The two are one. But both
have disappeared and naught remains but the deep fire of my desire. Judaism
does not have a formal catechism. While there have been several attempts to
formulate Jewish principles of faith, and some of these have achieved wide
acceptance, none can be described as being in the form of a catechism. The most
widely recited formulation, Yigdal, is in the form of a hymn based on
Maimonides' 13 Articles of Faith. Bhaktivinoda Thakur's book "Jaiva Dharma" is
an example of Gaudiya Vaishnava catechism. It follows the usual question-answer
format. In the Pali Canon of Theravada Buddhism a small bit of catechism
appears as the fourth section of the Khuddakapatha, as well as the forty-third
and forty-fourth suttas of the Majjhima Nikaya. Secular catechisms. In the
past, catechisms were written to rehearse the basic knowledge of a non-
religious subject. Examples include numerous political catechisms published
from the 18th to the 20th century in Europe as well as in North and South
America. See also the "Catechism of the History of Newfoundland" (c1856), the
"Coal Catechism" (1898), and "A Catechism of the Steam Engine" (1856). Some
literary works have also taken the form of a catechism. The 17th episode of
James Joyce's novel "Ulysses", known as "Ithaca", is written in the form of a
catechism, as is Ted Hughes' poem "Examination at the Womb Door", from the
collection "Crow". In Henry IV, Part 1: Act V, Scene I, Line 141 Falstaff
refers to his monologue as a catechism, explaining his view of the virtue of
honor.
