Minister (Catholic Church) In the Catholic Church the term minister enjoys a
variety of usages. It most commonly refers to the person, whether lay or
ordained, who is commissioned to perform some act on behalf of the Church. It
is not a particular office or rank of clergy, as is the case in some other
churches, but "minister" may be used as a collective term for vocational or
professional pastoral leaders including clergy (bishops, deacons, priests) and
non-clergy (theologians and lay ecclesial ministers). It is also used in
reference to the canonical and liturgical administration of sacraments, as part
of some offices, and with reference to the exercise of the lay apostolate.
"Minister" is not used as a form of address (e.g., Minister Jones) in the
Catholic Church. Scripturally, various passages utilize the language of servant
(ministri) to indicate those charged with spiritual functions or pastoral care
of the community: 1 Corinthians 4:1â€“2; Hebrews 8:2; Matthew 20:26, etc.
Specific distinction in terminology may be found in various documents, among
others: Participation of the Lay Faithful in the Presbyteral Ministry. Lay
"ministers". In a general sense, any Christian exercising a ministry is a
minister. Since all the baptised are part of the universal priesthood, whenever
they engage in their vocation to evangelize the world and to help those in
need, they are ministers. In addition, the Church calls people to the
responsible stewardship of their time and talent in support of the Church. This
often takes the form of volunteering for a specific lay ministry, most of which
are liturgical, catechetical, or involved in pastoral care and social justice.
Liturgical lay ministries include lectors (Ministers of the Word) who proclaim
scriptural (the Bible) passages during the Eucharist, altar servers and
acolytes who assist the presider at the altar, cantors and music ministers who
lead the singing, extraordinary ministers of Holy Communion who serve during
Mass and/or who take Holy Communion to the sick and homebound, and ushers or
ministers of hospitality who direct the seating and procession of the assembly.
Catechetical lay ministries include catechists (Sunday school teachers and
teachers at Catholic schools), dismissal leaders (ministers who lead RCIA
catechumens on Sundays), retreat leaders, youth group leaders, and Scout
religious emblems counselors. Other lay ministries include those who work with
charitable activities, pastoral care and outreach, or advocacy for social
justice. Ecclesial "ministers". Some persons within the church are called by
God and the assembly to serve as ministers to the whole people of God. These
people respond to this vocation by receiving the proper formation, usually
including graduate studies in theology or divinity, and then exercising some
leadership role in the community. In common usage, when someone refers to a
"minister of the church" they are referring to any one of these "professional"
ministers. The Catholic Church identifies five ecclesial vocations, three of
which are ordained. Theologians and lay ecclesial ministers are not necessarily
ordained, while bishops, presbyters, and deacons are ordained. While only the
later are considered clergy by the Catholic Church, all are considered
"ministers" in the professional and vocational sense. Ministers of the
sacraments. The other kind of "minister" in Catholic parlance is a person who
administers a sacrament, meaning that he or she is a conduit of sacramental
grace. This is not an office or position but instead a function that different
kinds of people may perform, depending on the sacrament. There are two kinds of
ministers in this sense. The "ordinary minister" of a sacrament, who is the
standard or normal minister of that sacrament, has the spiritual power to
administer it (i.e., a valid sacrament), but not necessarily the canonical
authority to administer it (i.e., a licit sacrament). Thus a bishop who
consecrates another bishop without pontifical mandate exercises illicitly the
spiritual power to consecrate him. While bishops, priests and deacons are
ordinary ministers of holy communion, only someone who has been validly
ordained as a priest is a minister of the Eucharist. If a priest is, for some
reason, debarred and yet celebrates the Eucharist, he does so illicitly (i.e.
against canon law), but the Eucharist is still valid. However, in the case of
the sacrament of Reconciliation (the Sacrament of Penance), although the priest
is the minister, the only minister, since there are no extraordinary ministers
of this sacrament, he must have been granted by the law itself or by a
competent authority the faculty to celebrate this sacrament validly for the
person to whom he imparts absolution. An "extraordinary minister" (Latin:
minister extraordinarius) of a sacrament is someone, other than an ordinary
minister, officially authorised to administer a sacrament by the law itself (as
an instituted acolyte is an extraordinary minister of holy communion) or by
being deputed for this purpose. If an extraordinary minister of a sacrament
administers it illicitly, the sacrament is effective, but the person
ministering could be liable for an ecclesiastical penalty, such as an
interdict. By way of example, an extraordinary minister of Holy Communion is
authorised to bring Holy Communion within a particular parish or diocese. If a
minister brings Holy Communion to someone outside of the authorised area, it is
done illicitly, but the communicant does receive Holy Communion, as indeed the
communicant would, even if the person administering it had no authorisation
whatever. If a person who is not an ordinary minister of certain sacraments
attempts to celebrate them, the sacraments are invalid. Below is a table
outlining each sacrament, its ordinary ministers, and its extraordinary
ministers (if any), with stipulations regarding its exercise by extraordinary
ministers in parenthesis. Instituted ministries. In certain traditionalist
Catholic priestly societies, whether enjoying the favour of the Holy See (like
the Priestly Fraternity of St. Peter) or not (like the Society of St. Pius X),
the rites of conferring of tonsure, what were called minor orders (of Porter,
Lector, Exorcist, and Acolyte) and subdiaconate continue to be used, as before
the coming into force of the apostolic letter "Ministeria quaedam" of 15 August
1972, which, of the minor orders, which it called instituted ministries,
preserved for seminarians being prepared for priesthood those of lector and
acolyte, and indicating that episcopal conferences, if they wished, could use
the term "subdeacon" instead of "acolyte". The specific functions of all of
these, whatever the rite by which they are conferred, are clearly not reserved
to them. Lay people may and do perform the functions of a lector or acolyte.
Laypersons of good character may act as ushers, porters, lectors, extraordinary
ministers of Holy Communion, cantors, or may teach the faith as catechists and
may advise the clergy or church courts, including serving as judges on marriage
tribunals. Since the entry into force of the 1983 Code of Canon Law, one
becomes a member of the clergy upon ordination to the diaconate. Earlier, it
was the rite of tonsure that made one a cleric.
