Chalcedonian Definition The Confession of Chalcedon (also Definition or Creed
of Chalcedon), also known as the Doctrine of the Hypostatic Union or the Two-
Nature Doctrine, was adopted at the Council of Chalcedon in 451 in Asia Minor.
That Council of Chalcedon is one of the first seven Ecumenical Councils
accepted by Eastern Orthodox, Catholic, and many Protestant Christian churches.
It is the first Council "not" recognized by any of the Oriental Orthodox
churches. The Definition defines that Christ is 'acknowledged in two natures',
which 'come together into one person and hypostasis'. The formal definition of
'two natures' in Christ was understood by the critics of the council at the
time, and is understood by many historians and theologians today, to side with
western and Antiochene Christology and to diverge from the teaching of Cyril of
Alexandria, who always stressed that Christ is 'one'. However, the best modern
analysis of the sources of the creed (by A. de Halleux, in Revue Theologique de
Louvain 7, 1976) and a reading of the acts, or proceedings, of the council
(recently translated into English) show that the bishops considered Cyril the
great authority and that even the language of 'two natures' derives from him.
Oriental Orthodox dissent. The Chalcedonian creed was written amid controversy
between the western and eastern churches over the meaning of the Incarnation
(see Christology), the ecclesiastical influence of the emperor, and the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome. The western churches readily accepted the
creed, but some eastern churches did not. The creed became standard orthodox
doctrine, while the Coptic Church of Alexandria dissented, holding to Cyril's
formula of the oneness of Christâ€™s nature as the incarnation of God the Word.
This church felt that this understanding required that the creed should have
stated that Christ be acknowledged "from two natures" rather than "in two
natures". This miaphysite position, historically characterised by Chalcedonian
followers as "monophysitism" though this is denied by the dissenters, formed
the basis for the distinction from other churches of the Coptic Church of Egypt
and Ethiopia and the "Jacobite" churches of Syria and Armenia (see Oriental
Orthodoxy). Over the last 30 years, however, the miaphysite position has been
accepted as a mere restatement of orthodox belief by Patriarch Bartholomew I of
the Eastern Orthodox Church and by Pope John Paul II of the Roman Catholic
Church.
