Chinese house church Chinese house churches (, also known as Âú∞‰∏ãÊïôÊúÉ
"d√¨xi√  ji√ ohu√¨" and Âú∞‰∏ãÂ§©Âúã "d√¨xi√  tiƒÅngu√≥") are a religious
movement of unregistered assemblies of Christians in the People's Republic of
China, which operate independently of the government-run Three-Self Patriotic
Movement (TSPM) and China Christian Council (CCC) for Protestant groups and the
Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association (CCPA) and the Chinese Catholic Bishops
Council (CCBC) for Catholics. They are also known as the "Underground" Church
or the "Unofficial" Church. They are called "house churches" because as they
are not officially registered organizations, they cannot independently own
property and hence they meet in private houses, often in secret for fear of
arrest or imprisonment, as in the Early Church under pagan Roman persecution.
The Chinese house church movement developed after 1949 as a result of the
Communist government policy which requires the registration of all religious
organizations. This registration policy requires churches to become part of the
TSPM/CCC set-up, which may involve interference in the church's internal
affairs either by government officials or by TSPM/CCC officials, who are
approved by the Communist Party of China's United Front Work Department. During
the Cultural Revolution of 1966-1976 all Christian worship was forced
underground, even the official churches were closed, and the house church
movement was solidified as an ongoing phenomenon. Because house churches
operate outside government regulations and restrictions, their members and
leaders are frequently harassed by local government officials. This persecution
may take the form of a prison sentence or, more commonly, reeducation through
labour. Heavy fines are also not uncommon, with personal effects being
confiscated in lieu of payment if this is refused or unavailable. House
churches were outlawed officially from the 1950s right up until the late 1980s
and adherents were severely persecuted. Persecution of house Christians
throughout China intensified during the 1980s, particularly during 1983. Since
the 1990s there have been cases of increasing official tolerance in various
regions of house churches. Most observers believe that the opposition of house
churches by government officials arises less from an ideological opposition to
religion and support of atheism, and more out of fear of potential disturbances
to orderly society from mass mobilization of believers, similar to the
Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, and mass protests of Falun Gong members in
Beijing in 1999. Others disagree, pointing to the arbitrary restrictions placed
on the heavily confined Three-Self Church system as non-Chinese activities, and
new purges before official international events such as the 2008 Olympics (see
account below). Protestant house churches are indigenous to mainland China and
are usually not under foreign control; some groups welcome help from abroad as
long as it does not compromise their independence. This assertion of strictly
native support is important in the PRC political discourse, since Christian
churches and missionaries have sometimes historically been seen as tools of
imperialism. In addition, at least with the Protestant churches there is no
central church hierarchy, a fact that is commonly cited as a reason why house
churches are seen as less threatening and subject to less overt opposition by
the Communist officials. Chinese house churches have indigenous forms of
worship and usually use their own songs. One collection of Chinese house church
worship songs, "JiƒÅn√°n Shƒ´xuƒÉn"; "Songs from Canaan") has been made into a
book, with audio of some of the songs available. Chinese Roman Catholic house
churches generally recognize the authority of the Pope in contrast to the
official Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association where such recognition is not
possible because Papal Supremacy is not only doctrinal but also because he
heads the Vatican, an external nation State. The role of Catholic house
churches is a major complication in the official diplomatic relations between
the Holy See and the People's Republic of China. In the past two decades, a
number of house church networks have developed, headquartered mainly in Henan
and Zhejiang provinces. These networks have sent missionaries all over the
country and have even started sending them abroad to neighboring states. In
2008, twenty-one pastors of house churches in Shandong Province were sent to
labor camps, which was the largest sentencing of house church leaders in a
quarter of a century. By some estimations, Chinese authorities were trying to
restrict activities of house churches right before the Beijing Olympics.
Christianity in China. Frank Lee, a Chinese academic who has studied the
development of so-called house churches in the mainland, projected 20 million
members for 'official' churches (registered with the Three-Self Church),
whereas house churches boast 10 million Catholics and up to 70 million
Protestants. Meanwhile "China Aid", a Christian charity working in China, have
given 130 million (including house churches). The numbers of Chinese Christians
at churches on a Sunday now outnumber the whole of Europe. While official
government figures put the number at 25 million (18 million Protestants and six
million Catholics), Lee estimates 60 million plus as a conservative tally.
