Christmas Eve Christmas Eve is the evening or entire day preceding Christmas
Day, the widely celebrated annual festival commemorating the birth of Jesus
Christ. It occurs on December 24 in the Western Christian Church, and is
considered one of the most culturally significant celebrations in Christendom
and the Western world, where it widely observed as a full or partial holiday in
anticipation of Christmas Day. One reason celebrations occur on Christmas Eve
is because the traditional Christian liturgical day starts at sunset, an
inheritance from Jewish tradition, which in turn is based in the story of
creation in Genesis: "And there was evening, and there was morning â€“ the
first day." This liturgical day is followed for all days in the Eastern rite,
and the custom of beginning Christmas celebration (as well as Sunday and the
other major festivals) in the preceding evening is preserved in western
Churches that have altered the liturgical day to start at midnight, for example
the Roman Catholic Church. Many churches still ring their church bells and hold
prayers in the evening before holidays; for example, the Nordic Lutheran
churches. In some languages, such as the Scandinavian, Christmas Eve is simply
referred to as "Christmas Evening". Since Christian tradition holds that Jesus
was born at night (based in Luke 2:6-8), Midnight Mass is celebrated on
Christmas Eve, traditionally at midnight, in commemoration of his birth. The
idea of Jesus being born at night is reflected in the fact that Christmas Eve
is referred to as "Heilige Nacht" ("Holy Night") in German, "Nochebuena" ("the
Good Night") in Spanish and similarly in other expressions of Christmas
spirituality, such as the song "Silent Night, Holy Night". Christmas is also
celebrated as a secular holiday by some non-Christians; however, in other
regions, such as in the Indian subcontinent, though not celebrated by non-
Christians, Christmas Eve is nevertheless known as "the big day" (Hindustani
"") by non-Christian religionists, including Hindus and Muslims. Religious
traditions. Western churches. Roman Catholics and Anglicans traditionally
celebrate Midnight Mass, which begins either at or sometime before midnight on
Christmas Eve. This ceremony, which is held in churches throughout the world,
celebrates the birth of Christ, which is believed to have occurred at night. In
recent years some churches have scheduled their "Midnight" Mass as early as
7Â pm In Spanish-speaking areas, the Midnight Mass is sometimes referred to as
"Misa del Gallo", or "Missa do Galo", in Portuguese ("Rooster's Mass"). In the
Philippines, this custom lasts for nine days, starting on December 16 and
continuing daily up to December 24, during which Filipinos attend dawn Masses,
usually starting at around 4:00â€“5:00Â am In 2009 Vatican officials scheduled
the Midnight Mass to start at 10Â pm so the 82 year old Pope Benedict XVI would
not have too late a night. Whilst not performing any kind of Mass per se, the
Church of Scotland has a Watchnight (similar to the one on Hogmanay) service
beginning just before midnight, wherein carols are sung. Lutherans
traditionally practice Christmas Eve Eucharistic traditions typical of Germany
and Scandinavia. "Krippenspiele" (Nativity plays), special festive music for
organ, vocal and brass choirs and candlelight services make Christmas Eve one
of the highlights in the Lutheran Church calendar. Christmas Vespers are
popular in the early evening, and midnight services are also widespread in
regions which are predominately Lutheran. The old Lutheran tradition of a
Christmas Vigil in the early morning hours of Christmas Day (Christmette) can
still be found in some regions. In eastern and middle Germany, congregations
still continue the tradition of "Quempas singing": separate groups dispersed in
various parts of the church sing verses of the song "He whom Shepherds once
came Praising" (Quem pastores) responsively. Methodists celebrate the evening
in different ways. Some, in the early evening, come to their church to
celebrate Holy Communion with their families. The mood is very solemn, and the
only visible light is the Advent Wreath, and the candles upon the Lord's Table.
Others celebrate the evening with services of light, which include singing the
song "Silent Night" as a variety of candles (including personal candles) are
lit. Other churches have late evening services at 11Â pm, so the church can
celebrate Christmas Day together with the ringing of bells at 12Â am Others
offer Christmas Day services, as well. The annual "Nine Lessons and Carols"
broadcast from King's College, Cambridge, on Christmas Eve, has established
itself as one of the signs that Christmas has begun in the United Kingdom. It
is broadcast outside the UK via the BBC World Service, and is also bought by
broadcasters around the world. Other churches hold a candlelight service. Some
services re-enact the Nativity. Each church is able to celebrate Christmas Eve
evening and Christmas Day in its own special way. Eastern churches. In the
Eastern Orthodox Church, Christmas Eve is referred to as Paramony
("preparation"). It is the concluding day of the Nativity Fast and is
celebrated as a day of strict fasting by those devout Orthodox Christians who
are physically capable of doing so. In some traditions, nothing is eaten until
the first star appears in the evening sky, in commemoration of the Star of
Bethlehem. The liturgical celebration begins earlier in the day with the
celebration of the Royal Hours, followed by the Divine Liturgy combined with
the celebration of Vespers, during which a large number of readings from the
Old Testament are chanted, recounting the history of salvation. After the
dismissal at the end of the service, a new candle is brought out into the
center of the church and lit, and all gather round and sing the Troparion and
Kontakion of the Feast. In the evening, the All-Night Vigil for the Feast of
the Nativity is composed of Great Compline, Matins and the First Hour. The
Orthodox services of Christmas Eve are intentionally parallel to those of Good
Friday, illustrating the theological point that the purpose of the Incarnation
was to make possible the Crucifixion and Resurrection. This is illustrated in
Orthodox icons of the Nativity, on which the Christ Child is wrapped in
swaddling clothes reminiscent of his burial wrappings. The child is also shown
lying on a stone, representing the Tomb of Christ, rather than a manger. The
Cave of the Nativity is also a reminder of the cave in which Jesus was buried.
The services of Christmas Eve are also similar to those of the Eve of Theophany
(Epiphany), and the two Great Feasts are considered one celebration. In some
Orthodox cultures, after the Vesperal Liturgy the family returns home to a
festive meal, but one at which Orthodox fasting rules are still observed; i.e.,
no meat or dairy products (milk, cheese, eggs, etc.) are consumed (see below
for variations according to nationality). Then they return to the church for
the All-Night Vigil. The next morning, Christmas Day, the Divine Liturgy is
celebrated again, but with special features that occur only on Great Feasts of
the Lord. After the dismissal of this Liturgy, the faithful customarily greet
each other with the kiss of peace and the words: "Christ is Born!", to which
the one being greeted responds: "Glorify Him!" (these are the opening words of
the Canon of the Nativity that was chanted the night before during the Vigil).
This greeting, together with many of the hymns of the feast, continue to be
used until the leave-taking of the feast on December 29. The first three days
of the feast are particularly solemn. The second day is known as the Synaxis of
the Theotokos, and commemorates the role of the Virgin Mary in the Nativity of
Jesus. The third day is referred to simply as "the Third Day of the Nativity".
The Saturday and Sunday following December 25 have special Epistle and Gospel
readings assigned to them. December 29 celebrates the Holy Innocents. Orthodox
Christians observe a festal period of twelve days, during which no one in the
Church fasts, even on Wednesdays and Fridays, which are normal fasting days
throughout the year. During this time one feast leads into another: December
25â€“31 is the afterfeast of the Nativity; January 2â€“5 is the forefeast of
the Epiphany. Meals. In some parts of Central and Eastern Europe such as
Russia, Ukraine, Poland, and Lithuania, a traditional meatless 12-dishes
Christmas Eve Supper is served on Christmas Eve before opening gifts. This is
known as the "Holy Meal". The table is spread with a white cloth symbolic of
the swaddling clothes the Child Jesus was wrapped in, and a large white candle
stands in the center of the table symbolizing Christ the Light of the World.
Next to it is a round loaf of bread symbolizing Christ Bread of Life. Hay is
often displayed either on the table or as a decoration in the room, reminiscent
of the manger in Bethlehem. The twelve dishes (which differ by nationality or
region) symbolize the Twelve Apostles. The Holy Meal was a common Eastern
Orthodox tradition in the Russian Empire, but during the era of the Soviet
Union it was greatly discouraged as a result of the official atheism of the
former former regime. It is coming back in Russia and continues to be popular
in Ukraine. The main attribute of Holy Meal in Ukraine is kutia, a sweet grain
pudding. The other typical dishes are borscht, Varenyky, a traditional
Christmas compote called "uzvar" and dishes made of fish, phaseolus and
cabbage. In accordance with the Christmas traditions of the Serbs, their
festive meal has a copious and diverse selection of foods, although it is
prepared according to the rules of fasting. As well as a round, unleavened loaf
of bread and salt, which are necessary, this meal may comprise roast fish,
cooked beans, sauerkraut, noodles with ground walnuts, honey, and wine. In
Bulgaria, the meal consists of an odd number of lenten dishes in compliance
with the rules of fasting. They are usually the traditional sarma, bob chorba
(bean soup), fortune pita (pastry with a fortune in it), stuffed peppers, nuts.
The meal is often accompanied with wine or Bulgaria's traditional alcoholic
beverage rakia. While other Christian families throughout the world celebrate
the Christmas Eve meal with various meats, Italians and Sicilians celebrate the
traditional Catholic "Feast of the Seven Fishes" and attend the Midnight Mass.
In various cultures, a festive dinner is traditionally served for the family
and close friends in attendance, when the first star (usually Sirius) arrives
on the sky. Families in some Slavic countries reserve a place for guests
(alluding to Mary and Joseph looking for shelter in Bethlehem). Gift giving.
During the Reformation in 16thâ€“17th century Europe, many Protestants changed
the gift bringer to the Christ Child or "Christkindl", and the date of giving
gifts changed from December 6 to Christmas Eve. It is the night when Santa
Claus (or some variant thereof) makes his rounds delivering gifts to good
children. In the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Croatia and Hungary, where St.
Nicholas (sveti MikulÃ¡Å¡/szent MikulÃ¡s) gives his sweet gifts on December 6,
the Christmas gift-giver is the Child Jesus (JeÅ¾Ã­Å¡ek in Czech, JÃ©zuska in
Hungarian, JeÅ¾iÅ¡ko in Slovak and Isusek in Croatian). In most parts of
Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, presents are traditionally exchanged in the
evening of December 24. Children are commonly told that presents were brought
either by the Christkind (German for: Christchild), or the Weihnachtsmann
(German name of Santa Claus). Both leave the gifts, but are in most families
not seen doing so. In Finland, "Joulupukki", and in Sweden "Jultomten",
personally meets children and gives presents in the evening of Christmas Eve.
In Netherlands, Argentina, Austria, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany,
Hungary, Iceland, Latvia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Quebec, Romania, Uruguay,
and Sweden, Christmas presents are opened mostly on the evening of the 24th,
â€“ this is also the tradition among the British Royal Family, due to their
mainly German ancestry â€“ while in Italy, the United States, the United
Kingdom, Ireland, English Canada, South Africa, New Zealand and Australia, this
occurs mostly on the morning of Christmas Day. In other Latin American
countries, people stay awake until midnight, when they open the presents. In
Spain, gifts are traditionally opened on the morning of January 6, Epiphany day
("DÃ­a de Los Tres Reyes Magos"), though in some other countries, like
Argentina and Uruguay, people receive presents both around Christmas and on the
morning of Epiphany day. In the Netherlands they also celebrate Sinterklaas on
December 5. Christmas Eve around the world. Christmas Eve is celebrated in
different ways around the world, varying by country and region. Elements common
to many areas of the world include the attendance of special religious
observances such as a midnight Mass or Vespers, and the giving and receiving of
presents. Along with Easter, Christmastime is one of the most important periods
on the Christian calendar, and is often closely connected to other holidays at
this time of year, such as Advent, the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, St.
Nicholas Day, St. Stephen's Day, New Year's, and the Feast of the Epiphany.
Jewish traditions on Christmas Eve. The significant amount of vacation travel,
and travel back to family homes, means that Christmas Eve is also frequently
linked to social events and parties, worldwide. Due to the family gathering and
religious worship activities that are central to Christmas Eve for Christians
but which Jews do not typically engage in, a series of events on the night of
December 24 have been made available to Jews in various regions of the world.
Matzo Ball events and parties are an option for single Jews. Jews in interfaith
relationships may prefer to participate in Chrismukkah events and parties.
However, Jewish people are invited to Christmas Eve parties and plenty will
attend, and some host Christmas Eve parties for others. Historical events. A
number of historical events have been influenced by the occurrence of Christmas
Eve. Christmas truce. During World War I in 1914 and 1915 an unofficial
Christmas truce took place, particularly that between British and German
troops. The truce began on Christmas Eve, December 24, 1914, when German troops
began decorating the area around their trenches in the region of Ypres,
Belgium, for Christmas. They began by placing candles on trees, then continued
the celebration by singing Christmas carols, most notably "Stille Nacht"
("Silent Night"). The British troops in the trenches across from them responded
by singing English carols. The two sides shouted Christmas greetings to each
other. Soon thereafter, there were calls for visits across the "No man's land"
where small gifts were exchanged. The truce also allowed a breathing spell
where recently fallen soldiers could be brought back behind their lines by
burial parties. Funerals took place as soldiers from both sides mourned the
dead together and paid their respects. At one funeral in No Man's Land,
soldiers from both sides gathered and read a passage from Psalm 23. The truce
occurred in spite of opposition at higher levels of the military command.
Earlier in the autumn, a call by Pope Benedict XV for an official truce between
the warring governments had been ignored. Apollo 8 reading from Genesis. On
December 24, 1968, in what was the most watched television broadcast to that
date, the astronauts Bill Anders, Jim Lovell and Frank Borman of Apollo 8
surprised the world with a reading of the Creation from the Book of Genesis as
they orbited the moon. Madalyn Murray O'Hair, an atheist activist, filed a
lawsuit under the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. The suit was
dismissed by the US Supreme Court. In 1969, the United States Postal Service
issued a stamp (Scott # 1371) commemorating the Apollo 8 flight around the
moon. The stamp featured a detail of the famous photograph of the Earthrise
over the moon (NASA image AS8-14-2383HR) taken by Anders on Christmas Eve, and
the words, "In the beginning God..."
