Christian Peacemaker Teams Christian Peacemaker Teams (CPT) is an international
organization set up to support teams of peace workers in conflict areas around
the world. These teams believe that they can lower the levels of violence
through nonviolent direct action, human rights documentation, and nonviolence
training. CPT sums their work up as "...committed to reducing violence by
"getting in the way" ". CPT has a full-time corps of over 30 activists who
currently work in Colombia, Iraq, the West Bank, the United Statesâ€“Mexico
border, and Kenora, Ontario, Canada. These teams are supported by over 150
reservists who spend two weeks to two months a year on location. Christianity
and CPT. CPT has its roots in the historic peace churches of North America, and
its four supporting denominations are the Mennonite Church USA, Mennonite
Church Canada, Church of the Brethren, and the Religious Society of Friends. It
is also sponsored by several Christian groups: "Every Church a Peace Church",
"On Earth Peace", "Presbyterian Peace Fellowship", "Baptist Peace Fellowship of
North America", and the "Congregation of St. Basil". In conflict areas it works
in partnership with Jewish, Muslim and secular peace organizations, such as the
International Solidarity Movement and Peace Brigades International. Another
component of CPT's work is to engage "...congregations, meetings and support
groups at home to play a key advocacy role with policy makers." Although it is
a Christian-based organization, CPT does not engage in any type of missionary
activity. Their website states "While CPTers have chosen to follow Jesus
Christ, they do not proselytize." This has raised the question of what
distinguishes them from similar "secular", organizations;  Their website also
states that Corp members are Christians, there is not faith requirement for
members of CPT's short-term delegations. For example one of the CPT delegates
who was held hostage in Iraq, Harmeet Singh Sooden, is a Sikh. The Mennonite
Church USA Archives is the repository of the official records of Christian
Peacemaker Teams. History. Statement by Ron Sider After a series of meetings,
Gene Stoltzfus was hired as the first staff person for the new organization in
1988. Over the next few years CPT trainings and conferences explored various
models for international peacemaking. In 1990, just before the Gulf War, CPT
sent a team of 13 to Iraq for 10Â days. This delegation proved to be the first
of a number the group sent its first delegations to Haiti, Iraq, and the West
Bank. Iraq activities. CPT has operated in Iraq since October 2002. Since the
2003 invasion of Iraq, they have worked with and advocated for families of
people detained by the U.S. Military and collected stories of detainee abuse.
In January 2004 they released a report documenting routine abuse of Iraqi
prisoners held by Coalition Provisional Authority, well before the photographs
of Abu Ghraib prisoners brought international attention to the issue. Hostage
crisis. The four had planned to visit the Muslim Clerics Association, an
influential group of Sunni religious leaders formed in 2003 after the collapse
of Saddam Hussein's regime, and were about 100Â metres from the entrance to a
mosque where the meeting was to take place when they were abducted. Their
captors are a previously unknown group, the Swords of Righteousness Brigade.
The hostages were shown on a video broadcast released worldwide on 29 November
by Arab satellite channel Al Jazeera. The captors branded their hostages as
spies posing as Christian peace activists. The captors threatened to kill the
hostages unless the US freed all Iraqi prisoners held in the US and Iraq. A
body found in Iraq on 10 March 2006 was identified later that day as being that
of Tom Fox. During the crisis, the news had broken that he had performed for a
long time with the United States Marine Band. On March 23, 2006, the three
remaining hostages were rescued from a house near the town of Mishahda by a
multinational force. None of the kidnappers were found in the house at the
time. The "Telegraph (UK)" reported that "A deal had been struck with a man
detained the previous night who was one of the leaders of the kidnappers. He
was allowed a telephone call to warn his henchmen to leave the kidnap house.
When the troops moved in and found the prisoners alive, they also let him go as
promised." The rescue force was led by elements of 'Task Force Black' - a
multinational counter-kidnap unit consisting of British, American and Canadian
JTF2 special forces. They were supported by 'Task Force Maroon', a support unit
made up of British Paras and marines. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police and
Canadian Security Intelligence Service were also involved. The three surviving
hostages were in good medical condition. While captive, they had been allowed
to exercise and Kember had received medication he needs. Although happy that
the hostages were freed, CPT placed the responsibility for the kidnapping on
the coalition itself: "We believe that the illegal occupation of Iraq by
Multinational Forces is the root cause of the insecurity which led to this
kidnapping and so much pain and suffering in Iraq." CPT initially made no
mention of appreciation to coalition forces for the rescue in its statement,
but did so in a later addenda after considerable media attention. It was
reported that the CPT had not cooperated with the SAS officials who coordinated
the rescue. CPT co-director Doug Pritchard stated that they did not want a
"military raid" to occur and preferred to work with diplomats. Work in
Colombia. CPT has had a team based in Barrancabermeja, Colombia since 2001. The
focus of their work has been accompanying a number of communities along the
Opon river, a tributary of the Magdalena River. The farmers and fishers from
these communities displaced themselves in 2000 due to heavy fighting in 2000
between the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) and the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). Since the community members returned to their
homes in 2001, the team has had a nearly daily presence in the area to support
the people, work to prevent intimidation by both AUC and FARC and document
human rights abuses if they occur. The team also works with Colombian women's
groups and human rights groups based in Barrancabermeja in an effort to reduce
threats and violent acts carried out by the AUC in the city. Work in Chiapas,
Mexico. CPT has, in the past, also been involved in Chiapas, Mexico, where
violence had erupted between the Zapatista Army of National Liberation and the
Mexican government. CPT's long-term presence began in June 1998. In Chiapas,
CPT partnered with a Christian civil society group called Las Abejas (the Bees)
that shares a commitment to pacifism. Their joint activities included going to
the bases of the Mexican military to pray. Work in the Palestinian territories.
CPT has two teams in the Palestinian territories, one in Hebron and one in At-
tuwani. Part of their daily routines includes school patrol, and monitoring
settler violence and soldier home invasions. The teams also work against home
demolitions. The CPT says the Israeli occupation is "violent", and that
reconciliation between Palestinians and Israelis can only flourish when the
occupation ends. In 2004, two CPT members, Kim Lamberty and Chris Brown in At-
Tuwani were severely injured when Israeli settlers attacked them as they were
walking children to school. A few days later, the team, along with Operation
Dove and Amnesty International members were again attacked. In response to
these attacks, the Israeli Knesset Committee for Children's Rights initiated an
order to have soldiers escort the Palestinian children to school in At-Tuwani.
However, CPT's report records that as of 10 November 2006, settlers had
attacked or harassed the schoolchildren 40 times, in spite of the order by the
Israeli Knesset Committee for Children's Rights to protect the children. CPT
has however condemned Palestinian violence against Israeli civilians. For
example, when Egged bus #18 was bombed two Sundays in a row, CPTer Kathy Kern
publicized the fact that she would ride the bus the following Sunday in
protest.
