Church of England The Church of England is the officially established Christian
church in England and the Mother Church of the worldwide Anglican Communion.
The church considers itself within the tradition of Western Christianity and
dates its formal establishment principally to the mission to England by St
Augustine of Canterbury in AD 597. During the 17th century, political and
religious disputes raised the Puritan and Presbyterian faction to control of
the church, but this ended with the Restoration. The contemporary Church of
England still continues to contain several doctrinal strands, now generally
known as Anglo-Catholic and Evangelical, which reflect the early divisions. In
recent times, tensions between theological conservatives and progressives find
expression in debates over women's ordination and homosexuality within the
church. The Church of England has ordained women as priests since 1994 and is
in the process of considering the consecration of female bishops. Since the
Reformation, the Church of England has used an English liturgy. "The Book of
Common Prayer" was based on original writings and translations from the Latin
services by Thomas Cranmer. This liturgy has been updated and modernised at
various times. The church also adopted congregational singing of hymns and
psalms. The governing structure of the church is based on the traditional
parishes which are gathered into dioceses presided over by a bishop. The
Archbishop of Canterbury is the Primate of All England and a focus of unity for
the whole Anglican Communion worldwide. The General Synod is the legislative
body for the church and comprises bishops, clergy and laity. As it is the
established church, its measures must be approved of by both Houses of
Parliament. This is done by the General Synod referring measures decided on to
the Ecclesiastical Committee of Parliament, which is made up of 15 peers from
the House of Lords selected by the Lord Speaker and 15 MPs selected by the
Speaker of the House of Commons. This committee then produces a report on the
proposed measure. The measure and report are then presented to Parliament. Both
houses must agree to pass a resolution passing the measure before it can be
presented to the Sovereign for Royal Assent and become law. While the Church of
England is the established church in England and the Crown dependencies, its
territory does not extend to the other constituent countries of the United
Kingdom, who have their own separate but disestablished national churches. The
Church of Ireland and the Church in Wales were separated from the English
Church in 1869 and 1914 respectively, and both are autonomous churches in the
Anglican communion; due to different historical origins, Scotland's national
church, the Church of Scotland, is Presbyterian, but the smaller Scottish
Episcopal Church (itself an offshoot of the Church of Scotland) is in the
Anglican communion. History. Early history. According to tradition,
Christianity arrived in Britain in the first or 2nd century, during which time
southern Britain became part of the Roman Empire. The earliest historical
evidence of Christianity among the native Britons is found in the writings of
such early Christian Fathers as Tertullian and Origen in the first years of the
3rd century, although the first Christian communities probably were established
some decades earlier. Three Romano-British bishops, including Restitutus, are
known to have been present at the Council of Arles in 314. Others attended the
Council of Sardica in 347 and that of Ariminum in 360, and a number of
references to the church in Roman Britain are found in the writings of 4th
century Christian fathers. Britain was the home of Pelagius, who opposed
Augustine of Hippo's doctrine of original sin. Anglo-Saxon Christianity. While
Christianity was long established as the religion of the Britons at the time of
the Anglo-Saxon invasion, Christian Britons made little progress in converting
the newcomers from their native paganism. Consequently, in 597, Pope Gregory I
sent Saint Augustine of Canterbury from Rome to evangelise the Angles. This
event is known as the Gregorian mission and is the date the Church of England
generally marks the beginning of its formal history. With the help of
Christians already residing in Kent, Augustine established his church in
Canterbury, the capital of the Kingdom of Kent, and became the first in the
series of Archbishops of Canterbury in 598. A later archbishop, the Greek
Theodore of Tarsus, also contributed to the organisation of Christianity in
England. Synod of Whitby and papal authority. While some Celtic Christian
practices were changed at the Synod of Whitby, the Church in the British Isles
was under papal authority from earliest times. Queen Bertha of Kent was among
the Christians in England who recognised papal authority before Augustine
arrived and Celtic Christians were carrying out missionary work with papal
approval long before the Synod of Whitby. The Synod of Whitby established the
Roman date for Easter and the Roman style of monastic tonsure in Britain. This
meeting of the ecclesiastics with Roman customs with local bishops was summoned
in 664 at Saint Hilda's double monastery of Streonshalh (Strean√¶shalch), later
called Whitby Abbey. It was presided over by King Oswiu, who did not engage in
the debate but made the final ruling. Secession from Rome. In 1534 King Henry
VIII separated the English Church from Rome. A theological separation had been
foreshadowed by various movements within the English church such as Lollardy,
but the English Reformation gained political support when Henry VIII wanted an
annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon so he could marry Anne Boleyn.
Pope Clement VII, considering that the earlier marriage had been entered under
a papal dispensation and how Catherine's nephew, Emperor Charles V, might react
to such a move, refused the annulment. Eventually, Henry, although
theologically opposed to Protestantism, took the position of Supreme Head of
the Church of England to ensure the annulment of his marriage. He was
excommunicated by Pope Paul III. Henry maintained a strong preference for
traditional Catholic practices and, during his reign, Protestant reformers were
unable to make many changes to the practices of the Church of England. Indeed,
this part of Henry's reign saw the trial for heresy of Protestants as well as
Roman Catholics. Under his son Edward VI, more Protestant-influenced forms of
worship were adopted. Under the leadership of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Thomas Cranmer, a more radical reformation proceeded. A new pattern of worship
was set out in the Book of Common Prayer (1549 and 1552). These were based on
the older liturgy but influenced by Protestant principles. The confession of
the reformed Church of England was set out in the Forty-two Articles (later
revised to thirty-nine). The reformation however was cut short by the death of
the king. Queen Mary I, who succeeded him, returned England again to the
authority of the Pope, thereby ending the first attempt at an independent
Church of England. During Mary's reign, many leaders and common people were
burnt for their refusal to recant of their reformed faith. These are known as
the Marian martyrs and the persecution has led to her nickname of "Bloody
Mary". Mary also died childless and so it was left to the new regime of her
half-sister Elizabeth to resolve the direction of the church. The settlement
under Elizabeth I (from 1558), known as the Elizabethan Settlement, developed
the "via media" (middle way) character of the Church of England, a church
moderately Reformed in doctrine, as expressed in the Thirty-Nine Articles, but
also emphasising continuity with the Catholic and Apostolic traditions of the
Church Fathers. It was also an established church (constitutionally established
by the state with the head of state as its supreme governor). The exact nature
of the relationship between church and state would be a source of continued
friction into the next century. Stuart period. For the next century, through
the reigns of James I, who ordered the creation of what became known as the
King James Bible, and Charles I, culminating in the English Civil War and the
Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell, there were significant swings back and forth
between two factions: the Puritans (and other radicals) who sought more far-
reaching Protestant reforms, and the more conservative churchmen who aimed to
keep closer to traditional beliefs and Catholic practices. The failure of
political and ecclesiastical authorities to submit to Puritan demands for more
extensive reform was one of the causes of open warfare. By Continental
standards, the level of violence over religion was not high, but the casualties
included King Charles I and Archbishop of Canterbury William Laud. Under the
Commonwealth and the Protectorate of England from 1649 to 1660, the bishops
were dethroned and former practices were outlawed, and Presbyterian
ecclesiology was introduced in place of the episcopate. The 39 Articles were
replaced by the Westminster Confession, the Book of Common Prayer by the
Directory of Public Worship. Despite this, about one quarter of English clergy
refused to conform to this form of State Presbyterianism. With the Restoration
of Charles II, Parliament restored the Church of England to a form not far
removed from the Elizabethan version. One difference was that the ideal of
encompassing all the people of England in one religious organization, taken for
granted by the Tudors, had to be abandoned. The religious landscape of England
assumed its present form, with the Anglican established church occupying the
middle ground, and those Puritans and Protestants who dissented from the
Anglican establishment, and Roman Catholics, too strong to be suppressed
altogether, having to continue their existence outside the National Church
rather than controlling it. Continuing official suspicion and legal
restrictions continued well into the 19th century. 19th century. By the Fifth
Article of the Union with Ireland 1800, the Church of England and Church of
Ireland were united into "one protestant episcopal church, to be called, the
united church of England and Ireland". Although this union was declared "an
essential and fundamental Part of the Union", the Irish Church Act 1869
separated the Irish part of the Church again and disestablished it, the Act
coming into effect on 1 January 1871. Overseas developments. As the British
Empire expanded, British colonists and colonial administrators took the
established church doctrines and practices together with ordained ministry and
formed overseas branches of the Church of England. As they developed or,
beginning with the United States of America, became sovereign and/or
independent states many of their churches became separate organizationally but
remained linked to the Church of England through the Anglican Communion.
Doctrine and practice. "The doctrine of the Church of England is grounded in
the Holy Scriptures, and in such teachings of the ancient Fathers and Councils
of the Church as are agreeable to the said Scriptures. In particular such
doctrine is to be found in the Thirty-nine Articles of Religion, The Book of
Common Prayer, and the Ordinal." As the Church of England bases its teachings
on the Holy Scriptures, the ancient Catholic teachings of the Church Fathers
and some of the doctrinal principles of the Protestant Reformation (as
expressed in the 39 Articles and other documents such as the Book of Homilies),
Anglicanism can therefore be described as "Reformed Catholic" in character
rather than Protestant. In practice, however, it is more mixed, with some
Anglicans who emphasise the Catholic tradition and others who emphasise the
Reformed tradition. These three "parties" in the Church of England are
sometimes called high church (or Anglo-Catholic), low church (or Evangelical)
and broad church (or Liberal). There is also a long history of more liberal or
latitudinarian views and more conservative views in both the Anglo-Catholic and
Evangelical branches of the church. In terms of church government, unlike many
of the Protestant denominations it has retained episcopal (bishop)
leadership.The teachings of Richard Hooker, the 16th century divine, summarised
the Anglican position well, affirming bishops as ancient, allowable and for the
good of the church. In many people's eyes today the Church of England has, as
one of its distinguishing marks, a breadth and "open-mindedness". This range of
belief and practice includes those of the Anglo-Catholics, who emphasise
liturgy and sacraments, to the far more preaching-centred and less ritual-based
services of Evangelicals and gatherings of the Charismatics. But this "broad
church" faces various contentious doctrinal and social questions. Women's
ministry. Women were appointed as deaconesses from 1861 but they could not
function fully as deacons and were not considered ordained clergy. Women have
been lay readers for a long time. During the First World War some women were
appointed as lay readers known as "Bishop's Messengers". After that no more lay
readers were appointed until 1969. Legislation authorising the ordination of
women as deacons was passed in 1986 and they were first ordained in 1987. The
ordination of women as priests was passed by the General Synod in 1993 and
began in 1994. In July 2005 the synod voted to "set in train" the process of
allowing the consecration of women as bishops. In February 2006 the synod voted
overwhelmingly for the "further exploration" of possible arrangements for
parishes that did not want to be directly under the authority of a woman
bishop. On 7 July 2008 the Synod voted to approve the ordination of women as
bishops and rejected moves for alternative episcopal oversight for those who do
not accept women bishops. Actual ordinations of women to the episcopate will
require further legislation which is anticipated to be considered before 2014.
In 2010, for the first time in the history of the Church of England, more women
than men were ordained as priests (290 women and 273 men). Worship and liturgy.
The Church of England's official book of liturgy as established in English Law
is the "Book of Common Prayer" (BCP), but there are many examples of local
variations throughout the churches of the Anglican Communion. In addition to
this book the General Synod has also legislated for a modern liturgical book,
"Common Worship", dating from 2000, which can be used as an alternative to the
BCP. Like its predecessor, the 1980 "Alternative Service Book", it differs from
the "Book of Common Prayer" in providing a range of alternative services,
mostly in modern language, although it does include some BCP-based forms as
well, for example Order Two for Holy Communion. (This is a revision of the BCP
service, altering some words and allowing the insertion of some other
liturgical texts such as the "Agnus Dei" before communion.) The Order One rite
follows the pattern of more modern liturgical scholarship. The use of hymns and
music in the Church of England has changed dramatically over the centuries.
Traditional Choral evensong is a staple of most cathedrals. The style of psalm
chanting harks back to the Church of England's pre-reformation roots. During
the 18th century, clergy such as Charles Wesley introduced their own styles of
worship with poetic hymns. In the latter half of the 20th century, the
influence of the Charismatic Movement significantly altered the worship
traditions of numerous Church of England parishes, primarily affecting those of
evangelical persuasion. These churches now adopt a contemporary worship form of
service, with minimal liturgical or ritual elements, and incorporating
contemporary worship music. Membership. Due to its status as the established
church, in general anyone may be married, have their children baptised or their
funeral in their local parish church, regardless of whether they are baptised
or regular churchgoers. Between 1890 and 2001 churchgoing in the United Kingdom
declined steadily. In the years 1968 to 1999, Anglican Sunday church
attendances almost halved, from 3.5 per cent of the population to just 1.9 per
cent. One study published in 2008 suggested that if current trends were to
continue, Sunday attendances could fall to 350,000 in 2030 and just 87,800 in
2050. In 2011, the Church published statistics showing 1.7 million people
taking part in a Church of England service each month, a level maintained since
the turn of the millennium; approximately one million participating each Sunday
and three million taking part in a Church of England service on Christmas Day
or Christmas Eve. The Church also claimed that each year 30% attend regular
Sunday worship on at least one occasion; more than 40% attend a wedding in
their local church and still more attend a funeral there. Nationally the Church
of England baptises one child in eight. The Church has 18,000 active ordained
clergy and 10,000 licensed lay ministers. In 2009, 491 people were recommended
for ordination training, maintaining the level at the turn of the millennium,
and 564 new clergy (266 women and 298 men) were ordained. More than half of
those ordained (193 men and 116 women) were appointed to full-time paid
ministry. Structure. Despite the complexities of the structure, the Church of
England at its heart views the local parish church as the basic unit. The
British monarch has the constitutional title of Supreme Governor of the Church
of England. The canon law of the Church of England states, "We acknowledge that
the Queen‚Äôs most excellent Majesty, acting according to the laws of the
realm, is the highest power under God in this kingdom, and has supreme
authority over all persons in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil." In
practice this power is often exercised through Parliament and the Prime
Minister. In addition to England, the jurisdiction of the Church of England
extends to the Isle of Man, the Channel Islands and a few parishes in
Flintshire, Monmouthshire and Radnorshire in Wales (the present Church in Wales
was an integral part of the Church of England until 1920). Expatriate
congregations on the continent of Europe have become the Diocese of Gibraltar
in Europe. All rectors and vicars are appointed by patrons, who may be private
individuals, corporate bodies such as cathedrals, colleges or trusts, or by the
bishop or directly by the Crown. No clergy can be instituted and inducted into
a parish without swearing the Oath of Allegiance to Her Majesty, and taking the
Oath of Canonical Obedience "in all things lawful and honest" to the bishop.
Usually they are instituted to the benefice by the bishop and then inducted by
the archdeacon into the possession of the benefice property‚Äîchurch and
parsonage. Curates are appointed by rectors and vicars, or if priests-in-charge
by the bishop after consultation with the patron. Cathedral clergy (normally a
dean and a varying number of residentiary canons who constitute the cathedral
chapter) are appointed either by the Crown, the bishop, or by the dean and
chapter themselves. Clergy officiate in a diocese either because they hold
office as beneficed clergy or are licensed by the bishop when appointed (e.g.
curates), or simply with permission. Primates. The most senior bishop of the
Church of England is the Archbishop of Canterbury, who is the Metropolitan of
the southern province of England, the Province of Canterbury. He has the status
of Primate of All England. He is the focus of unity for the worldwide Anglican
Communion of independent national or regional churches. Rowan Williams became
Archbishop of Canterbury in 2002. The second most senior bishop is the
Archbishop of York, who is the Metropolitan of the northern province of
England, the Province of York. For historical reasons (relating to the time of
York's control by the Danes) he is referred to as the Primate of England. John
Sentamu became Archbishop of York in 2005. The Bishop of London, the Bishop of
Durham and the Bishop of Winchester are ranked in the next three positions.
Diocesan bishops. The process of appointing diocesan bishops is complex and is
handled by the Crown Nominations Committee which submits names to the Prime
Minister (acting on behalf of the Crown) for consideration. Representative
bodies. The Church of England has a legislative body, the General Synod. Synod
can create two types of legislation, measures and canons. Measures have to be
approved but cannot be amended by the British Parliament before receiving the
Royal Assent and becoming part of the law of England. Canons require Royal
Licence and Royal Assent, but form the law of the church, rather than the law
of the land. Another assembly is the Convocation of the English Clergy (older
than the General Synod and its predecessor the Church Assembly). There are also
diocesan synods and deanery synods. House of Lords. Of the 44 diocesan
archbishops and bishops in the Church of England, 26 are permitted to sit in
the House of Lords. The Archbishops of Canterbury and York automatically have
seats, as do the Bishops of London, Durham and Winchester. The remaining 21
seats are filled in order of seniority by consecration. It may take a diocesan
bishop a number of years to reach the House of Lords, at which point he becomes
a Lord Spiritual. The Bishop of Sodor and Man and the Bishop of Gibraltar in
Europe are not eligible to sit in the House of Lords as their dioceses lie
outside the United Kingdom. Financial situation. Although an established
church, the Church of England does not receive any direct government support.
Donations comprise its largest source of income, and it also relies heavily on
the income from its various historic endowments. , the Church of England had
estimated total outgoings of around ¬£900¬ million. The Church of England
manages an investment portfolio which is worth more than ¬£8 billion.
