Communion of Saints The communion of saints (in Latin, "communio sanctorum"),
when referred to persons, is the spiritual union of the members of the
Christian Church, living and the dead, those on earth, in heaven, and, for
those who believe in purgatory, those also who are in that state of
purification. They are all part of a single "mystical body", with Christ as the
head, in which each member contributes to the good of all and shares in the
welfare of all. The word "sanctorum" in the phrase "communio sanctorum" can
also be understood as referring not to "holy persons", but to "holy things",
namely the blessings that the holy persons share with each other, including
their faith, the sacraments and the other spiritual graces and gifts they have
as Christians. Belief in the communion of saints is affirmed in the Apostles'
Creed. History. The earliest known use of this term to refer to the belief in a
mystical bond uniting both the living and the dead in a confirmed hope and love
is by Saint Nicetas of Remesiana (ca. 335â€“414); the term has since then
played a central role in formulations of the Christian creed. The doctrine of
the communion of saints is based on , where Paul compares Christians to a
single body. The words translated into English as "saints" can refer to
Christians, who, whatever their personal sanctity as individuals, are called
holy because they are consecrated to God and Christ. This usage of the word
"saints" is found some fifty times in the New Testament. The Heidelberg
Catechism defends this view, citing , and to claim that all members of Christ
have communion with him, and are recipients of all his gifts. The persons who
are linked in this communion include those who have died and whom pictures as a
cloud of witnesses encompassing Christians on earth. In the same chapter, says
Christians on earth "have come to Mount Zion, and to the city of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to innumerable angels in festal gathering, and
to the assembly of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, and to a judge who
is God of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect." Roman Catholic and
Orthodox view. In Catholic terminology, the communion of saints is thus said to
comprise the church militant (those alive on earth), the church penitent (those
undergoing purification in purgatory in preparation for heaven), and the church
triumphant (those already in heaven). The damned are not a part of the
communion of saints. The Roman Catholic Church, the Old Catholic Church, the
Eastern Orthodox Church, the Oriental Orthodox Church, the Church of the East
and some elements in the Anglican Communion point to this doctrine in support
of their practice of asking the intercession of saints in heaven, whose prayers
(cf. ) are seen as helping their fellow Christians on earth. These same
churches refer to this doctrine in support of the practice of praying "for" the
dead (as seen in ).
