Confucianism Confucianism is a Chinese ethical and philosophical system
developed from the teachings of the Chinese philosopher Confucius (Â≠îÂ§´Â≠ê
K«íng F≈´z«ê, or K'ung-fu-tzu, lit. "Master Kong", 551‚Äì479 BC). Confucianism
originated as an "ethical-sociopolitical teaching" during the Spring and Autumn
Period, but later developed metaphysical and cosmological elements in the Han
Dynasty. Following the abandonment of Legalism in China after the Qin Dynasty,
Confucianism became the official state ideology of China, until it was replaced
by the "Three Principles of the People" ideology with the establishment of the
Republic of China, and then Maoist Communism after the ROC was replaced by the
People's Republic of China in Mainland China. The core of Confucianism is
humanism, the belief that human beings are teachable, improvable and
perfectible through personal and communal endeavour especially including self-
cultivation and self-creation. Confucianism focuses on the cultivation of
virtue and maintenance of ethics, the most basic of which are "ren", "yi", and
"li". "Ren" is an obligation of altruism and humaneness for other individuals
within a community, "yi" is the upholding of righteousness and the moral
disposition to do good, and "li" is a system of norms and propriety that
determines how a person should properly act within a community. Confucianism
holds that one should give up one's life, if necessary, either passively or
actively, for the sake of upholding the cardinal moral values of "ren" and
"yi". Although Confucius the man may have been a believer in Chinese folk
religion, Confucianism as an ideology is humanistic and non-theistic, and does
not involve a belief in the supernatural or in a personal god. Cultures and
countries strongly influenced by Confucianism include mainland China, Taiwan,
Korea, Japan and Vietnam, as well as various territories settled predominantly
by Chinese people, such as Singapore. Although Confucian ideas prevail in these
areas, few people outside of academia identify themselves as Confucian, and
instead see Confucian ethics as a complementary guideline for other ideologies
and beliefs, including democracy, Marxism, capitalism, Christianity, Islam and
Buddhism. Names and Etymology. Three of these use the Chinese character ÂÑí
"r√∫," meaning "scholar". These names do not use the name "Confucius" at all,
but instead center on the figure or ideal of the Confucian scholar; however,
the suffixes of "jiƒÅ, ji√ o," and "xu√©" carry different implications as to
the nature of Confucianism itself. "R√∫jiƒÅ" contains the character "jiƒÅ,"
which literally means "house" or "family". In this context, it is more readily
construed as meaning "school of thought", since it is also used to construct
the names of philosophical schools contemporary with Confucianism: for example,
the Chinese names for Legalism and Mohism end in "jiƒÅ." "R√∫ji√ o" and
"K«íngji√ o" contain the Chinese character ji√ o, the noun "teach", used in
such as terms as "education", or "educator". The term, however, is notably used
to construct the names of religions in Chinese: the terms for Islam, Judaism,
Christianity, and other religions in Chinese all end with "ji√ o." "R√∫xu√©"
contains "xu√©" 'study'. The term is parallel to "-ology" in English, being
used to construct the names of academic fields: the Chinese names of fields
such as physics, chemistry, biology, political science, economics, and
sociology all end in "xu√©." Themes in Confucian thought. Six books. The six
books' name is traditionally written in a sequence "ËØó‰π¶Á§º‰πêÊòìÊò•Áßã".When
the Classic of Change(ÊòìÔºâis verbal,it could read as
"Poetry,documents,rites,music changed the annals of Spring and Autumn." There
is also a Chinese idiom "A big dream such like Spring and Autumn"
(Êò•ÁßãÂ§ßÊ¢¶Ôºâ. Humanism. Humanism is at the core in Confucianism. A simple
way to appreciate Confucian thought is to consider it as being based on varying
levels of honesty, and a simple way to understand Confucian thought is to
examine the world by using the logic of humanity. In practice, the primary
foundation and function of Confucianism is as an ethical philosophy to be
practiced by all the members of a society. Confucian ethics is characterized by
the promotion of virtues, encompassed by the Five Constants, or the Wuchang
(‰∫îÂ∏∏), extrapolated by Confucian scholars during the Han Dynasty. The five
virtues are: These are accompanied by the classical S√¨z√¨ (ÂõõÂ≠ó) with four
virtues: There are still many other elements, such as Ch√©ng (Ë™ , honesty),
Sh√π (ÊÅï, kindness and forgiveness), Li√°n (Âªâ, honesty and cleanness), Ch«ê
(ÊÅ•, shame, judge and sense of right and wrong), Y«íng (Âãá, bravery), Wƒìn
(Ê∫´, kind and gentle), Li√°ng (ËâØ, good, kindhearted), G≈çng (ÊÅ≠,
respectful, reverent), Ji«én (ÂÑâ, frugal), R√ ng (ËÆì, modestly, self-
effacing). Among all elements, Ren and Yi are fundamental. Ren. "Ren" is one of
the basic virtues promoted by Confucius, and is an obligation of altruism and
humaneness for other individuals within a community. Confucius' concept of
humaneness () is probably best expressed in the Confucian version of the ethic
of reciprocity, or the Golden Rule: "Do not do unto others what you would not
have them do unto you." Confucius never stated whether man was born good or
evil, noting that 'By nature men are similar; by practice men are wide apart'
‚Äîimplying that whether good or bad, Confucius must have perceived all men to
be born with intrinsic similarities, but that man is conditioned and
inÔ¨Çuenced by study and practise. Xunzi's opinion is that men originally just
want what they instinctively want despite positive or negative results it may
bring, so cultivation is needed. In Mencius' view, all men are born to share
goodness such as compassion and good heart, although they may become wicked.
The Three Character Classic begins with "People at birth are naturally good
(kind-hearted)", which stems from Mencius' idea. All the views eventually lead
to recognize the importance of human education and cultivation. "R√©n" also has
a political dimension. If the ruler lacks "r√©n", Confucianism holds, it will
be difficult if not impossible for his subjects to behave humanely. "R√©n" is
the basis of Confucian political theory: it presupposes an autocratic ruler,
exhorted to refrain from acting inhumanely towards his subjects. An inhumane
ruler runs the risk of losing the "Mandate of Heaven", the right to rule. A
ruler lacking such a mandate need not be obeyed. But a ruler who reigns
humanely and takes care of the people is to be obeyed strictly, for the
benevolence of his dominion shows that he has been mandated by heaven.
Confucius himself had little to say on the will of the people, but his leading
follower Mencius did state on one occasion that the people's opinion on certain
weighty matters should be considered. Etiquette. In Confucianism, the term "li"
(), sometimes translated into English as rituals, customs, rites, etiquette, or
morals, refers to any of the secular social functions of daily life, akin to
the Western term for culture. Confucius considered education and music as
various elements of li. Li were codified and treated as a comprehensive system
of norms, guiding the propriety or politeness which colors everyday life.
Confucius himself tried to revive the etiquette of earlier dynasties. It is
important to note that, although li is sometimes translated as "ritual" or
"rites", it has developed a specialized meaning in Confucianism, as opposed to
its usual religious meanings. In Confucianism, the acts of everyday life are
considered rituals. Rituals are not necessarily regimented or arbitrary
practices, but the routines that people often engage in, knowingly or
unknowingly, during the normal course of their lives. Shaping the rituals in a
way that leads to a content and healthy society, and to content and healthy
people, is one purpose of Confucian philosophy. Loyalty. Loyalty () is the
equivalent of filial piety on a different plane. It is particularly relevant
for the social class to which most of Confucius' students belonged, because the
only way for an ambitious young scholar to make his way in the Confucian
Chinese world was to enter a ruler's civil service. Like filial piety, however,
loyalty was often subverted by the autocratic regimes of China. Confucius had
advocated a sensitivity to the realpolitik of the class relations in his time;
he did not propose that "might makes right", but that a superior who had
received the "Mandate of Heaven" (see below) should be obeyed because of his
moral rectitude. In later ages, however, emphasis was placed more on the
obligations of the ruled to the ruler, and less on the ruler's obligations to
the ruled. Loyalty was also an extension of one's duties to friends, family,
and spouse. Loyalty to one's family came first, then to one's spouse, then to
one's ruler, and lastly to one's friends. Loyalty was considered one of the
greater human virtues. Confucius also realized that loyalty and filial piety
can potentially conflict. Filial piety. The Five Bonds Specific duties were
prescribed to each of the participants in these sets of relationships. Such
duties were also extended to the dead, where the living stood as sons to their
deceased family. This led to the veneration of ancestors. The only relationship
where respect for elders wasn't stressed was the Friend to Friend relationship.
In all other relationships, high reverence was held for elders. The idea of
Filial piety influenced the Chinese legal system: a criminal would be punished
more harshly if the culprit had committed the crime against a parent, while
fathers often exercised enormous power over their children. A similar
differentiation was applied to other relationships. Now filial piety is also
built into law. People have the responsibility to provide for their elderly
parents according to the law. The main source of our knowledge of the
importance of filial piety is the "Classic of Filial Piety", a work attributed
to Confucius and his son but almost certainly written in the 3rd century BCE.
The Analects, the main source of the Confucianism of Confucius, actually has
little to say on the matter of filial piety and some sources believe the
concept was focused on by later thinkers as a response to Mohism. Filial piety
has continued to play a central role in Confucian thinking to the present day.
Relationships. Relationships are central to Confucianism. Particular duties
arise from one's particular situation in relation to others. The individual
stands simultaneously in several different relationships with different people:
as a junior in relation to parents and elders, and as a senior in relation to
younger siblings, students, and others. While juniors are considered in
Confucianism to owe their seniors reverence, seniors also have duties of
benevolence and concern toward juniors. This theme of mutuality is prevalent in
East Asian cultures even to this day. There is government, when the prince is
prince, and the minister is minister; when the father is father, and the son is
son. ("Analects" XII, 11, trans. Legge) Mencius says: "When being a child,
yearn for and love your parents; when growing mature, yearn for and love your
lassie; when having wife and child(ren), yearn for and love your wife and child
(ren); when being an official (or a staffer), yearn for and love your sovereign
(and/or boss)." The gentleman. The term "j≈´nz«ê" () is crucial to classical
Confucianism. Confucianism exhorts all people to strive for the ideal of a
"gentleman" or "perfect man". A succinct description of the "perfect man" is
one who "combines the qualities of saint, scholar, and gentleman." In modern
times the masculine translation in English is also traditional and is still
frequently used. Elitism was bound up with the concept, and gentlemen were
expected to act as moral guides to the rest of society. The great exemplar of
the perfect gentleman is Confucius himself. Perhaps the tragedy of his life was
that he was never awarded the high official position which he desired, from
which he wished to demonstrate the general well-being that would ensue if
humane persons ruled and administered the state. The opposite of the "J≈´nz«ê"
was the "Xi«éor√©n" (). The character Â∞è in this context means petty in mind
and heart, narrowly self-interested, greedy, superficial, or materialistic.
Rectification of names. Confucius believed that social disorder often stemmed
from failure to perceive, understand, and deal with reality. Fundamentally,
then, social disorder can stem from the failure to call things by their proper
names, and his solution to this was "Zh√®ngm√≠ng" (). He gave an explanation of
"zhengming" to one of his disciples. Xun Zi chapter (22) "On the Rectification
of Names" claims the ancient sage-kings chose names () that directly
corresponded with actualities (), but later generations confused terminology,
coined new nomenclature, and thus could no longer distinguish right from wrong.
Governance. To govern by virtue, let us compare it to the North Star: it stays
in its place, while the myriad stars wait upon it. ("Analects" II, 1) Another
key Confucian concept is that in order to govern others one must first govern
oneself. When developed sufficiently, the king's personal virtue spreads
beneficent influence throughout the kingdom. This idea is developed further in
the Great Learning, and is tightly linked with the Taoist concept of wu wei ():
the less the king does, the more gets done. By being the "calm center" around
which the kingdom turns, the king allows everything to function smoothly and
avoids having to tamper with the individual parts of the whole. This idea may
be traced back to early Chinese shamanistic beliefs, such as the king being the
axle between the sky, human beings, and the Earth. Another complementary view
is that this idea may have been used by ministers and counselors to deter
aristocratic whims that would otherwise be to the detriment of the state's
people. Meritocracy. In teaching, there should be no distinction of classes.
("Analects" XV, 39) The main basis of his teachings was to seek knowledge,
study, and become a better person. Although Confucius claimed that he never
invented anything but was only transmitting ancient knowledge (see "Analects"
VII, 1), he did produce a number of new ideas. Many European and American
admirers such as Voltaire and H. G. Creel point to the revolutionary idea of
replacing nobility of blood with nobility of virtue. J≈´nz«ê (ÂêõÂ≠ê, lit.
"lord's child"), which originally signified the younger, non-inheriting,
offspring of a noble, became, in Confucius' work, an epithet having much the
same meaning and evolution as the English "gentleman". A virtuous plebeian who
cultivates his qualities can be a "gentleman", while a shameless son of the
king is only a "small man". That he admitted students of different classes as
disciples is a clear demonstration that he fought against the feudal structures
that defined pre-imperial Chinese society. Another new idea, that of
meritocracy, led to the introduction of the Imperial examination system in
China. This system allowed anyone who passed an examination to become a
government officer, a position which would bring wealth and honour to the whole
family. The Chinese Imperial examination system seems to have been started in
165 BC, when certain candidates for public office were called to the Chinese
capital for examination of their moral excellence by the emperor. Over the
following centuries the system grew until finally almost anyone who wished to
become an official had to prove his worth by passing written government
examinations. His achievement was the setting up of a school that produced
statesmen with a strong sense of patriotism and duty, known as Rujia (). During
the Warring States Period and the early Han Dynasty, China grew greatly and the
need arose for a solid and centralized cadre of government officers able to
read and write administrative papers. As a result, Confucianism was promoted by
the emperor and the men its doctrines produced became an effective counter to
the remaining feudal aristocrats who threatened the unity of the imperial
state. During the Han Dynasty, Confucianism developed from an ethical system
into a political ideology used to legitimize the rule of the political elites.
Most Chinese emperors used a mix of Legalism and Confucianism as their ruling
doctrine, often with the latter embellishing the former. The practice of using
the Confucian meritocracy to justify political actions continues in countries
in the Sinosphere, including post-economic liberalization People's Republic of
China, Chiang Kai-Shek's Republic of China, and modern Singapore. Influence in
17th-century Europe. The works of Confucius were translated into European
languages through the agency of Jesuit scholars stationed in China. Matteo
Ricci was among the very earliest to report on the thoughts of Confucius, and
father Prospero Intorcetta wrote about the life and works of Confucius in Latin
in 1687. Translations of Confucian texts influenced European thinkers of the
period, particularly among the Deists and other philosophical groups of the
Enlightenment who were interested by the integration of the system of morality
of Confucius into Western civilization. Confucianism influenced Gottfried
Leibniz, who was attracted to the philosophy because of its perceived
similarity to his own. It is postulated that certain elements of Leibniz's
philosophy, such as "simple substance" and "preestablished harmony", were
borrowed from his interactions with Confucianism. The French philosopher
Voltaire was also influenced by Confucius, seeing the concept of Confucian
rationalism as an alternative to Christian dogma. He praised Confucian ethics
and politics, portraying the sociopolitical hierarchy of China as a model for
Europe. Influence on Islamic thought. From the late 17th century onwards a
whole body of literature known as the Han Kitab developed amongst the Hui
Muslims of China who infused Islamic thought with Confucianism. Especially the
works of Liu Zhi such as "TiƒÅnfƒÅng Di«énl«ê"ÔºàÂ§©ÊñπÂÖ∏Á¶ÆÔºâ sought to
harmonize Islam with not only Confucianism but Daoism and is considered to be
one of the crowning achievements of the Chinese Muslim culture. Influence in
modern times. Important military and political figures in modern Chinese
history continued to be influenced by Confucianism, like the Muslim warlord Ma
Fuxiang. The New Life Movement relied heavily on Confucianism. Referred to
variously as the Confucian hypothesis and as a debated component of the more
all-encompassing Asian Development Model, there exists among political
scientists and economists a theory that Confucianism plays a large latent role
in the ostensibly non-Confucian cultures of modern-day East Asia, in the form
of the rigorous work ethic it endowed those cultures with. These scholars have
held that, if not for Confucianism's influence on these cultures, many of the
people of the East Asia region would not have been able to modernize and
industrialize as quickly as Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan,
South Korea, and even China have done. Most scholars attribute the origins of
this idea to futurologist Herman Kahn's . In years since, this hypothesis has
been thoroughly discredited. See Hicks' account of it referenced above for
details, or for an alternate and more current explanation, Cristobal Kay's "Why
East Asia Overtook Latin America: Agrarian Reform, Industrialization, and
Development." Criticism. For many years since the era of Confucius, various
critiques of Confucianism have arisen, including Laozi's philosophy and Mozi's
critique. Lu Xun also criticised Confucianism heavily for shaping Chinese
people into the condition they had reached by the late Qing Dynasty: his
criticisms are well portrayed in two of his works, A Madman's Diary and The
True Story of Ah Q. In modern times, waves of critique along with vilification
against Confucianism arose. The Taiping Rebellion, May Fourth Movement and
Cultural Revolution are some upsurges of those waves in China. Taiping rebels
described many sages in Confucianism as well as gods in Taoism and Buddhism as
mere legends. Marxists during the Cultural Revolution described Confucius as
the general representative of the class of slave owners. Numerous opinions and
interpretations of Confucianism (of which many are actually opposed by
Confucianism) were invented. In South Korea, there has been long criticism to
Confucianism. Many Koreans believe Confucianism has not contributed to the
modernization of Korea. For example, South Korean writer Kim-kyong-li wrote a
criticism named "Must Kill Confucius, This Nation will be Solved" (Í≥µÏûêÍ∞Ä
Ï£ΩÏñ¥Ïïº ÎÇòÎùºÍ∞Ä ÏÇ∞Îã§, "gongjaga jug-eoya nalaga sanda"). The writer said
that filial relationships are one-side and blind. He writes that if these
circumstance continue, social problems will continue to be caused by society
and the government forcing Confucian filial obligations onto families. Women in
Confucian thought. Confucianism "largely defined the mainstream discourse on
gender in China from the Han dynasty onward," and its strict, obligatory gender
roles as a cornerstone of family, and thus, societal stability, continue to
shape social life throughout East Asia. Confucians taught that a virtuous woman
was supposed to uphold 'three subordinations': be subordinate to her father
before marriage, to her husband after marriage, and to her son after her
husband died. Men could remarry and have concubines, whereas women were
supposed to uphold the virtue of chastity when they lost their husbands. Chaste
widows were revered as heroes during the Ming and Qing periods, and were deemed
so central to China‚Äôs culture and the fate of all peoples, the Yongle Emperor
distributed 10,000 copies of the "Biographies of Exemplary Women" ("Lien√º
Zhuan") to various non-Chinese countries for their moral instruction. The book
served as Confucianism's seminal textbook for Chinese women for two millennia,
but cementing the "cult of chastity" as an exemplar of Chinese superiority also
condemned many widows to lives of "poverty and loneliness." However, recent
reexaminations of Chinese gender roles suggest that many women flourished
within Confucianism. During the Han dynasty period, the important Confucian
text Lessons for Women (N√ºjie), was written by Ban Zhao (45-114 CE): by a
woman, for women. She wrote the "N√ºjie" ostensibly for her daughters,
instructing them on how to live proper Confucian lives as wives and mothers.
Although this is a relatively rare instance of a female Confucian voice, Ban
Zhao almost entirely accepts the prevailing views concerning women's proper
roles; they should be silent, hard-working, and compliant. She stresses the
complementarity and equal importance of the male and female roles according to
yin-yang theory, but she clearly accepts the dominance of the yang-male. Her
only departure from the standard male versions of this orthodoxy is that she
insists on the necessity of educating girls and women. We should not
underestimate the significance of this point, as education was the bottom line
qualification for being a junzi or "noble person,"...her example suggests that
the Confucian prescription for a meaningful life as a woman was apparently not
stifling for all women. Even some women of the literate elite, for whom
Confucianism was quite explicitly the norm, were able to flourish by living
their lives according to that model. In 2009, for the first time women (and
ethnic minorities and people living overseas) were officially recognized as
being descendants of Confucius. These additions more than tripled the number of
officially recognized descendants of Confucius. Debate over classification.
Ever since Europeans first encountered Confucianism, the issue of how
Confucianism should be classified has been subject to debate. In the 16th and
the 17th centuries, the earliest European arrivals in China, the Christian
Jesuits, considered Confucianism to be an ethical system, not a religion, and
one that was compatible with Christianity. The Jesuits, including Matteo Ricci,
saw Chinese rituals as "civil rituals" that could co-exist alongside the
spiritual rituals of Catholicism. By the early 18th century, this initial
portrayal was rejected by the Dominicans and Franciscans, creating a dispute
among Catholics in East Asia that was known as the "Rites Controversy". The
Dominicans and Franciscans argued that ancestral worship was a form of pagan
idolatry that was contradictory to the tenets of Christianity. This view was
reinforced by Pope Benedict XIV, who ordered a ban on Chinese rituals. This
debate continues into the modern era. There is consensus among scholars that,
whether or not it is religious, Confucianism is definitively non-theistic.
Confucianism is humanistic, and does not involve a belief in the supernatural
or in a personal god. On spirituality, Confucius said to Chi Lu, one of his
students, that "You are not yet able to serve men, how can you serve spirits?"
Attributes that are seen as religious‚Äîsuch as ancestor worship, ritual, and
sacrifice‚Äîwere advocated by Confucius as necessary for social harmony;
however, these attributes can be traced to the traditional non-Confucian
Chinese beliefs of Chinese folk religion, and are also practiced by Daoists and
Chinese Buddhists. Scholars recognize that classification ultimately depends on
how one defines religion. Using stricter definitions of religion, Confucianism
has been described as a moral science or philosophy. But using a broader
definition, such as Frederick Streng's characterization of religion as "a means
of ultimate transformation", Confucianism could be described as a
"sociopolitical doctrine having religious qualities." With the latter
definition, Confucianism is religious, even if non-theistic, in the sense that
it "performs some of the basic psycho-social functions of full-fledged
religions", in the same way that non-theistic ideologies like Communism do.
