Confirmation Confirmation is a rite of initiation in Christian churches
(although in the Church of England and similar denominations it can be simply
viewed as a restating of one's beliefs), normally carried out through anointing
and/or the laying on of hands and prayer for the purpose of bestowing the Gift
of the Holy Spirit. There is an analogous ceremony also called Confirmation in
the Jewish religion, which is not to be confused with Bar/Bat Mitzvah. The
early Jewish Reformers instituted a ceremony where young Jews who are older
than Bar/Bat Mitzvah age study both traditional and contemporary sources of
Jewish philosophy in order to learn what it means to be Jewish. The age
instituted was older than that of Bar Mitzvah because some of these topics were
considered too complex for thirteen-year-old minds to grasp. Nowadays,
Confirmation has gained widespread adherence among congregations affiliated
with the Reform movement, but has not gained as much traction in Conservative
and Orthodox Jewish groups. The way Confirmation differs from Bar Mitzvah is
that Confirmation is considered a more communal confirmation of one's being
Jewish, and Bar Mitzvah is more of a personal confirmation of joining that
covenant (see below section about Confirmation in Judaism). Within
Christianity, confirmation is seen as the sealing of the covenant made in Holy
Baptism. In some denominations, confirmation also bestows full membership in a
local congregation upon the recipient. In others, such as the Roman Catholic
Church, confirmation "renders the bond with the Church more perfect", because a
baptized person is already a full member. Roman Catholics, Eastern Orthodox,
Oriental Orthodox Churches, and many Anglicans view Confirmation as a
sacrament. In the East it is conferred immediately after baptism. In the West,
this practice is followed when adults are baptized, but in the case of infants
not in danger of death it is administered, ordinarily by a bishop, only when
the child reaches the age of reason or early adolescence. Among those Catholics
who practice teen-aged confirmation, the practice may be perceived,
secondarily, as a "coming of age" rite. In Protestant churches, the rite tends
to be seen rather as a mature statement of faith by an already baptised person.
It is also required by most Protestant denominations for membership in the
respective church, in particular for traditional Protestant churches. In
traditional Protestant churches (Presbyterian, Methodist, Lutheran etc.) it is
recognized by a coming of age ceremony. Confirmation is not practised in
Baptist, Anabaptist and other groups that teach believer's baptism. Scriptural
foundation. Now when the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had accepted
the word of God, they sent them Peter and John, who went down and prayed for
them, that they might receive the holy Spirit, for it had not yet fallen upon
any of them; they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Then
they laid hands on them and they received the holy Spirit. Also, in the Gospel
of John, Chapter 14, Christ speaks of the coming of the Holy Spirit on the
Apostles (). Later, after his Resurrection, Jesus breathed upon them and they
received the Holy Spirit (), a process completed on the day of Pentecost ().
After this point, the New Testament records the apostles bestowing the Holy
Spirit upon others through the laying on of hands. Roman Catholic view. In the
teaching of the Roman Catholic Church, Confirmation, known also as Chrismation,
is one of the seven sacraments instituted by Christ for the conferral of
sanctifying grace and the strengthening of the union between individual souls
and God. "According to the ancient practice maintained in the Roman liturgy, an
adult is not to be baptized unless he receives confirmation immediately
afterward, provided no serious obstacles exist." Administration of the two
sacraments, one immediately after the other, to adults is normally done by the
bishop of the diocese (generally at the Easter Vigil, since "the baptism of
adults, at least of those who have completed their fourteenth year, is to be
referred to the Bishop, so that he himself may confer it if he judges this
appropriate" But if the bishop does not confer the baptism, then it devolves on
the priest whose office it then is to confer both sacraments, since, "in
addition to the bishop, the law gives the faculty to confirm to the following
... priests who, in virtue of an office which they lawfully hold, baptize an
adult or a child old enough for catechesis or receive a validly baptized adult
into full communion with the Church ..." In Eastern Catholic Churches, the
usual minister of this sacrament is the parish priest, using olive oil
consecrated by a bishop (i.e., "chrism"), and administering the sacrament
immediately after baptism. This corresponds exactly to the practice of the
early Church, when at first those receiving baptism were mainly adults, and of
the non-Catholic Eastern Churches. "Catechism of the Catholic Church", 1292
Rite of Confirmation in the West. The main reason why the West separated the
sacrament of Confirmation from that of Baptism was to re-establish direct
contact between the person being initiated with the bishops. In the Early
Church, the bishop administered all three sacraments of initiation (Baptism,
Confirmation and Eucharist), assisted by the priests and deacons and, where
they existed, by deaconesses for women's Baptism. The post-baptismal
chrismation in particular was reserved to the Bishop. When adults no longer
formed the majority of those being baptised, this chrismation was delayed until
the bishop could confer it. Until the 12th century, priests often continued to
confer Confirmation before giving Communion to very young children. After the
Fourth Lateran Council, Communion, which continued to be given only after
Confirmation, was to be administered only on reaching the age of reason. Some
time after the 13th century, the age of Confirmation and Communion began to be
delayed further, from seven, to twelve and to fifteen. The 1917 Code of Canon
Law, while recommending that Confirmation be delayed until about seven years of
age, allowed it be given at an earlier age. Only on 30 June 1932 was official
permission given to change the traditional order of the three sacraments of
Christian initiation: the Sacred Congregation for the Sacraments then allowed,
where necessary, that Confirmation be administered "after" first Holy
Communion. This novelty, originally seen as exceptional, became more and more
the accepted practice. Thus, in the mid-twentieth century, Confirmation began
to be seen as an occasion for professing personal commitment to the faith on
the part of someone approaching adulthood. However, the Catechism of the
Catholic Church, 1308 warns: "Although Confirmation is sometimes called the
'sacrament of Christian maturity,' we must not confuse adult faith with the
adult age of natural growth, nor forget that the baptismal grace is a grace of
free, unmerited election and does not need 'ratification' to become effective."
On the canonical age for confirmation in the Latin or Western Catholic Church,
the present (1983) Code of Canon Law, which maintains unaltered the rule in the
1917 Code, lays down that the sacrament is to be conferred on the faithful at
about the age of discretion (generally taken to be about 7), unless the
Episcopal Conference has decided on a different age, or there is a danger of
death or, in the judgement of the minister, a grave reason suggests otherwise
(canon 891 of the Code of Canon Law). The Code prescribes the age of discretion
also for the sacraments of Penance and first Holy Communion. In some places the
setting of a later age, e.g. mid-teens in the United States, early teens in
Ireland and Britain, has been abandoned in recent decades in favour of
restoring the traditional order of the three sacraments of Christian
initiation, although in some countries, such as the United States, the general
tendency has been in the opposite direction. Even where a later age has been
set, a bishop may not refuse to confer the sacrament on younger children who
request it, provided they are baptized, have the use of reason, are suitably
instructed and are properly disposed and able to renew the baptismal promises
(letter of the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the
Sacraments published in its 1999 bulletin, pages 537â€“540). Effects of
confirmation. The Roman Catholic Church and some Anglo-Catholics teach that,
like baptism, confirmation marks the recipient permanently, making it
impossible to receive the sacrament twice. It accepts as valid a confirmation
conferred within churches, such as the Eastern Orthodox Church, whose Holy
Orders it sees as valid through the apostolic succession of their bishops. But
it considers it necessary to administer the sacrament of confirmation, in its
view for the only time, to Protestants who are admitted to full communion with
the Catholic Church. One of the effects of the sacrament is that "it gives us a
special strength of the Holy Spirit to spread and defend the faith by word and
action as true witnesses of Christ, to confess the name of Christ boldly, and
never to be ashamed of the Cross" ("Catechism of the Catholic Church", 1303).
This effect has been described as making the confirmed person "a soldier of
Christ". The same passage of the "Catechism of the Catholic Church" also
mentions, as an effect of confirmation, that "it renders our bond with the
Church more perfect". This mention stresses the importance of participation in
the Christian community. The "soldier of Christ" imagery was used, as far back
as 350, by St Cyril of Jerusalem. In this connection, the touch on the cheek
that the bishop gave while saying "Pax tecum" (Peace be with you) to the person
he had just confirmed was interpreted in the Roman Pontifical as a slap, a
reminder to be brave in spreading and defending the faith: "Deinde leviter eum
in maxilla caedit, dicens: Pax tecum" (Then he strikes him lightly on the
cheek, saying: Peace be with you). When, in application of the Second Vatican
Council's Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy, the confirmation rite was revised
in 1971, mention of this gesture was omitted. However, the French and Italian
translations, indicating that the bishop should accompany the words "Peace be
with you" with "a friendly gesture" (French text) or "the sign of peace"
(Italian text), explicitly allow a gesture such as the touch on the cheek, to
which they restore its original meaning. This is in accord with the
Introduction to the Rite of Confirmation, 17, which indicates that the
episcopal conference may decide "to introduce a different manner for the
minister to give the sign of peace after the anointing, either to each
individual or to all the newly confirmed together." Confirmation name. In many
English-speaking and other countries, it is customary for a person being
confirmed in the Roman Catholic Church (and some Anglican dioceses) to adopt a
new name, generally the name of a saint, thus securing an additional patron
saint as protector and guide. This practice is unknown in many other countries
(including the Spanish- and French-speaking lands, and in Italy), and is not
mentioned in the official liturgical book of the Rite of Confirmation. Although
some insist on the custom, it is discouraged by others and in any case is only
a secondary aspect of confirmation. As indicated by the different senses of the
word "christening", baptism and the giving of a personal name have
traditionally been linked. At confirmation, in which the intervention of a
godparent strengthens a resemblance with baptism, it became customary to take a
new name, as was also the custom on other occasions, in particular that of
religious profession. King Henry III of France (1551â€“1589) was christened
Edouard Alexandre in 1551, but at confirmation received the name Henri, by
which he afterwards reigned. Today usually no great use is made of the
confirmation name, although some treat it as a new middle name. However, even
after the English Reformation, the legal system of that country admitted the
lawfulness of using one's confirmation name in, for instance, purchasing land.
Orthodox views. The Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox and Eastern Catholic
churches refer to this sacrament (or, more properly, Sacred Mystery) as
Chrismation, a term which Roman Catholics also use; for instance, in Italian
the term is "cresima". Eastern Christians link Chrismation closely with the
Sacred Mystery of Baptism, conferring it immediately after baptism, which is
normally on infants. The Sacred Tradition of the Orthodox Church teaches that
the Apostles themselves established the practice of anointing with chrism in
place of the laying on of hands when bestowing the sacrament. As the numbers of
converts grew, it became physically impossible for the apostles to lay hands
upon each of the newly baptized. So the Apostles laid hands upon a vessel of
oil, bestowing the Holy Spirit upon it, which was then distributed to all of
the presbyters (priests) for their use when they baptized. This same chrism is
in use to this day, never being completely depleted but newly consecrated
chrism only being added to it as needed (this consecration traditionally is
performed only by the primates of certain autocephalous churches on Great
Thursday) and it is believed that chrism in use today contains some small
amount of the original chrism made by the apostles. When Roman Catholics (and
some Protestants) convert to Orthodoxy, they are often admitted by Chrismation,
without baptism; but, since this is a matter of local episcopal discretion, a
bishop may require all converts to be admitted by baptism if he deems it
necessary. Depending upon the form of the original baptism, some Protestants
must be baptized upon conversion to Orthodoxy. A common practice is that those
persons who have been previously baptized by triple immersion in the name of
the Trinity do not need to be baptized. However, requirements will differ from
jurisdiction to jurisdiction and some traditional Orthodox jurisdictions prefer
to baptize all converts. When a person is received into the church, whether by
Baptism or Chrismation, they will often take the name of a saint, who will
become their patron saint. Thenceforward, the feast day of that saint will be
celebrated as the convert's name day, which in traditional Orthodox cultures is
celebrated in lieu of one's birthday. The Orthodox rite of Chrismation takes
place immediately after baptism and clothing the "newly illumined" (i.e., newly
baptized) in their baptismal robe. The priest makes the sign of the cross with
the chrism (also referred to as Myrrh) on the brow, eyes, nostrils, lips, both
ears, breast, hands and feet of the newly illumined, saying with each
anointing: "The seal of the gift of the Holy Spirit. Amen." Then the priest
will place his epitrachelion (stole) over the newly illumined and leads them
and their sponsors in a procession, circling three times around the Gospel
Book, while the choir chants each time: "As many as have been baptized into
Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia" (). The reason the Eastern Churches
perform Chrismation immediately after Baptism is so that the newly baptized may
receive Holy Communion, which is commonly given to infants as well as adults.
An individual may be baptized "in extremis" (in a life-threatening emergency)
by any baptized member of the church; however, only a priest or bishop may
perform the Mystery of Chrismation. If someone who has been baptized "in
extremis" survives, the priest then performs the Chrismation. The Roman
Catholic Church does not confirm converts to Catholicism who have been
Chrismated in an Eastern church, considering that the sacrament has been
validly conferred and may not be repeated. In the Eastern Orthodox Church the
sacrament may be conferred more than once and it is customary to receive
apostates by repeating Chrismation. Anglican view. The 16th Century Thirty-Nine
Articles list confirmation among those rites "commonly called Sacraments" which
are "not to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel" (a term meaning Baptism
and the Holy Eucharist), as they were not directly instituted by Christ with a
specific matter and form, and they are not generally necessary to salvation.
The language of the Articles has led some to deny that confirmation and the
other rites are sacraments at all; however, "commonly called Sacraments" does
not mean "wrongly called Sacraments". Today, many Anglicans, especially Anglo-
Catholics, count it as one of seven sacraments. This is the official view in
several Anglican Provinces. Anglicans are unique in Christianity in that only
bishops may administer confirmation, unlike the Roman Catholic Church where, in
the Latin Rite, confirmation conferred by a priest is valid "if he has the
faculty to do so, either from the general law or by way of a special grant from
the competent authority", and, in the Eastern Rites, confirmation is usually
administered by a priest immediately after baptism, as is the practice also of
the Eastern Orthodox Church. The renewal of the baptismal vows, which is part
of the Anglican confirmation service, is in no way necessary to confirmation
and can be done more than once. The unfortunate phrase 'ratify and confirm'
applied to the vows since 1552 (but altered in the 1928 revision to 'ratify and
confess') has led to the common error that confirmation is merely the renewal
of baptismal vows. (If it were, there would be no need for the presence of a
bishop.) When confirmation is given early, candidates may be asked to make a
fresh renewal of vows when they approach adult life at about eighteen."
Anglican doctrine thus differs from Lutheran. In Anglicanism, the patron saint
of Confirmation is St. Uriel the Archangel. Protestant views. Some Protestant
churches call confirmation a rite, not a sacrament, and see it as merely
symbolic, not an effective means of conferring divine grace. Protestant groups
in which baptism in the early teens is the norm often have no confirmation. The
Roman Catholic Church confirms converts from Protestantism, not recognizing
their Protestant confirmations as sacramentally valid. Lutheran view. Lutheran
confirmation is a public profession of faith prepared for by long and careful
instruction. In English, it is called "affirmation of baptism", and is a mature
and public profession of the faith which "marks the completion of the
congregation's program of confirmation ministry". The German language also uses
for Lutheran confirmation a different word ("Konfirmation") from the word used
for the sacramental rite of the Catholic Church ("Firmung"). Lutheran churches
do not treat confirmation as a dominical sacrament of the Gospel, considering
that only Baptism and the Eucharist can be regarded as such. Some popular
Sundays for this to occur are Palm Sunday, Pentecost and Reformation Sunday
(last Sunday in October). Methodist view. In the United Methodist Church,
confirmation is a rite in which individuals baptized in infancy later recognize
the work of God's grace and embrace discipleship. It is the individual's first
public affirmation of the grace of God in baptism and the acknowledgment of the
acceptance of that grace by faith. It often occurs when youth enter their
junior high school years, but it may occur during the early high school years.
Candidates to be confirmed take a class which covers Christian doctrine,
theology, Methodist Church history, stewardship, basic Bible study and other
topics. Those who are baptized as adults rather than as infants do not go
through a separate confirmation ritual, since they acknowledge their faith and
commitment during baptism. Latter Day Saint view. In the Latter Day Saint
movement, confirmation is an ordinance that takes place soon after baptism. It
has two purposes: (1) to confirm the participant as a member of the church, and
(2) to give the participant the Gift of the Holy Ghost, which provides the
recipient with spiritual gifts. It consists of a member of the priesthood
laying hands on the participant's head and blessing the new member, and telling
them to "receive the Holy Ghost". Secular confirmations. Several secular,
mainly Humanist, organizations direct civil confirmations for older children,
as a statement of their life stance that is an alternative to traditional
religious ceremonies for children of that age. Some secular regimes have as a
matter of policy fostered the replacement of Christian rituals such as
confirmation with non-religious ones. In the historically Protestant German
Democratic Republic (East Germany), for example, "the "Jugendweihe" (youth
dedication) gradually supplanted the Christian practice of Confirmation." A
concept that first appeared in 1852, the Jugendweihe is described as "a solemn
initiation marking the transition from youth to adulthood that was developed in
opposition to Protestant and Catholic Churches' Confirmation." Repetition of
the sacrament. The Roman Catholic Church sees confirmation as one of the three
sacraments that no one can receive more than once (see sacramental character).
It recognizes as already confirmed those who enter the Catholic Church after
receiving the sacrament, even as babies, in the churches of Eastern
Christianity, but it confers the sacrament (in its view, for the first and only
time) on those who enter the Catholic Church after being confirmed in
Protestant or Anglican churches, seeing these churches as lacking properly
ordained ministers. In the Anglican Communion, a person who was previously
confirmed by a validly ordained bishop in another denomination is "received"
rather than confirmed again. However, the Episcopal Church USA recognizes non-
episcopal confirmations as well. Eastern Orthodox Churches occasionally
practise what is seen by other Christians as "re-chrismation", in that they
usually chrismate/confirm â€” and sometimes rebaptize â€” a convert, even one
previously confirmed in other Churches. The justification is that the new
chrismation (or baptism) is the only valid one, the earlier one being
administered outside of the Church and hence being little more than a symbol.
The Eastern Orthodox will also chrismate an apostate from the Orthodox Church
who repents and re-enters communion. According to some interpretations, the
Eastern Churches therefore view confirmation/chrismation as a repeatable
sacrament. According to others, the rite is understood as "part of a process of
reconciliation, rather than as a reiteration of post-baptismal chrismation".
Confirmation in Judaism. All mainstream denominations of Judaism have a
ceremony known as Bar Mitzvah (Bat Mitzvah), which occurs when Jewish children
reach 13 years (boys), 12â€“13 years (girls); at this time they become
responsible for their observance of Judaism's religious obligations. Prior to
this, the child's parents hold the responsibility for the child's adherence to
Jewish law and tradition. After this age, children bear their own
responsibility for Jewish ritual law, tradition, and ethics and are privileged
to participate in all areas of Jewish community life. In the late 1800s Reform
Judaism developed a separate ceremony, confirmation, loosely modeled on
Christian confirmation ceremonies. This occurred because, at the time, Reform
Jews believed that it was inappropriate for Bar/bat mitzvah age children to be
considered mature enough to understand what it means to be religious. It was
held that children of this age were not responsible enough to understand what
it means to observe religious practices. As such, the reform rite of
"confirmation" was originally a replacement for the Bar/Bat mitzvah ceremomy,
held at age 16. In later decades, the Reform movement modified this view, and
now much of Reform Judaism in the USA encourages chidren to celebrate becoming
Bar/Bat mitsvah at the traditional age, and then has the confirmation at the
later age as a sign of a more advanced completion of their Jewish studies.
Today, many Reform Jewish congregations hold Confirmation ceremonies as a way
of marking the biblical festival of "Shavuot" and the decision of young adults
to embrace Jewish study in their lives and reaffirm their commitment to the
Covenant. The confirmands represent "the first fruits of each year's harvest.
They represent the hope and promise of tomorrow." Confirmation is typically
held in tenth grade after a year of study, but some synagogues celebrate it in
other years of high school. "Confirmation" in the context of Reform Judaism is
mentioned officially for the first time in an ordinance issued by the Jewish
consistory of the kingdom of Westphalia at Cassel in 1810. There it was made
the duty of the rabbi "to prepare the young for confirmation, and personally to
conduct the ceremony." At first only boys were confirmed, on the Shabbat
("Sabbath") that they celebrated becoming Bar Mitzvah; the ceremony was
performed at the home or in the schoolroom. In Berlin, Jewish girls were
confirmed for the first time in 1817, in Hamburg in 1818. Confirmation was at
first excluded from the synagogue, because, like every innovation, it met with
stern opposition from more traditional rabbis. Gradually, however, it found
more favor; Hebrew school classes were confirmed together, and confirmation
gradually became a solemn and celebration at the synagogue. In 1822 the first
class of boys and girls was confirmed at the Hamburg Temple, and in 1831 Rabbi
Samuel Egers, a prominent traditional rabbi of his time, began to confirm boys
and girls at the synagogue of Brunswick. While in the beginning some Shabbat,
frequently during Chanukah or Passover, was selected for confirmation, it
became increasingly customary, following the example of Egers, to perform the
ceremony during the biblical festival of Shavuot ("Feast of Weeks"). It was
felt that Shavuot was well suited for the rite, as it celebrated the occasion
when the Israelites on Mount Sinai declared their intention to accept the yoke
of God's Law, so those of every new generation should follow the ancient
example and declare their willingness to be faithful to the Sinaitic covenant
transmitted by their ancestors. Confirmation was introduced in Denmark as early
as 1817, in Hamburg 1818, and in Hessen and Saxony in 1835. The Prussian
government, which showed itself hostile to the Reform movement, prohibited it
as late as 1836, as did Bavaria as late as 1838. It soon made its way, however,
into all progressive congregations of Germany. In 1841 it was introduced in
France, first in Bordeaux and Marseilles, then in Strasburg and Paris, under
the name "initiation religieuse." The first Israelitish synod in 1869 at
Leipsic adopted a report by Dr. Herxheimer on religious education, the
thirteenth section of which contains an elaborate opinion on confirmation,
recommending the same to all Jewish congregations. In America the annual
confirmation of boys and girls was first resolved upon by the congregation of
Temple Emanu-El of New York in 1847. The ceremony soon gained so firm a
foothold in America that soon there was no progressive Jewish congregation in
which it did not occur during Shavuot. Orthodox Judaism criticized the Reform
movement for introducing confirmation, as the ceremony had no roots in rabbinic
Judaism. When Conservative Judaism began to develop as a distinct movement, it
too generally rejected confirmation as either unnecessary, or as a non-Jewish
innovation. Today, nearly all Reform communities have returned to individual
Bar Mitzvah at 13 and 12 or 13 for the Bat Mitzvah ceremonies, but the communal
confirmation ceremony is still popular.
