Sam Harris (author) Sam Harris (born 1967) is an American author, philosopher,
public intellectual, and neuroscientist, as well as the co-founder and CEO of
Project Reason. He is the author of "The End of Faith", which was published in
2004 and appeared on "The New York Times" best seller list for 33 weeks. The
book also won the PEN/Martha Albrand Award for First Nonfiction in 2005. In
2006 Harris published his book "Letter to a Christian Nation", a response to
criticism of "The End of Faith". This work was followed by "The Moral
Landscape" published in 2010, his long-form essay "Lying" in 2011 and the short
book "Free Will" in 2012. Harris is a well-known contemporary critic of
religion and proponent of scientific skepticism and the "New Atheism". He is
also an advocate for the separation of church and state, freedom of religion,
and the liberty to criticize religion. Harris has written numerous articles for
"The Huffington Post", "Los Angeles Times", "The Washington Post", "The New
York Times", "Newsweek", and the journal "Nature". His articles touch upon a
diversity of topics, including religion, morality, neuroscience, free will, and
terrorism. In his 2010 book "The Moral Landscape", he argues that science can
help answer moral problems, and can aid the facilitation of human well-being.
He regularly gives talks around the United States and Great Britain, which
include speeches at the University of Oxford, Cambridge, Harvard, Caltech,
Berkeley, Stanford University, Tufts University, as well as TED, where he
outlined the arguments made in his book "The Moral Landscape". Harris has also
made numerous television appearances, including interviews for "Nightline",
"Real Time with Bill Maher", "The O'Reilly Factor", "The Daily Show", "The
Colbert Report", "The Last Word", among others. He also appeared in the 2005
film "The God Who Wasn't There". Early life and education. Harris grew up in a
secular home in Los Angeles with a Jewish mother and Quaker father who rarely
discussed religion, although it was always a subject which had interested him.
Harris has at times been reluctant to discuss personal details such as where he
lives, where he grew up, or what his parents do professionally, citing security
concerns. In 1986, as a young student at Stanford University, Harris
experimented with the drug ecstasy, and has spoken about the powerful insights
he felt psychologically. Harris found himself interested in spiritual and
philosophical questions when he was at Stanford University and the notion that
he might be able to achieve spiritual insights without the help of drugs. After
leaving Stanford in the course of his sophomore year as an English major, he
traveled to Asia, where he studied meditation with Hindu and Buddhist teachers.
Eleven years later, in 1997, he returned to Stanford University, going on to
complete a BA degree in philosophy in 2000. Harris began writing his first
book, "The End of Faith", immediately after the September 11 attacks. In 2009,
Harris earned a PhD degree in cognitive neuroscience at University of
California, Los Angeles, using functional magnetic resonance imaging to conduct
research into the neural basis of belief, disbelief, and uncertainty. Harris
married his wife Annaka Harris in 2004. Annaka is Co-Founder of Project Reason
and an editor of nonfiction and scientific books. Worldview. Harris's basic
message is that the time has come to freely question the idea of religious
faith.p.Â 13â€“15 Harris specifically attacks Islam, Christianity, and Judaism,
characterizing them as much more dangerous than other religions, such as
Jainism. He feels that the survival of civilization is in danger because of a
taboo against questioning religious beliefs, and that this taboo impedes
progress toward more enlightened approaches to spirituality and ethics.
Although an atheist, Harris avoids using the term, arguing that the label is
both unnecessary and a liability. His position is that "atheism" is not in
itself a worldview or a philosophy. He believes atheists "should not call
ourselves anything. We should go under the radarâ€”for the rest of our lives.
And while there, we should be decent, honest people, who destroy bad ideas
wherever we find them". Harris argues that religion is especially rife with bad
ideas, calling it "one of the most perverse misuses of intelligence we have
ever devised." He compares modern religious beliefs to the myths of the Ancient
Greeks, which were once accepted as fact but which are obsolete today. In a
January 2007 interview with PBS, Harris said, "We don't have a word for not
believing in Zeus, which is to say we are all atheists in respect to Zeus. And
we don't have a word for not being an astrologer". He goes on to say that the
term will be retired only when "we all just achieve a level of intellectual
honesty where we are no longer going to pretend to be certain about things we
are not certain about". He also rejects the claim that the Bible was inspired
by an omniscient god. He insists that if that were the case, the book could
"make specific, falsifiable predictions about human events". Instead, he notes,
the Bible "does not contain a single sentence that could not have been written
by a man or woman living in the first century". In "The End of Faith", Harris
suggests that all beliefs, except those emanating from religious dogma, are
based on evidence and experience. He maintains that religion allows views that
would otherwise be a sign of "madness" to become accepted or, in some cases,
revered as "holy", citing as an example the doctrine of transubstantiation.
Harris contends that if a lone individual developed this belief, he or she
would be considered "mad", and that it is "merely an accident of history that
it is considered normal in our society to believe that the Creator of the
universe can hear your thoughts while it is demonstrative of mental illness to
believe that he is communicating with you by having the rain tap in Morse code
on your bedroom window".p.Â 72. Religion as failed science. Harris postulates
that religion is essentially a failed science. He states that "religion was the
discourse we had when all causes in the universe were opaque" such that
religion developed as a consequence of humans' "cognitive imperative" to seek
explanations coupled with an earlier obliviousness to the natural order of the
environment. As a cognitive and behavioral imperative, we form descriptions of
the world and we try to figure out what's going on. We tell ourselves stories
about our origins, about where we are going and about causes in the world.
Given our pervasive ignorance and our disposition to see agency in the world,
these stories entail relationships with invisible friends and enemies. Harris
believes that religion is "losing the argument" with science, given the
escalating popularity of science within the past hundred years on almost all
fronts. As an example he states that, given our knowledge of epilepsy, most
parents today do not send their epileptic children to exorcists. Harris also
predicts that science will one day truly be capable of understanding
spirituality and feelings of otherworldliness commonly associated with
religion. Conversational intolerance. Harris suggests that he advocates a
benign, noncoercive, corrective form of intolerance, distinguishing it from
historic religious persecution. He promotes a conversational intolerance, in
which personal convictions are scaled against evidence, and where intellectual
honesty is demanded equally in religious views and non-religious views. He
suggests that, just as a person declaring a belief that Elvis is still alive
would immediately make his every statement suspect in the eyes of those he was
conversing with, asserting a similarly non-evidentiary point on a religious
doctrine ought to be met with similar disrespect. He also believes there is a
need to counter inhibitions that prevent the open critique of religious ideas,
beliefs, and practices under the auspices of "tolerance". Harris maintains that
such conversation and investigation are essential to progress in every other
field of knowledge. As one example, he suggests that few would require
"respect" for radically differing views on physics or history; instead, he
notes, societies expect and demand logical reasons and valid evidence for such
claims, while those who fail to provide valid support are quickly marginalized
on those topics. Thus, Harris suggests that the routine deference accorded to
religious ideologies constitutes a double standard, which, following the events
of September 11, 2001 attacks, has become too great a risk. In the 2007 PBS
interview, Harris said, The usefulness of religion, the fact that it gives life
meaning, that it makes people feel good is not an argument for the truth of any
religious doctrine. It's not an argument that it's reasonable to believe that
Jesus really was born of a virgin or that the Bible is the perfect word of the
creator of the universe. You can only believe those things or you should only
be able to believe those things if you think there are good reasons to believe
those things. Religious America. Harris focuses much of his critique on the
state of contemporary religious affairs in the United States. Harris worries
that many areas of American culture are harmed by beliefs that are driven by
religious dogma. For instance, he cites polls showing that 44% of Americans
believe it is either "certain" or "probable" that Jesus will return to Earth
within the next fifty years, and suggests that the same percentage believe that
creationism should be taught in public schools and that God has literally
promised the land of Israel to the modern-day Jews. Harris often travels with
bodyguards because he receives death threats from both Muslims and Christians.
When then-President George W. Bush publicly invoked God in speeches regarding
either domestic or foreign affairs, Harris questioned how people might react if
the President were to mention Zeus or Apollo in a similar vein. Islam and
Muslims. While Harris is "extremely critical of all religious faiths", he
asserts that the doctrines of Islam are uniquely dangerous to civilization,
stating that unlike Jainism, Islam "is not even remotely a religion of peace".
Harris denounced New York mayor Bloomberg's and President Obama's support of
allowing the Park51 Islamic center to be built. In an opinion piece to "The
Washington Post", Harris claims that allowing the Islamic center to be built
would be seen as liberal "cowardice", arguing that "Islam simply is different
from other faiths" and should be changed "for the better". In the same piece,
Harris states that there is no legal basis for stopping the community center
from being built, nor should there be one. Harris criticizes the general
response in the West to terrorist atrocities such as the 9/11 attacks: to
Harris the "war on 'terrorism is meaningless.p.Â 31, p.Â 28. Harris said in
2004: "It is time we admitted that we are not at war with terrorism. We are at
war with Islam." Suggesting that the Qur'an and the "hadith" incite Muslims to
kill or subjugate infidels, and reward such actions with paradise (including 72
virgins), Harris believes Islam is a religion of violence and political
subjugation. He asserts that the liberal argument of stating that the
phenomenon of religious extremism is a consequence of fundamentalism in and of
itself is false, and that many other religions such as Jainism have not
experienced the same trends Islam and Christianity have. Harris considers
martyrdom as taking the "sting out of death" and a source of peril. He rejects
arguments that suggest such behavior is a result of extremist Muslims, not
mainstream ones. He argues that the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons
controversy erupted not because the cartoons were derogatory but because "most
Muslims believe that it is a sacrilege to depict Muhammad at all". Harris
maintains that the West is at war with "precisely the vision of life that is
prescribed to all Muslims in the Koran, and further elaborated in the
literature of the hadith".pp.Â 109â€“110. Harris acknowledges that religions
other than Islam can inspire, and have inspired, atrocities. In "The End of
Faith", he discusses examples such as the Inquisition and witch hunts. However,
Harris believes that Islam is the most evil. Harris argues there is no such
thing as Islamophobia, but criticizes "prejudice against Muslims or Arabs,
purely because of the accident of their birth". Harris has called upon Muslim
communities to criticize their faith, and assist Western governments in
incarcerating any religious extremists among them. He demands that Muslims
"must tolerate, advocate, and even practice ethnic profiling" in the fight
against terrorism.  Judaism. Harris was raised by a secular Jewish mother and a
Quaker father, but has publicly stated that his upbringing was entirely
secular. Writer and friend Christopher Hitchens once referred to Harris as a
"Jewish warrior against theocracy and bigotry of all stripes", though it
remains unclear whether Harris approves of such a comment. In "The End of
Faith", Harris criticizes the Jewish faith and its followers: The gravity of
Jewish suffering over the ages, culminating in the Holocaust, makes it almost
impossible to entertain any suggestion that Jews might have brought their
troubles upon themselves. This is, however, in a rather narrow sense, the
truth. [...] the ideology of Judaism remains a lightning rod for intolerance to
this day. [...] Jews, insofar as they are religious, believe that they are
bearers of a unique covenant with God. As a consequence, they have spent the
last two thousand years collaborating with those who see them as different by
seeing themselves as irretrievably so. Judaism is as intrinsically divisive, as
ridiculous in its literalism, and as at odds with the civilizing insights of
modernity as any other religion. Jewish settlers, by exercising their "freedom
of belief" on contested land, are now one of the principal obstacles to peace
in the Middle East. Miracles. The truth is even if we had multiple
contemporaneous eye witness accounts of the miracles of Jesus, this still would
not provide sufficient basis to believe that these events actually occurred, or
why not? Well the problem is that first hand reports of miracles are quite
common, even in the 21st century. Harris also stated that he has "met literally
hundreds at this point, Western educated men and women who think that their
favorite Hindu or Buddhist guru has magic powers". Moderation. Golson, Blair.
"Sam Harris: the Truthdig Interview", "Truthdig", April 3, 2006. Furthermore,
Harris believes that it is absurd to continue to expect equal respect for all
conflicting religious beliefs, as the claim to absolute truth is inherent in
nearly all belief systems at some level. Any religion that claims that all
other belief systems are false and heretical cannot foster genuine acceptance
or tolerance of religious diversity. Harris concludes that religious moderation
stands on weak intellectual ground, as well as a poor understanding of
theological issues. Harris also says that moderation is bad theology because
the extremists are, in a sense, right: he thinks that, if one reads the texts
literally, God wants to put homosexuals to death or destroy infidels. Harris
claims that religious moderates appear to be blinded to the reality of what
fundamentalists truly believe. Moderates tend to argue that suicide attacks can
be attributed to a range of social, political, and economic factors. Harris
counters by noting that many suicide bombers come not from poverty but from
mainstream Muslim society. He points to the fact that the 9/11 hijackers were
"college-educated" and "middle-class" and suffered "no discernible experience
of political oppression". Harris thus asserts that religion is a significant
cause of terrorism. How many more architects and mechanical engineers must hit
the wall at 400 miles an hour before we admit to ourselves that jihadist
violence is not merely a matter of education, poverty, or politics? The truth,
astonishingly enough, is that in the year 2006 a person can have sufficient
intellectual and material resources to build a nuclear bomb and still believe
that he will get 72 virgins in Paradise. Western secularists, liberals, and
moderates have been very slow to understand this. The cause of their confusion
is simple: They don't know what it is like to "really" believe in God. Harris
discounts the idea that Jesus' teachings, and the New Testament in general,
serve to moderate the more extreme laws set forth in the Old Testament. He
points out that the Old Testament prescribes death as the punishment
forâ€”among other thingsâ€”breaking any of the Ten Commandments, including
heresy against Yahweh and the act of adultery. He asserts that Jesus and his
followers never repudiated such teachings in the New Testament. In "Letter to a
Christian Nation", Harris cites several quotations in the New Testament
attributed to Jesus himself that clearly do uphold adherence to the Old
Testament prophets. Speaking at the New York Society for Ethical Culture in
2005, Harris said, "I've got news for youâ€”I've read the books. God is not a
moderate... There's no place in the books where God says, 'You know, when you
get to the New World and you develop your three branches of government and you
have a civil society, you can just jettison all the barbarism I recommended in
the first books. Morality and ethics. In regard to morality, Harris considers
the time long overdue to reclaim the concept for rational secular humanism.
Harris describes the supposed link between religious faith and morality as a
myth, unsupported by statistical evidence. He notes, for instance, that the
highly secular Scandinavian countries are among the most generous in helping
the developing world. Harris goes further and posits that, far from being the
source of our moral intuition, religion can yield highly problematic ethical
positions. He cites several examples, including the Catholic prohibition
against condom use aggravating the global AIDS epidemic, the attempts made by
the American religious lobby to impede funding for embryonic stem-cell
research, and the punitive nature of the American "war on drugs". He sees in
these examples the tendency of religion to decouple moral judgments from focus
on real human suffering. Harris also sees the influence of religion in most of
America's "vice" laws. He writes that most of the laws outlawing pornography,
sodomy, and prostitution are actually intended to combat "sin" rather than
"crime".(p 158) Harris suggests that morality and ethics can be studied, and
improved, without "presupposing anything on insufficient evidence". He states
that humans "decide what is good in the Good Books", rather than deriving our
moral code from scriptures. He praises the Golden Rule as one moral teaching
that is "great, wise and compassionate". He contrasts this with biblical edicts
directing that acts such as premarital sex, disobedience of one's parents, and
the worship of "other gods" should be punished by death. Harris states that we
have evolved in our thinking such that we understand that the Golden Rule is
worth following while some commandments in other sections of the Bible are not.
He also points out that even the Golden Rule is not unique to any one religion
and was taught by such figures as Confucius and the Buddha centuries before the
New Testament was written. More controversially, Harris has put forward an
argument questioning the relative morality of collateral damage and judicial
torture during war. He reasons that, if we accept collateral damage when bombs
are used in warfare, we have no reason to reject the use of torture. Indeed,
Harris argues that the former, involving the killing of innocent civilians,
should be much more troubling to us than the torture of, for instance, a
terrorist suspect. He claims that it is merely a function of our biological
intuitions that suffering appears disproportionately unimportant when enacted
impersonally. Harris notes that the deaths of civilians in Iraq and Afghanistan
were both foreseeable and inevitable consequences of bombing the countries.
However, the civilian casualties were seen as unfortunate but not so
unacceptable as to prevent the attacks. Any suffering caused by the torture of
people such as Al Qaeda leader Khalid Sheikh Mohammed or Osama bin Laden,
Harris argues, should pale in comparison to the deaths and injuries of
comparatively innocent citizens. In a response to the controversy caused by
this argument, Harris stated, "you think it is ever justifiable to drop bombs
in an attempt to kill a man like Osama bin Laden (and thereby risk killing and
maiming innocent men, women, and children), you should think it may sometimes
be justifiable to 'water-board' a man like Osama bin Laden." Ultimately, Harris
maintains that torture should remain illegal, and that comparing torture with
collateral damage does not cause him to see torture as "acceptable". However,
he believes that discussion is needed on the coherence of our beliefs regarding
the two. Spirituality. Harris wishes to incorporate spirituality in the domain
of human reason. He draws inspiration from the practices of Eastern religion,
in particular that of meditation, as described principally by Hindu and
Buddhist practitioners. By paying close attention to moment-to-moment conscious
experience, Harris suggests, it is possible to make our sense of "self" vanish
and thereby uncover a new state of personal well-being. Moreover, Harris argues
that such states of mind should be subjected to formal scientific
investigation, without incorporating the myth and superstition that often
accompanies meditation in the religious context. "There is clearly no greater
obstacle to a truly empirical approach to spiritual experience than our current
beliefs about God", he writes.p.Â 214. Despite his anti-religious sentiments,
Sam Harris also claims that there is "nothing irrational about seeking the
states of mind that lie at the core of many religions. Compassion, awe,
devotion and feelings of oneness are surely among the most valuable experiences
a person can have." Support for Geert Wilders. Harris has voiced support for
Dutch politician Geert Wilders, stating that Wilders has become the latest
projectile in "the zero-sum conflict between civil society and traditional
Islam". Organizational affiliations. In 2007 Sam and Annaka Harris founded
Project Reason, a charitable foundation devoted to spreading scientific
knowledge and secular values in society. He is also a member of the advisory
board of the Secular Coalition for America, a national lobbying organization
representing the interests of nontheistic Americans. "The Moral Landscape". In
his third book, "The Moral Landscape: How Science Can Determine Human Values",
Harris argues that "Human well-being is not a random phenomenon. It depends on
many factorsâ€”ranging from genetics and neurobiology to sociology and
economics." He contends that humanity has reached a point in time when, due to
scientific flourishing and inquiry, many sciences can "have an impact on the
well-being of others". Harris argues that it is time to promote a scientific
approach to normative morality, rejecting the idea that religion determines
what is good. He believes that once scientists begin proposing moral norms in
papers, supernatural moral systems will join "astrology, witchcraft and Greek
mythology on the scrapheap". Harris's arguments in "The Moral Landscape" were
widely criticized by reviewers. Soon after the book's release, Harris responded
to some of the criticisms in an article for "The Huffington Post". Criticism.
Harris has been criticized by some of his fellow contributors at "The
Huffington Post". In particular, R. J. Eskow has accused him of fostering an
intolerance towards Islam, potentially as damaging as the religious fanaticism
that he opposes. Margaret Wertheim, herself an atheist, also weighed in,
contending that liberals should view Harris's account of religious faith "with
considerable skepticism". On the other hand, Harris has received backing from
Nina Burleigh and Richard Dawkins. In May 2006, Harris came under sustained
attack in a featured article by Meera Nanda for the "New Humanist", in which
she claimed that his analysis of religious extremism was flawed, and suggested
that he was criticizing religion "for what seems to be his real goal: a
defense, nay, a celebration of Harris' own Dzogchen Buddhist and Advaita
Vedantic Hindu spirituality." Nanda stated that Harris failed to apply the same
critical analysis to the eastern traditions as he applied to Western religions,
and she argues that the detachment from the self in Dharmic spirituality is
part of the recipe for authoritarianism. Journalist Chris Hedges' book "When
Atheism Becomes Religion" (originally published as "I Don't Believe in
Atheists") targets Harris and Dawkins as its two examples of the worst atheism
has to offer. Early in the book, Hedges quotes a statement from Harris's "The
End of Faith" regretfully advocating a nuclear first strike as arguably "the
only course of action available to us, given what Islamists believe" in the
event of an Islamist regime such as Iran acquiring nuclear weapons capability.
Harris has responded to Hedges' repeated mentions of the quotation (throughout
the book and in subsequent articles and interviews) by reprinting the passage
in question with sections highlighted to stress his personal horror not only at
the likely immediate casualties of a first strike but also at the probable
ultimate consequences for Westerners, and his call for Muslim nations to police
each other's weapons development so as to prevent the scenario from arising.
Anthropologist Scott Atran has criticized Harris for using what Atran considers
to be an unscientific approach towards highlighting the role of belief in the
psychology of suicide bombers. In the 2006 conference "", Atran confronted
Harris for portraying a "caricature of Islam". Atran later followed up his
comments in an online discussion for "Edge.org", in which he criticized Harris
and others for using methods of combating religious dogmatism and faith that
Atran believes are "scientifically baseless, psychologically uninformed,
politically naÃ¯ve, and counterproductive for goals we share". In "The National
Interest", Atran argued against Harris's thesis in "The Moral Landscape" that
science can determine moral values. Atran adds that abolishing religion will do
nothing to rid mankind of its ills. In January 2007, Harris received criticism
from John Gorenfeld, writing for "AlterNet". Gorenfeld took Harris to task for
defending some of the findings of paranormal investigations into areas such as
reincarnation and xenoglossy. He also strongly criticized Harris for his
defense of judicial torture. Gorenfeld's critique was subsequently reflected by
Robert Todd Carroll, writing in the "Skeptic's Dictionary". On his website
Harris disputed that he had defended these views to the extent that Gorenfeld
suggested. Shortly afterward, Harris engaged in a lengthy debate with Andrew
Sullivan on the internet forum "Beliefnet". In April 2007, Harris debated with
the evangelical pastor Rick Warren for "Newsweek" magazine. Madeleine Bunting
quotes Harris in saying "some propositions are so dangerous that it may even be
ethical to kill people for believing them", and states this "sounds like
exactly the kind of argument put forward by those who ran the Inquisition".
Quoting the same passage, theologian Catherine Keller asks, "there be a more
dangerous proposition than "that"?" and argues that the "anti-tolerance" it
represents would "dismantle" the Jeffersonian wall between church and state.
Writer Theodore Dalrymple described the passage as "quite possibly the most
disgraceful that I have read in a book by a man posing as a rationalist".
Harris repudiated his critics' characterization, stating they "have interpreted
the second sentence of this passage to mean that I advocate simply killing
religious people for their beliefs. . . . but such a reading remains a frank
distortion of my views." Harris goes on to argue that beliefs are only
dangerous to the extent that they can influence a person's behavior, and to the
extent that the behavior is violent. He believes that pre-emptively attacking
known dangerous fanatics (i.e. Osama Bin Laden) is justified. Harris also
claims, however, that "Whenever we can capture and imprison jihadists, we
should. But in most cases this is impossible." If the quote is read in its
context it clearly states that when extreme beliefs motivate terrorism
preemptive strikes against potential terrorists are sometimes justified.
Neuroscience. Building on his interests in belief and religion, Harris
completed a PhD in cognitive neuroscience at UCLA. He used fMRI to explore
whether the brain responses differ between sentences that subjects judged as
true, false or undecidable, across a wide range of categories including
autobiographical, mathematical, geographical, religious, ethical, semantic, and
factual statements. Statements that were judged as "true" (belief) led to
greater activation in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex than did statements
that were judged as "false" (disbelief) both when examined across all
categories, and when examined for mathematical judgments alone and for ethical
judgments alone. Conversely, disbelief led to greater activation of left
inferior frontal gyrus, right middle frontal gyrus, and bilateral anterior
insular cortex. When certainty (belief and disbelief) was compared against
uncertainty, a widespread network of sub-cortical regions, including the head
and tail of the caudate were activated. Uncertainty activated anterior
cingulate cortex and superior frontal gyrus more than certainty did. In another
study, Harris and colleagues examined the neural basis of religious and non-
religious belief using fMRI. Fifteen committed Christians and fifteen
nonbelievers were scanned as they evaluated the truth and falsity of religious
and nonreligious propositions. For both groups, statements of belief (sentences
judged as either true or false) were associated with increased activation of
ventromedial prefrontal cortex, a region of the brain involved in emotional
judgment, processing uncertainty, assessing rewards and thinking about oneself.
Writings and media appearances. Harris's writing focuses on neuroscience and
criticism of religion, for which he is best known. He blogs for the "Washington
Post", the "Huffington Post", and formerly for "Truthdig", and his articles
have appeared in such publications as "Newsweek", "The New York Times", the
"Los Angeles Times", the "Boston Globe", and the British national newspaper
"The Times". Harris has made numerous TV and radio appearances, including on
"The O'Reilly Factor", "ABC News", "Tucker", "Book TV", NPR, "Real Time", "The
Colbert Report", and "The Daily Show". In 2005, Harris appeared in the
documentary film "The God Who Wasn't There". Harris was a featured speaker at
the 2006 conference "". He made two presentations and participated in the
ensuing panel discussions. Harris has also appeared a number of times on the
"Point of Inquiry" radio podcast. In September 2011 Harris's essay "Lying" was
published as a Kindle single. On March 8, 2012, he was the guest on "The Joe
Rogan Experience" podcast. The conversation lasted nearly three hours and
covered a variety of topics related to Harris's research and personal
experiences. On September 28, 2012, Harris was the first major speaker at the
Festival of Dangerous Ideas in Sydney, Australia. His speech was on the topic
of his book "Free Will".
