Dabru Emet The Dabru Emet (Heb. דברו אמת "Speak Truth") is a document
concerning the relationship between Christianity and Judaism. It was signed by
over 220 rabbis and intellectuals from all branches of Judaism, as individuals
and not as representing any organisation or stream of Judaism. The Dabru Emet
was first published on September 10th, 2000, in the New York Times, and has
since been used in Jewish education programs across the U.S. While affirming
that there are theological differences between these two religions, the purpose
of Dabru Emet is to point out common ground and a legitimacy of Christianity,
for non-Jews, from the Jewish perspective. It is not an official document of
any of the Jewish denominations per se, but it is representative of what many
Jews feel. Controversy. There are various objections to "Dabru Emet" from
within the Jewish community. This statement prompted Protestant Christian
pastor A. Roy Eckardt to describe these words as "the road to Auschwitz". Many
Jews agree, and thus cannot sign "Dabru Emet". Critics of "Dabru Emet" hold
that it is false to claim that the Nazis would move on to exterminate
Christians after they finished with the Jews. Germany and Austria had deeply
religious Christian populations, and a majority of Christians in these nations
supported the anti-Semitic Nazi policies throughout all of World War II.In
Germany over a half-million Christians developed a church that praised both
Jesus and Hitler in their services [Source?. Thus, many Jews feel that this
document is white-washing Christian responsibility for the Holocaust [Source?].
The signatories signed as individuals, not representing any Jewish organisation
or stream of Judaism. Furthermore, it was a predominantly American effort,
without any consultation or input from Jewish communities outside of the United
States.
