Day of the Vow The Day of the Vow () is the name of a religious public holiday
in South Africa until 1994, when it was renamed the Day of Reconciliation. The
holiday is December 16. Commemorating a famous Boer victory over the Zulu, the
anniversary and its commemoration are intimately connected with various streams
of Afrikaner nationalism. Origin. According to an Afrikaner tradition, the Day
of the Vow traces its origin as an annual religious holiday to The Battle of
Blood River on 16 December 1838. The besieged Voortrekkers took a public vow
(or covenant) together before the battle, led by either Andries Pretorius or
Sarel Cilliers, depending on whose version is correct. In return for God's help
in obtaining victory, they promised to build a church. Participants also vowed
that they and their descendants would keep the day as a holy Sabbath. During
the battle a group of about 470 Voortrekkers and their servants defeated a
force of about ten thousand Zulu. Only three Voortrekkers were wounded, and
some 3,000 Zulu warriors died in the battle. Two of the earlier names given to
the day stem from this prayer. Officially known as the Day of the Vow, the
commemoration was renamed from the Day of the Covenant in 1982. Afrikaners
colloquially referred to it as "Dingaansdag" (), a reference to the Zulu ruler
of the defeated attackers. Wording. No verbatim record of the vow exists. The
version often considered to be the original vow is in fact W.E.G. Louw's ca.
1962 translation into Afrikaans of G.B.A. Gerdener's reconstruction of the vow
in his 1919 biography of Sarel Cilliers (Bailey 2003:25). History. "official"
version of the event is that a public vow was taken by a Trekker commando on
December 16, 1838 at Ncome River (Blood River) which bound future descendants
to commemorate the day as a religious holiday (sabbath) in the case of victory
over the Zulu. In 1841 the victorious Trekkers built The Church of the Vow at
Pietermaritzburg, and passed the obligation to keep the vow on to their
descendants. As the original vow was never recorded in verbatim form,
descriptions come from the diary of Jan Bantjes (possibly written on December
9); a dispatch written by Pretorius to the Volksraad on December 23, 1838; and
the recollections of Sarel Cilliers in 1871. A participant in the battle,
Dewald Pretorius, wrote his recollections in 1862, interpreting the vow as
including the building of church"es" and schools (Bailey 2003:31). Jan B.
Bantjes (1817â€“1887), Pretorius' secretary, indicates that the initial promise
was to build "a House" in return for victory. He notes that Pretorius called
everyone together, and asked them to pray for God's help. Bantjes writes that
Pretorius told the assembly that he wanted to make a vow, "if everyone would
agree" (Bailey 2003:24). Bantjes does not say whether everyone did so. Perhaps
the fractious nature of the Boers dictated that the raiding party held their
own prayers in the tents of various leading men (Mackenzie 1997:73). Pretorius
is also quoted as wanting to have a book written to make known what God had
done to even "our last descendants". Pretorius in his 1838 dispatch mentions a
vow () in connection with the building of a church, but not that it would be
binding for future generations. Cilliers writes that those who objected were
given the option to leave. At least two persons declined to participate in the
vow. Scholars disagree about whether the accompanying English settlers and
servants complied (Bailey 2003). This seems to confirm that the promise was
binding only on those present at the actual battle. Mackenzie (1997) claims
that Cilliers may be recalling what he said to men who met in his tent. Up to
the 1970s the received version of events was seldom questioned, but since then
scholars have questioned almost every aspect. They debate whether a vow was
even taken and, if so, what its wording was. Some argue that the vow occurred
on the day of the battle, others point to December 7 or 9. Whether Andries
Pretorius or Sarel Cilliers led the assembly has been debated; and even whether
there was an assembly. The location at which the vow was taken has also
produced diverging opinions, with some rejecting the Ncome River site for
(Bailey 2003). Commemorations of the Day of the Vow. Disagreements exist about
the extent to which the date was commemorated before the 1860s. Some historians
maintained that little happened between 1838 and 1910. Historian S.P. Mackenzie
argues that the day was not commemorated before the 1880s. Initial observations
may have been limited to those associated with the battle at Ncome River and
their descendants. While Sarel Cilliers upheld the day, Andries Pretorius did
not (Ehlers 2003). In Natal. Informal commemorations may have been held in the
homes of former Voortrekkers in Pietermaritzburg in Natal. Voortrekker pastor
Rev. Erasmus Smit announced the "7th annual" anniversary of the day in 1844 in
"De Natalier" newspaper, for instance. Bailey mentions a meeting at the site of
the battle in 1862 (Bailey 2003:29,32). In 1864 the General Synod of the Dutch
Reformed Church in Natal decreed that all its congregations should observe the
date as a day of thanksgiving. The decision was spurred by the efforts of two
Dutch clergymen working in Pietermaritsburg during the 1860s, D.P.M. Huet and
F. Lion Cachet. Large meetings were held in the church in Pietermaritzburg in
1864 and 1865 (Bailey 2003:33). In 1866 the first large scale meeting took
place at the traditional battle site, led by Cachet. Zulus who gathered to
watch proceedings assisted the participants in gathering stones for a
commemorative cairn. In his speech Cachet called for the evangelization of
black heathen. He relayed a message received from the Zulu monarch Cetshwayo.
In his reply to Cetshwayo, Cachet hoped for harmony between the Zulu and white
Natalians. Trekker survivors recalled events, an institution which in the 1867
observation at the site included a Zulu (Bailey 2003:35). Huet was of the same
opinion as Delward Pretorius. He declared at a church inauguration in Greytown
on December 16, 1866 that its construction was also part of fulfilling the vow
(Bailey 2003:35). In the Transvaal. "Die Zuid-Afrikaansche Republiek" declared
16 December a public holiday in 1865, to be commemorated by public religious
services. However, until 1877, the general public there did not utilize the
holiday as they did in Natal. Cricket matches and hunts were organized, some
businesses remained open, and newspapers were sold. The name Dingane's Day
appeared for the first time in the media, in an 1875 edition of "De Volksstem."
That newspaper wondered whether the lack of support for the holiday signaled a
weakening sense of nationalism (Bailey 2003:37,38). After the Transvaal was
annexed by the British in 1877, the new government refrained from state
functions (like Supreme Court sittings) on the date (Bailey 2003:41). The
desire by the Transvaal to retrieve its independence prompted the emergence of
Afrikaner nationalism and the revival of December 16 in that territory.
Transvaal burgers held meetings around the date to discuss responses to the
annexation. In 1879 the first such a meeting convened at Wonderfontein on the
West Rand. Burgers disregarded Sir G.J. Wolseley, the governor of Transvaal,
who prohibited the meeting on December 16. The following year they held a
similar combination of discussions and the celebration of Dingane's Day at
Paardekraal (Bailey 2003:43). Paul Kruger, president of the Transvaal Republic,
believed that failure to observe the date led to the loss of independence and
to the first Anglo-Boer war as a divine punishment. Before initiating
hostilities with the British, a ceremony was held at Paardekraal on December
16, 1880 in which 5,000 "burghers" piled a cairn of stones that symbolized past
and future victories (over the Zulu and the British). After the success of its
military campaign against the British, the Transvaal state organized a
Dingane's Day festival every five years. At the first of these in 1881, an
estimated 12,000 to 15,000 people listened to speeches by Kruger and others
(Gilliomee 1989). At the third such festival in 1891, Kruger emphasized the
need for the festival to be religious in nature (Ehlers 2003). In the Free
State. The Free State government in 1894 declared December 16 a holiday (Bailey
2003). National commemorations. The Union state in 1910 officially declared
Dingane's Day as a national public holiday. In 1938 D.F. Malan, leader of the
National Party, reiterated at the site that its soil was "sacred." He said that
the Blood River battle established "South Africa as a civilized Christian
country" and "the responsible authority of the white race". Malan compared the
battle to the urban labour situation in which whites had to prevail (Ehlers
2003). In 1952 the ruling National Party passed the Public Holidays Act (Act 5
of 1952), in which section 2 declared the day to be a religious public holiday.
Accordingly, certain activities were prohibited, such as organized sports
contests, theatre shows, and so on (Ehlers 2003). Pegging a claim on this day
was also forbidden under section 48(4)(a) of the Mining Rights (Act 20 of 1967;
repealed by the Minerals Act (Act 50 of 1991).[http://findarticles.com/p/
articles/mi_qa3736/is_199901/ai_n8832379/pg_19] The name was changed to the Day
of the Vow in order to be less offensive, and to emphasize the vow rather than
the Zulu protagonist (Ehlers 2003). In 1961 the African National Congress chose
December 16 to initiate a series of sabotages, signaling its decision to embark
on an armed struggle against the regime through its military wing, Umkhonto we
Sizwe. In 1983 the South African government vetoed the decision by the acting
government of Namibia to discontinue observing the holiday. In response, the
Democratic Turnhalle Alliance resigned its 41 seats in Namibia's 50-seat
National Assembly. Act 5 of 1952 was repealed in 1994 by Act No. 36 of 1994,
which changed the name of the public holiday to the Day of Reconciliation. The
Truth and Reconciliation Commission started its work on December 16, 1995.
Debates Over the Holiday. Those who celebrate the holiday argue that
commemoration has nothing to do with racial dynamics; they are simply
remembering to give thanks for divine deliverance from certain destruction.
Detractors from this viewpoint claim that the victors were of one and the
defeated from another race and that celebrating the breaking of the power of a
Zulu tyrant creates racial tension. Yet others point out that the defeated Zulu
leader, Dingane, was in fact a usurper of the throne who murdered the famous
King Shaka; that the ultimate victors of the greater conflict were an alliance
of Boers and a Shaka loyalist Zulu force led by Prince Mpande, who was the
rightful heir; and that consequently, it is illegitimate to politicize the
events at all, whether in a nationalist or liberal sense. Scholars like
historian Leonard Thompson have said that the events of the battle were woven
into a new myth that justified racial oppression on the basis of racial
superiority and divine providence. Accordingly, the victory over Dingaan was
reinterpreted as a sign that God confirmed the rule of whites over black
Africans, justifying the Boer project of acquiring land and eventually
ascending to power in South Africa. In post-apartheid South Africa the holiday
was criticized as a racist holiday, which celebrates the success of Boer
expansion over the black natives. By comparison with the large number of
Afrikaners who participated in the annual celebrations of the Voortrekker
victory, some did take exception. In 1971, for instance, "Pro Veritate", the
journal of the anti-apartheid organization the Christian Institute of Southern
Africa, devoted a special edition to the matter. Historian Anton Ehlers traces
how political and economic factors changed the themes emphasized during
celebrations of the Day of the Vow. During the 1940s and 1950s Afrikaner unity
was emphasized over against black Africans. This theme acquired broader meaning
in the 1960s and 1970s, when isolated "white" South Africa was positioned
against the decolonization of Africa. The economic and political crises of the
1970s and 1980s forced white Afrikaners to rethink the apartheid system.
Afrikaner and other intellectuals began to critically evaluate the historical
basis for the celebration. The need to include English and "moderate" black
groups in reforms prompted a de-emphasis on "the ethnic exclusivity and divine
mission of Afrikaners" (Ehlers 2003).
