Book of Deuteronomy The Book of Deuteronomy (from Greek
ŒîŒµœÖœÑŒµœÅŒøŒΩœåŒºŒπŒøŒΩ, "Deuteronomion", "second law"; , "Devarim", "
words") is the fifth book of the Hebrew Bible, and of the Jewish Torah/
Pentateuch. The Hebrew title is taken from the opening phrase "Eleh ha-
devarim", "These are the words..."; the English title is from a Greek mis-
translation of the Hebrew phrase "mishneh ha-torah ha-zoth", "a copy of this
law", in , as "to deuteronomion touto" - "this second law". The book consists
of three sermons or speeches delivered to the Israelites by Moses on the plains
of Moab, shortly before they enter the Promised Land. The first sermon
recapitulates the forty years of wilderness wanderings which have led to this
moment, and ends with an exhortation to observe the law (or teachings); the
second reminds the Israelites of the need for exclusive allegiance to one God
and observance of the laws he has given them, on which their possession of the
land depends; and the third offers the comfort that even should Israel prove
unfaithful and so lose the land, with repentance all can be restored. While
traditionally accepted as the genuine words of Moses delivered on the eve of
the occupation of Canaan, a broad consensus of modern scholars now see its
origins in traditions from Israel (the northern kingdom) brought south to the
Kingdom of Judah in the wake of the Assyrian destruction of Samaria (8th
century BCE) and then adapted to a program of nationalist reform in the time of
King Josiah (late 7th century), with the final form of the modern book emerging
in the milieu of the return from the Babylonian exile during the late 6th
century. One of its most significant verses is , the Shema, which has become
the definitive statement of Jewish identity: "Hear, O Israel: the
Tetragrammaton our God, the is one." Verses 6:4-5 were also quoted by Jesus in
as part of the Great Commandment. Contents. Structure. Patrick D. Miller in his
commentary on Deuteronomy suggests that different views of the structure of the
book will lead to different views on what it is about. The structure is often
described as a series of three speeches or sermons (chapters 1:1‚Äì4:43, 4:
44‚Äì29:1, 29:2‚Äì30:20) followed by a number of short appendices¬ ‚Äì Miller
refers to this as the "literary" structure; alternatively, it is sometimes seen
as a ring-structure with a central core (chapters 12‚Äì26, the Deuteronomic
code) and an inner and an outer frame (chapters 4‚Äì11/27‚Äì30 and 1‚Äì3/
31‚Äì34)¬ ‚Äì Miller calls this the covenantal substructure; and finally the
theological structure revealed in the theme of the exclusive worship of Yahweh
established in the first of the Ten Commandments ("Thou shalt have no other god
before me") and the shema ("Hear O Israel, the our God is One!") Summary. "(The
following "literary" outline of Deuteronomy is from John Van Seters; it can be
contrasted with Alexander Rof√©'s "covenantal" analysis in his "Deuteronomy:
Issues and Interpretation".)" The final verses, Deuteronomy 34:10‚Äì12, "never
again did there arise in Israel a prophet like Moses," state authoritatively
that the Deuteronomistic view of theology, with its insistence on the worship
of Yahweh as the sole God of Israel, was the only permissible religion, sealed
by the greatest of prophets. Composition. Sources. The prophet Isaiah, active
in Jerusalem about a century before Josiah, makes no mention of the Exodus,
covenants with God, or disobedience to God's laws; in contrast Isaiah's
contemporary Hosea, active in the northern kingdom of Israel, makes frequent
reference to the Exodus, the wilderness wanderings, a covenant, the danger of
foreign gods and the need to worship Yahweh alone; this has led scholars to the
view that these traditions behind Deuteronomy have a northern origin. Whether
the Deuteronomic code ‚Äì the set of laws at chapters 12-26 which form the
original core of the book ‚Äì was written in Josiah's time (late 7th century)
or earlier is subject to debate, but many of the individual laws are older than
the collection itself. The two poems at chapters 32-33 ‚Äì the Song of Moses
and the Blessing of Moses were probably originally independent. Position in the
Hebrew Bible. Deuteronomy occupies a puzzling position in the Bible, linking
the story of the Israelites' wanderings in the wilderness to the story of their
history in Canaan without quite belonging totally to either. The wilderness
story could end quite easily with Numbers, and the story of Joshua's conquests
could exist without it, at least at the level of the plot; but in both cases
there would be a thematic (theological) element missing. Scholars have given
various answers to the problem. The Deuteronomistic history theory is currently
the most popular (Deuteronomy was originally just the law code and covenant,
written to cement the religious reforms of Josiah, and later expanded to stand
as the introduction to the full history); but there is an older theory which
sees Deuteronomy as belonging to Numbers, and Joshua as a sort of supplement to
it. This idea still has supporters, but the mainstream understanding is that
Deuteronomy, after becoming the introduction to the history, was later detached
from it and included with Genesis-Exodus-Leviticus-Numbers because it already
had Moses as its central character. According to this hypothesis, the death of
Moses was originally the ending of Numbers, and was simply moved from there to
the end of Deuteronomy. Themes. Overview. Deuteronomy stresses the uniqueness
of God, the need for drastic centralisation of worship, and a concern for the
position of the poor and disadvantaged. Its many themes can be organised around
the three poles of Israel, Israel's God, and the covenant which binds them
together. Additionally, it stresses the importance of harsh laws and being put
to the death for the smallest of transgressions. Israel. The themes of
Deuteronomy in relation to Israel are election, faithfulness, obedience, and
God's promise of blessings, all expressed through the covenant: "obedience is
not primarily a duty imposed by one party on another, but an expression of
covenantal relationship." Yahweh has chosen ("elected") Israel as his special
property (Deuteronomy 7:6 and elsewhere), and Moses stresses to the Israelites
the need for obedience to God and covenant, and the consequences of
unfaithfulness and disobedience. Yet the first several chapters of Deuteronomy
are a long retelling of Israel's past disobedience - but also God's gracious
care, leading to a long call to Israel to choose life over death and blessing
over curse (chapters 7-11). Dillard and Longman note that the centralization of
worship is an important and repeated theme in Deuteronomy, and that this is
designed to focus the hearer's attention on the unique and exclusive holiness
of Yahweh. God. Deuteronomy's concept of God changed over time: the earliest
7th century layer is monolatrous, not denying the reality of other gods but
enforcing the worship of Yahweh in Jerusalem alone; in the later, Exilic layers
from the mid-6th century, especially chapter 4, this becomes monotheism, the
idea that only one god exists. God is simultaneously present in the Temple and
in heaven - an important and innovative concept called "name theology." After
the review of Israel's history in chapters 1 to 4, there is a restatement of
the Decalogue in chapter 5. This arrangement of material highlights God's
sovereign relationship with Israel prior to the giving of establishment of the
Law. The Decalogue in turn then provides the foundational principles for the
subsequent, more detailed laws. Some scholars go so far as to see a correlation
between each of the laws of the Decalogue and each of the more detailed 'case-
law' of the rest of the book. This foundational aspect of the Decalogue is also
demonstrated by the emphasis to actively remember the law of God (),
immediately after the Decalogue. The Law as it is broadly presented across
Deuteronomy defines Israel both as a community and defines their relationship
with Yahweh. There is throughout the law a sense of justice. For example the
demand for multiple witness (), cities of refuge (), or the provision of judges
(). Covenant. The core of Deuteronomy is the Biblical covenant which binds
Yahweh and Israel by oaths of fidelity (Yahweh and Israel each faithful to the
other) and obedience (Israel obedient to Yahweh). God will give Israel
blessings of the land, fertility, and prosperity so long as Israel is faithful
to God's teaching; disobedience will lead to curses and punishment. But,
according to the Deuteronomists, Israel's prime sin is lack of faith, apostacy:
contrary to the first and fundamental commandment ("Thou shalt have no other
gods before me") the people have entered into relations with other gods. The
covenant is based on 7th century Assyrian suzerain-vassal treaties by which the
Great King (the Assyrian suzerain) regulated relationships with lesser rulers;
Deuteronomy is thus making the claim that Yahweh, not the Assyrian monarch, is
the Great King to whom Israel owes loyalty. The terms of the treaty are that
Israel holds the land from Yahweh, but Israel's tenancy of the land is
conditional on keeping the covenant, which in turn necessitates tempered rule
by state and village leaders who keep the covenant: "These beliefs", says
Norman Gottwald, "dubbed biblical Yahwism, are widely recognized in biblical
scholarship as enshrined in Deuteronomy and the Deuteronomistic History (Joshua
through Kings)." Dillard and Longman in their "Introduction to the Old
Testament" stress the living nature of the covenant between Yahweh and Israel
as a nation: The people of Israel are addressed by Moses as a unity, and their
allegiance to the covenant is not one of obeisance, but comes out of a pre-
existing relationship between God and Israel, established with Abraham and
attested to by the Exodus event, so that the laws of Deuteronomy set the nation
of Israel apart, signaling the unique status of the Jewish nation. The land is
God's gift to Israel, and many of the laws, festivals and instructions in
Deuteronomy are given in the light of Israel's occupation of the land. Dillard
and Longman note that "In 131 of the 167 times the verb "give" occurs in the
book, the subject of the action is Yahweh." Deuteronomy makes the Torah the
ultimate authority for Israel, one to which even the king is subject. Influence
on Judaism and Christianity. Judaism. Deuteronomy 6:4-5: "Hear ("shema"), O
Israel, the is our God, the is one!" has become the basic credo of Judaism, and
its twice-daily recitation is a mitzvah (religious commandment). The shema goes
on: "Thou shalt love the thy God with all thy heart and all thy soul and all
thy might"; it has therefore also become identified with the central Jewish
concept of the love of God, and the rewards that come with this. Christianity.
In the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus cited Deuteronomy 6:5 as a Great Commandment.
The earliest Christian authors interpreted Deuteronomy's prophecy of the
restoration of Israel as having been fulfilled (or superseded) in Jesus Christ
and the establishment of the Christian church (Luke 1-2, Acts 2-5), and Jesus
was interpreted to be the "one (i.e., prophet) like me" predicted by Moses in
Deuteronomy 18:15 (Acts 3:22-23). In place of the elaborate code of laws
("mitzvah") set out in Deuteronomy, Paul the Apostle, drawing on , possibly
claimed that the keeping of the Mosaic covenant was overturned by faith in
Jesus and the gospel (the New Covenant) but this is just one of the different
views of the relationship of Paul of Tarsus and Judaism. Bibliography.
Translations of Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy
