Devil's advocate In common parlance, a "devil's advocate" is someone who, given
a certain argument, takes a position he or she does not necessarily agree with,
for the sake of argument. In taking such position, the individual taking on the
devil's advocate role seeks to engage others in an argumentative discussion
process. The purpose of such process is typically to test the quality of the
original argument and identify weaknesses in its structure, and to use such
information to either improve or abandon the original, opposing position. It
can also refer to someone who takes a stance that is seen as unpopular or
unconventional, but is actually another way of arguing a much more conventional
stance. Origin. During the canonization process of the Roman Catholic Church,
the Promoter of the Faith (Latin: promotor fidei), popularly known as the
Devil's advocate (Latin: advocatus diaboli), was a canon lawyer appointed by
Church authorities to argue against the canonization of a candidate. It was
this personâ€™s job to take a skeptical view of the candidate's character, to
look for holes in the evidence, to argue that any miracles attributed to the
candidate were fraudulent, and so on. The Devil's advocate opposed God's
advocate (Latin: advocatus Dei; also known as the Promoter of the Cause), whose
task was to make the argument in favor of canonization. This task is now
performed by the Promoter of Justice ("promotor iustitiae"), who is in charge
of examining how accurate is the inquiry on the saintliness of the candidate.
The office was established in 1587 during the reign of Pope Sixtus V and
abolished by Pope John Paul II in 1983. This reform changed the canonization
process considerably, helping John Paul II to usher in an unprecedented number
of elevations: nearly 500 individuals were canonized and over 1,300 were
beatified during his tenure as Pope as compared to only 98 canonizations by all
his 20th-century predecessors. In cases of controversy the Vatican may still
seek to informally solicit the testimony of critics of a candidate for
canonization. Aroup Chatterjee, the author of the book Mother Teresa: The Final
Verdict testified against the late nun as a so-called Devil's Advocate. The
British-American columnist Christopher Hitchens was famously asked to testify
against the beatification of Mother Teresa in 2002, a role he would later
describe as being akin to "representing the Evil One, as it were, pro bono".
