Dispensationalism Dispensationalism is a nineteenth-century evangelical,
futurist, Biblical interpretation that foresees a series of "dispensations", or
periods in history, in which God relates to human beings in different ways
under different Biblical covenants. As a system, dispensationalism is rooted in
the writings of John Nelson Darby (1800â€“1882) and the Brethren Movement. The
theology of dispensationalism consists of a distinctive eschatological "end
times" perspective, as all dispensationalists hold to premillennialism and most
hold to a pretribulation rapture. Dispensationalists believe that the nation of
Israel (not necessarily the same as the state of Israel) is distinct from the
Christian Church, and that God has yet to fulfill his promises to national
Israel. These promises include the land promises, which in the future world to
come result in a millennial kingdom and Third Temple where Christ, upon his
return, will rule the world from Jerusalem for a thousand years. In other areas
of theology, dispensationalists hold to a wide range of beliefs within the
evangelical and fundamentalist spectrum. With the rise of dispensationalism,
some conservative Protestants came to interpret the Book of Revelation as
predicting future events (futurism), rather than predicting events that have
taken place throughout history (historicism) or predominantly associated to the
destruction of Jerusalem in AD 70, a position known as Preterism. Concepts.
Progressive revelation. One of the most important underlying theological
concepts for dispensationalism is progressive revelation. While some non-
dispensationalists start with progressive revelation in the New Testament and
refer this revelation back into the Old Testament, dispensationalists begin
with progressive revelation in the Old Testament and read forward in a
historical sense. Therefore there is an emphasis on a gradually developed unity
as seen in the entirety of Scripture. Biblical covenants are intricately tied
to the dispensations. When these Biblical covenants are compared and
contrasted, the result is a historical ordering of different dispensations.
Also with regard to the different Biblical covenant promises, dispensationalism
emphasises to whom these promises were written, the original recipients. This
has led to certain fundamental dispensational beliefs, such as a distinction
between Israel and the Church. Historical-grammatical interpretation. Another
important theological concept is the emphasis on what is referred to as the
historical-grammatical method of interpretation. This is often popularly
referred to as the "literal" interpretation of Scripture. Just as Israel was
said to have literally experienced the curses spoken of in the Old Testament,
dispensationalists believe that they will one day, literally, receive the
blessings spoken of in the Old Testament. Just as it is with progressive
revelation, the historical-grammatical method is not a concept or practice that
is exclusive just to dispensationalists. However, a dispensational distinctive
is created when the historical-grammatical method of interpretation is closely
coupled with an emphasis on progressive revelation along with the historical
development of the covenants in Scripture. Distinction between Israel and the
Church. Classical dispensationalists refer to the present day Church as a
"parenthesis" or temporary interlude in the progress of Israel's prophesied
history. Progressive dispensationalism "softens" the Church/Israel distinction
by seeing some Old Testament promises as expanded by the New Testament to
include the Church. However, progressives never view this expansion as
replacing promises to its original audience, Israel. Covenant Theology is the
alternative view to dispensationalism that holds that God has one people Israel
and the promises to Israel made in the Old Testament were fulfilled in Jesus
Christ, the new Israel, and the object of Abraham's hope. Dispensationalists
have often criticized Covenant Theology as being identical with what they call
"Replacement Theology" or Supersessionism, the concept that the Church has
replaced Israel. However, in Covenant Theology, the church is not a replacement
for the nation of Israel but an expansion of it where Gentiles are "grafted
into" the existing covenant community. Jewish Christians are included in the
spiritual Israel. Start of the Church Age. Mainstream dispensationalists such
as Scofield and Ironside identify Pentecost, in the second chapter of Acts,
with the start of the Church as distinct from Israel; this may be referred to
as the "ActsÂ 2" position. So-called hyperdispensationalists believe that the
church started after ActsÂ 2, focusing primarily on the ministry of Paul.
Advocates of the "mid-Acts" position, such as Darby identify the start of the
church after the stoning of Stephen in ActsÂ 7, or with the salvation of Saul
in ActsÂ 9, or with Paul's first missionary journey in Acts 13. The 'Acts 28'
position, most notably expounded by E. W. Bullinger, posits the beginning of
the church after the 28th and concluding chapter of Acts.
Hyperdispensationalists are considered divisive notably because they reject the
rite of water baptism practiced by almost all Christian denominations.
Eschatology. Dispensationalists are premillenialists who affirm a future,
literal 1,000-year reign of Jesus Christ which merges with and continues on to
the eternal state in the "new heavens and the new earth", and they hold that
the millennial kingdom will be theocratic in nature and not mainly
soteriological, as it is viewed by George Eldon Ladd and others who hold to a
non-dispensational form of premillennialism. Dispensationalism is known for its
views respecting the nation of Israel during this millennial kingdom reign, in
which Israel as a nation plays a major role and regains a king, a land, and an
everlasting kingdom. The vast majority of dispensationalists hold to the
pretribulation rapture, with small minorities holding to either a mid-
tribulation or post-tribulation rapture. History. The concept of arranging of
divisions in Biblical history dates back to Irenaeus in the second century.
Other Christian writers and leaders since then, such as Augustine of Hippo and
Joachim of FioreÂ (1135â€“1202), have also offered their own arrangements of
history. Many Protestant and Calvinist writers, including Herman Witsius,
Francis Turretin, and Isaac Watts also developed theological schemes and
divisions in history, in particular after the Westminster Confession of Faith
noted "various dispensations". Other concepts such as premillennialism and the
rapture also predated dispensationalism as a system. Stemming from the Reformed
tradition emerged the Covenant Theology, which deals with Biblical history as
different covenants between God and mankind, but not dispensations. As a
system, dispensationalism is rooted in the Plymouth Brethren movement in the
1830s of Ireland and England, and in the teachings of John Nelson DarbyÂ 
(1800â€“1882). The original concept came from Darby's interpretation of
2Â TimothyÂ 2:15, "...rightly dividing the word of truth". Darby traveled
extensively to continental Europe, New Zealand, Canada, and the United States
in an attempt to make converts to the Brethren movement. Over time, Darby's
eschatological views grew in popularity in the United States, especially among
Baptists and Old School Presbyterians. United States of America. John Nelson
Darby is recognized as the father of dispensationalism, later made popular in
the United States by Cyrus Scofield's Scofield Reference Bible. Charles Henry
Mackintosh, 1820â€“1896, with his popular style spread Darby's teachings to
humbler elements in society and may be regarded as the journalist of the
Brethren Movement. CHM popularised Darby more than any other Brethren author.
As there was no Christian teaching of a "rapture" before Darby began preaching
about it in the 1830s, he is sometimes credited with originating the "secret
rapture" theory wherein Christ will suddenly remove his bride, the Church, from
this world before the judgments of the tribulation. Dispensationalist beliefs
about the fate of the Jews and the re-establishment of the Kingdom of Israel
put dispensationalists at the forefront of Christian Zionism, because "God is
able to graft them in again", and they believe that in his grace he will do so
according to their understanding of Old Testament prophecy. They believe that,
while the methodologies of God may change, his purposes to bless Israel will
never be forgotten, just as he has shown unmerited favour to the Church, he
will do so to a remnant of Israel to fulfill all the promises made to the
genetic seed of Abraham. Dispensationalism was first introduced to North
America by James Inglis (1813â€“1872), through a monthly magazine called
"Waymarks in the Wilderness" (published intermittently between 1854 and 1872).
In 1866Â Inglis organized the Believers' Meeting for Bible Study, which
introduced dispensationalist ideas to a small but influential circle of
American evangelicals. After Inglis' death, JamesÂ H. BrookesÂ (1830â€“1898), a
pastor in St.Â Louis, organized the Niagara Bible Conference to continue the
dissemination of dispensationalist ideas. Dispensationalism was boosted after
DwightÂ L. MoodyÂ (1837â€“1899) learned of "dispensational truth" from an
unidentified member of the Brethren in 1872. Moody became close to Brookes and
other dispensationalists, and encouraged the spread of dispensationalism, but
apparently never learned the nuances of the dispensationalist system.
Dispensationalism began to evolve during this time, most significantly when a
significant body of dispensationalists proposed the "pre-tribulation" rapture.
Dispensationalist leaders in Moody's circle include Reuben Archer TorreyÂ 
(1856â€“1928), JamesÂ M. Gray (1851â€“1925), CyrusÂ I. ScofieldÂ (1843â€“1921),
WilliamÂ J. ErdmanÂ (1833â€“1923), A.Â C.Â Dixon (1854â€“1925),
A.Â J.Â GordonÂ (1836â€“1895) and William Eugene Blackstone, author of the
bestselling book of the 1800s titled, "Jesus is Coming" (endorsed by Torrey and
Erdman). These men were activist evangelists who promoted a host of Bible
conferences and other missionary and evangelistic efforts. They also gave the
dispensationalist movement institutional permanence by assuming leadership of
the new independent Bible institutes such as the Moody Bible Institute in 1886,
the Bible Institute of LosÂ Angeles (now Biola University) in 1908, and the
Philadelphia College of the Bible (now Philadelphia Biblical University) in
1913. The network of related institutes that soon sprang up became the nucleus
for the spread of American dispensationalism. The efforts of C.Â I.Â Scofield
and his associates introduced dispensationalism to a wider audience in America
through his Scofield Reference Bible. The publication of the Scofield Reference
Bible in 1909 by the Oxford University Press for the first time displayed
overtly dispensationalist notes to the pages of the Biblical text. The Scofield
Reference Bible became a popular Bible used by independent Evangelicals and
Fundamentalists in the United States. Evangelist and Bible teacher Lewis Sperry
ChaferÂ (1871â€“1952), who was influenced by C.Â I.Â Scofield, founded Dallas
Theological Seminary in 1924, which has become the flagship of
dispensationalism in America. More recently, the Baptist Bible Seminary in
Clark Summit, Pennsylvania became another dispensational school. The Grace
Movement, which began in the 1930s with the teaching ministries of
J.Â C.Â O'Hair, CorneliusÂ R. Stam, Henry Hudson and Charles Baker has been
labeled "ultra" or "hyper" dispensationalism. The term serves to distinguish a
theological system that departs from the tenets of dispensationalism. The
contrasts between law and grace, prophecy and mystery, Israel and the Church,
the body of Christ were promoted by Scofield, Barnhouse and Ironside, then
studied and taught by O'Hair, Stam and other "grace" teachers. It is however
contended by dispensational teachers such as Charles Caldwell Ryrie, J.Â Dwight
Pentecost and Arnold Fruchtenbaum that ultradispensationalism is removed enough
from dispensationalism to not any longer be dispensationalism at all.
Nevertheless, ultradispensationalism continues to be forcefully advocated by
manyâ€”most notably, through the works of poet-theologian Jack Royerton whose
work has generated an ultradispensationalist groundswell especially among young
artists and folk singers. Dispensationalism has become very popular with
American evangelicalism, especially among nondenominational Bible churches,
Baptists, Pentecostal, and Charismatic groups. Protestant denomiminations that
as a whole embrace covenant theology reject dispensationalism. For example, the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church USA termed it "evil and subversive"
and regards it as a heresy. Influence. Dispensationalism rejects the notion of
supersessionism, sees the Jewish people as the true people of God, and sees the
modern State of Israel as identical to the Israel of the Bible. John Nelson
Darby taught, and most subsequent dispensationalists have consistently
maintained, that God looks upon the Jews as his chosen people even as they
remain in rejection of Jesus Christ, and God continues to have a place for them
in the dispensational, prophetic scheme of things. Dispensationalists teach
that a remnant within the nation of Israel will be born again, called of God,
and by grace brought to realize they crucified their Messiah. Dispensationalism
is unique in teaching that the Church is a provisional parenthesis, a "mystery"
period, meaning that it was not revealed in the Old Testament, directly, which
period will end with the rapture of the church and the Jewish remnant entering
the Great Tribulation. Israel will finally recognize Jesus as their promised
Messiah during the trials that come upon them in this Tribulation. Darby's
teachings envision Judaism as continuing to enjoy God's protection literally to
the End of Time, and teach that God has a separate 'program', to use J.Â Dwight
Pentecost's term, for each Israel and the Church. Dispensationalists teach that
God has eternal covenants with Israel, which cannot be broken. While stressing
that God has not forsaken those physically descended from Abraham through
Isaac, dispensationalists do affirm the necessity for Jews to receive Jesus as
Messiah. They hold that God made unconditional covenants with Israel as a
people and nation in the Abrahamic, Palestinian, Davidic and the New Covenant.
Dispensationalism has had a pronounced effect on Christians' attitude toward
Israel; many thousands of Christians are presently lovers of Israel, and
Zionists, because they believe that God has not rejected Israel as his people.
Judaism. Christian dispensationalists sometimes embrace what some critics have
pejoratively called "Judeophilia"â€”ranging from support of the state of
Israel, to observing traditional Jewish holidays and practicing traditionally
Jewish religious rituals. ("See also" Christian Zionism, Jewish Christians,
Judaizers, and Messianic Judaism). Dispensationalists typically support the
modern state of Israel, recognize its existence as God revealing his will for
the Last Days, and reject anti-Semitism. Messianic Judaism. Dispensationalists
tend to have special interest in the Jews because the dispensationalist
hermeneutic honors Biblical passages that list Jews as among God's chosen
people (the others would be the Gentiles in the church, and proselytes to
Judaism). Some Messianic Jews (Messianic Judaism), however, reject
dispensationalism in favor of a related but distinct hermeneutics, called Olive
Tree Theology. The name "Olive Tree Theology" refers to the passages of
RomansÂ 11:17â€“18: "If some of the branches were broken off, and you, a wild
olive, were grafted in among them and have become equal sharers in the rich
root of the olive tree, then don't boast as if you were better than the
branches!" Antichrist. Some dispensationalists, such as the late fundamentalist
Jerry Falwell, have asserted that the Antichrist will be a Jew, based on a
belief that the Antichrist will falsely seem to some Jews to fulfill prophecies
of the Messiah more accurately than Jesus did. However, many dispensationalists
do not accept this belief, and claim that a number of scriptures do not cite
any evidence, such as DanielÂ 9:27. Such dispensationalists claim that this
"prince" will be of the same people that destroyed the Jewish city in 70Â AD,
i.e.,Â of Roman origin and therefore will not be Jewish. However, other
dispensationalists base the nationality of the army that destroyed Jerusalem as
comprising an Arab and Syrian ethnicity, and therefore the Antichrist, or the
"prince", shall not be of Roman origin, but middle eastern. In turn, this
"prince" will stand up "against the Prince of princes" and destroy many "by
peace" (Dan 8:25); and will be responsible for the false "peace and safety"
that will precede the destructive day of the Lord (1Â ThessÂ 5:2â€“3). Some
believe this man will be a Jew, based in part on JohnÂ 5:43, where the Lord
stated that the unbelieving Jews would receive another who "shall come in his
own name" (as opposed to the Lord Himself, who came in the Father's name).
Further evidence is taken from DanielÂ 11:37, "Neither shall he regard the God
of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he shall
magnify himself above all", although in a passage as late as Daniel, a better
translation is probably, "He will reject the gods (Eloha) of his fathers." The
prophet Daniel refers to this man as "a vile person", who will "obtain the
kingdom by flatteries" (DanielÂ 11:21). This belief is not essential to
dispensationalism. Darby himself taught the Antichrist will be a Jew, and the
Beast, a separate person, will be the political leader of the revived Roman
empire. World politics. Dispensationalism teaches that Christians should not
rely on spiritual good from earthly governments (though they are to pray for
peace in the state or country in which they live, and believe that government
is ordained by God (RomÂ 13:1â€“7)), or success in any endeavor to be prominent
in the present world, or start a church kingdom, since the Kingdom of Heaven is
seen as yet to come. Instead, people should expect social conditions to decline
as the end times draw nearer. Dispensationalist readings of prophecies (such as
DanielÂ 9:27, "And he Antichrist will make a covenant peace contract with the
many nation of Israel along with the nations that oppose it ...") often teach
that the Antichrist will appear to the world as a peacemaker.
Dispensationalists are usually not inclined to look upon the actions of the
United Nations with favor, because they view this entity as working toward
ungodly goals, such as contributing to the erection of the superstructure for
the coming government of the Antichrist. Almost all dispensationalists reject
the idea that a lasting peace can be attained by human effort in the Middle
East, and believe instead that "wars and rumors of wars" (MatthewÂ 24:6) will
increase as the end times approach. Dispensationalist beliefs often underlie
the religious and political movement of Christian Zionism. Dispensationalists
teach that churches that do not insist on Biblical literalism set forth an
inconsistent method of interpretation with respect to the area of Bible
prophecy, and view it as a step towards theological liberalism, which rejects
Scripture being inerrant. They are averse to ecumenism and other attempts to
create church organizations that cross denominational boundaries such as the
World Council of Churches. United States politics. Political analyst Richard
Allen Greene has argued that dispensationalism has had a major influence on the
foreign policy of the United States. This influence has included continued
support for the state of Israel. Political commentator Kevin Phillips points
out in his book "American Theocracy" (2006) how dispensationalists and other
fundamentalist Christians, together with the oil lobby, have provided political
support for the invasion of Iraq in 2003, without approval of the United
Nations. Fiction. Dispensationalist themes form the basis of the popular "Left
Behind" series of books. However, not all dispensationalists agree with the
theology of authors Tim LaHaye and Jerry Jenkins.
