Faith healing Faith healing is healing through spiritual means. Believers
assert that the healing of a person can be brought about by religious faith
through prayer and/or rituals that, according to adherents, stimulate a divine
presence and power toward correcting disease and disability. Belief in divine
intervention in illness or healing is related to religious belief. In common
usage, "faith healing" refers to notably overt and ritualistic practices of
communal prayer and gestures (such as laying on of hands) that are claimed to
solicit divine intervention in initiating spiritual and literal healing. Claims
that prayer, divine intervention, or the ministrations of an individual healer
can cure illness have been popular throughout history. Miraculous recoveries
have been attributed to many techniques commonly lumped together as "faith
healing". It can involve prayer, a visit to a religious shrine, or simply a
strong belief in a supreme being. The term is best known in connection with
Christianity. Some people interpret the Bible, especially the New Testament, as
teaching belief in, and practice of, faith healing. There have been claims that
faith can cure blindness, deafness, cancer, AIDS, developmental disorders,
anemia, arthritis, corns, defective speech, multiple sclerosis, skin rashes,
total body paralysis, and various injuries. Unlike faith healing, advocates of
spiritual healing make no attempt to seek divine intervention, instead
believing in divine energy. The increased interest in alternative medicine at
the end of the twentieth century has given rise to a parallel interest among
sociologists in the relationship of religion to health. The American Cancer
Society states "available scientific evidence does not support claims that
faith healing can actually cure physical ailments." "Death, disability, and
other unwanted outcomes have occurred when faith healing was elected instead of
medical care for serious injuries or illnesses." In various belief systems.
Faith Healing claims have been made by many religions and the sick have visited
their shrines in hopes of recovery. Christianity. Overview. One use of the term
"faith healing" is in reference to the belief of some Christians that God heals
people through the power of the Holy Spirit, often involving the laying on of
hands. It is also called supernatural healing, divine healing, and miracle
healing, among other things. In the Old Testament, "Jehovah-Rapha," translated
"I am the Lord your Physician" or "I am the Lord who heals you", is one of the
seven redemptive names for Jehovah God. Healing in the Bible is often
associated with the ministry of specific individuals including Elijah, Jesus
and Paul. Christian physician Reginald B. Cherry views faith healing as a
pathway of healing in which God uses both the natural and the supernatural to
heal. Being healed has been described as a privilege of accepting Christ's
redemption on the cross.p Pentecostal writer Wilfred Graves, Jr. views the
healing of the body as a physical expression of salvation. says, "This ministry
of healing was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah, 53:5
(NKJV): 'He took up our infirmities and carried our diseases.'" "Faith" in this
context is based on biblical uses of the term. Faith has been called "the very
nature of God." A classic definition of faith appears in the New Testament:
"Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seenâ€¦." () "Charisma" writer Larry Keefauver considers it important to
distinguish between the faith aspect in seeking a cure and the divine source of
the healing. points to God as the source: "I am the Lord that heals you." "The
truth is that God is the God who heals. Faith is trusting the God who heals.
Faith is a radical, absolute surrender to the God who heals. Faith is not
holding on for your healing but holding on to the God who can do the
impossible." Some Christian writers believe it extremely rare that God provides
a supernatural intervention that actually reverses the natural laws governing
the human body. Keefauver cautions against allowing enthusiasm for faith
healing to stir up false hopes "so that a sufferer stakes all his or her faith
on belief in miraculous healing at this level. We cannot build a water-tight
theology promising physical healing, surely, for the most 'miracle-ridden'
Christian will die in the end, yielding to the natural processes of
senescence." Those who actively lay hands on others and pray with them to be
healed are usually aware that healing may not always follow immediately.
Proponents of faith healing say it may come later, but that it may not come at
all. Some biblical examples. In the four gospels in the New Testament, Jesus
cures physical ailments well outside the capacity of first-century medicine.
Most dramatic perhaps is the case of "a woman who had had a discharge of blood
for twelve years, and who had suffered much under many physicians, and had
spent all that she had, and was not better but rather grew worse." After
healing her, Jesus tells her, "Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in
peace! Be cured from your illness." At least two other times Jesus credited the
sufferer's faith as the means of being healed: and . Jesus endorses the use of
the medical assistance of the time (medicines of oil and wine) when he praises
the Good Samaritan for acting as a physician, telling his disciples to go and
do the same thing that the Samaritan did in the story. The healing in the
gospels is referred to as a "sign" to prove Jesus' divinity and to foster
belief in him as the Christ. However, when asked for other types of miracles,
Jesus refuses some but grants others in consideration of the motive of the
request. Some theologians' understanding is that Jesus healed "all" who were
present every single time. Sometimes he determines whether they had faith that
he would heal them. Jesus commands his followers to heal the sick and states
that signs such as healing are evidence of faith. Jesus also commands his
followers to "cure sick people, raise up dead persons, make lepers clean, expel
demons. You received free, give free." Jesus sternly orders many who received
healing from him: "Do not tell anyone!" Jesus did not approve of anyone asking
for a sign just for the spectacle of it, describing such as coming from a
"wicked and adulterous generation." The apostle Paul believes healing is one of
the special gifts of the Holy Spirit, and that the possibility exists that
certain persons may possess this gift to an extraordinarily high degree. In the
New Testament Epistle of James, the faithful are told that to be healed, those
who are sick should call upon the elders of the church to pray over and anoint
[them with oil in the name of the Lord. During Jesus' ministry and after his
Resurrection, the apostles healed the sick and cast out demons, made lame men
walk, raised the dead and did many other miraculous things. Research of beliefs
about miraculous healing. A study of beliefs about miraculous healing among the
more religiously committed has indicated that there are significant differences
in belief about miraculous healing even among people within the same
denomination (Anglican). Researchers found that positive belief in faith
healing was mainly a characteristic of conservative Christians, most especially
those with charismatic experience. Belief about miraculous healing was seen as
a subset of belief about health and well-being in general. Older people had
less belief in miraculous healing or the sovereignty of God over illness, while
those with experience of higher education had more inclusive beliefs about
miraculous healing and saw human input as less important in the healing
process. The study further showed that people with degrees or post-graduate
qualifications can and do believe in the possibility of miraculous healing. No
significant gender differences were noted. Pentecostalism/Charismatic movement.
At the beginning of the 20th century, the new Pentecostal movement drew
participants from the Holiness movement and other movements in America that
already believed in divine healing. By the 1930s, several faith healers drew
large crowds and established worldwide followings. The first Pentecostals in
the modern sense appeared in Topeka, Kansas, in a Bible school conducted by
Charles Fox Parham, a holiness teacher and former Methodist pastor.
Pentecostalism achieved worldwide attention in 1906 through the Azusa Street
Revival in Los Angeles led by William Joseph Seymour. During the Azusa Street
meetings, according to witnesses who wrote about them, blind, crippled or other
sick people would be healed. Some of the participants would eventually minister
extensively in this area. For example, John G. Lake was present during the
years of the Azusa Street revival. Lake had earned huge sums of money in the
insurance business at the turn of the century but gave away his possessions
with the exception of food for his children while he and his wife fasted on a
trip to Africa to do missionary work. Certain people he had never met before
gave him money and keys to a place to stay which were required to enter South
Africa at the dock. His writings tell of numerous healing miracles he and
others performed as over 500 churches were planted in South Africa. Lake
returned to the U.S. and set up healing rooms in Spokane, Washington. Smith
Wigglesworth was also a well-known figure in the early part of the 20th
century. A former English plumber turned evangelist who lived simply and read
nothing but the Bible from the time his wife taught him to read, Wigglesworth
traveled around the world preaching about Jesus and performing faith healings.
Wigglesworth claimed to raise several people from the dead in Jesus' name in
his meetings.p During the 1920s and 1930s, Aimee Semple McPherson was a
controversial faith healer of growing popularity during the Great Depression.
Subsequently, William Branham has been credited as being the founder of the
pos-World War II healing revivals. By the late 1940s, Oral Roberts was well
known, and he continued with faith healing until the 1980s. A friend of Roberts
was Kathryn Kuhlman, another popular faith healer, who gained fame in the 1950s
and had a television program on CBS. Also in this era, Jack Coe and A. A. Allen
were faith healers who traveled with large tents for large open-air crusades.
Oral Roberts's successful use of television as a medium to gain a wider
audience led others to follow suit. His former pilot, Kenneth Copeland, started
a healing ministry. Pat Robertson, Benny Hinn, and Peter Popoff became well-
known televangelists who claimed to heal the sick. Richard Rossi is known for
advertising his healing clinics through secular television and radio. Kuhlman
influenced Benny Hinn, who adopted some of her techniques and wrote a book
about her. Catholicism. Faith healing is reported by Catholics as the result of
intercessory prayer to a saint or to a person with the gift of healing.
According to "U.S. Catholic" magazine, "Even in this skeptical, postmodern,
scientific ageâ€”miracles really are possible." Three-fourths of American
Catholics say they pray for miracles. According to Notre Dame theology
professor John Cavadini, when healing is granted, "The miracle is not primarily
for the person healed, but for all people, as a sign of God's work in the
ultimate healing called 'salvation,' or a sign of the kingdom that is coming."
Some might view their own healing as a sign they are particularly worthy or
holy, while others do not deserve it. The Catholic Church has a special
Congregation dedicated to the careful investigation of the validity of alleged
miracles attributed to prospective saints. Since Catholic Christians believe
the lives of canonized saints in the Church will reflect Christ's, they have
come to actually expect healing miracles. While the popular conception of a
miracle can be wide-ranging, the Catholic Church has a specific definition for
the kind of miracle formally recognized in a canonization process. Among the
best-known accounts by Catholics of faith healings are those attributed to the
miraculous intercession of the apparition of the Blessed Virgin Mary known as
Our Lady of Lourdes at the grotto of Lourdes in France and the remissions of
life-threatening disease claimed by those who have applied for aid to Saint
Jude, who is known as the "patron saint of lost causes". The Catholic Church
has given official recognition to 67 miracles and 7,000 otherwise inexplicable
medical cures since the Blessed Virgin Mary first appeared in Lourdes in
February 1858. These cures are subjected to intense medical scrutiny and are
only recognized as authentic spiritual cures after a commission of doctors and
scientists, called the Lourdes Medical Bureau, has ruled out any physical
mechanism for the patient's recovery. Christian Science. Christian Science
claims that healing is possible through an understanding of the underlying,
spiritual perfection of God's creation. The world as humanly perceived is
believed to be a distortion of the underlying spiritual reality. Christian
Scientists believe that healing through prayer is possible insofar as it
succeeds in correcting the distortion. This is not "intercessory" prayer, but
recognition of the good believed to be already present behind the illusory
appearance, and gratitude for that good. While Christian Scientists are under
no compulsion to choose prayer in preference to material medicine, they
normally choose not to combine the two, in the belief that they tend to work
against each other if used simultaneously. The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. With claims of being the true and restored Church of Jesus
Christ, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has had a long history
of faith healings. Many members of the LDS Church have told their stories of
healing within the LDS publication, the "Ensign". The church believes healings
come most often as a result of priesthood blessings given by the laying on of
hands; however, prayer often accompanied with fasting is also thought to cause
healings. Healing is always attributed to be God's power. Latter-day Saints
believe that the Priesthood of God, held by prophets (such as Moses) and worthy
disciples of the Savior, was restored via heavenly messengers to the first
prophet of this dispensation, Joseph Smith. According to LDS doctrine, even
though members may have the restored priesthood authority to heal in the name
of Jesus Christ, all efforts should be made to seek the appropriate medical
help. Brigham Young stated this effectively, while also noting that the
ultimate outcome is still dependent on the will of God. Many LDS members
believe that healing is one of the signs of the true church of Christ, as
Christ told his disciples to heal the sick as one of their duties(Matt 10:
8 KJV); however, they also believe that healing is not just restricted to the
true church. It is believed that faith in Jesus Christ is the most important
thing in a faith healing; however, it is also believed that even the devil has
some ability to heal and work other miracles (Matt 7:21-23 KJV, Rev. 16:14
KJV). Spiritualism. Spiritualism is a system of belief which holds as a tenet
the belief that contact is possible between the living and the spirits of the
dead. For this reason, death, as an outcome of disease, may not seem as
frightening to Spiritualists as it does to those who practice other religions.
According to the 20th-century Spiritualist author Lloyd Kenyon Jones, "This
does not mean that sickness is unreal. It is real enough from the mortal
viewpoint. The spirit feels the pain, senses the discomfiture of the flesh-
body, even though the spirit is not ill." Spiritualism does not promote
"mental" cures of the type advocated by New Thought; however, help from the
"spirit world" (including advice given by the spirits of deceased physicians)
is sought and may be seen as central to the healing process. As with
practitioners of New Thought, Spiritualists may combine faith healing with
conventional medical therapies. As Jones explained it, "We are not taught to
put the burden on our minds. We do not 'will away' illness. But â€“ we do not
fear illness. [...] When we ask the spirit-world to relieve us of a bodily ill,
we have gone as far as our own understanding and diligence permit. [...] We
have faith, and confidence, and belief. [...] If medicine at times will assist,
we take it â€“ not as a habit, but as a little push over the hill. If we need
medical attention, we secure it." United States law. Thirty-one states have
child-abuse religious exemptions. These are Alabama, Alaska, California,
Colorado, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri,
Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Vermont, Virginia, and Wyoming. Scientific investigations. While
faith in the supernatural is not in itself usually considered to be the purview
of science, claims of reproducible effects are nevertheless subject to
scientific investigation. A Cochrane review of intercessory prayer found
conflicting evidence for claims of a positive effect, but there was a
conclusion that "evidence presented so far is interesting enough to justify
further study." A recent study not included in the review found that
intercessory prayer had no effect on complication-free recovery from heart
surgery, but curiously the group certain of receiving intercessory prayer
experienced higher rates of complications. (See also "Studies on intercessory
prayer") A group at Johns Hopkins published a study in 2011 reporting no
significant effects on pain, mood, health perceptions, illness intrusiveness,
or self-efficacy, but a small improvement in reported energy in a double-blind
study to test the efficacy of spiritual exercise in chronically ill adults.
Criticism. The American Medical Association considers that prayer as therapy
should not be a medically reimbursable or deductible expense. Skeptics of faith
healing offer primarily two explanations for anecdotes of cures or
improvements, relieving any need to appeal to the supernatural. The first is
"post hoc ergo propter hoc", meaning that a genuine improvement or spontaneous
remission may have been experienced coincidental with but independent from
anything the faith healer or patient did or said. These patients would have
improved just as well even had they done nothing. The second is the placebo
effect, through which a person may experience genuine pain relief and other
symptomatic alleviation. In this case, the patient genuinely has been helped by
the faith healer or faith-based remedy, not through any mysterious or numinous
function, but by the power of their own belief that they would be healed. In
both cases the patient may experience a real reduction in symptoms, though in
neither case has anything miraculous or inexplicable occurred. Both cases,
however, are strictly limited to the body's natural abilities. There have been
case studies of claims made. Following a Kathryn Kuhlman 1967 fellowship in
Philadelphia, Dr. William A. Nolen conducted a case study of 23 people who
claimed to have been cured during her services. Nolen's long-term follow-ups
concluded there were no cures in those cases. Furthermore, "one woman who was
said to have been cured of spinal cancer threw away her brace and ran across
the stage at Kuhlman's command; her spine collapsed the next day, according to
Nolen, and she died four months later." In 1976, Kuhlman died in Tulsa,
Oklahoma, following open-heart surgery. There are also some cases of fraud
(faking the condition) or ineffective healing (believing the condition has been
healed immediately after the "healing" and later finding out it has not). These
are discussed in following sections. Negative impact on public health. Reliance
on faith healing to the exclusion of other forms of treatment can have a public
health impact when it reduces or eliminates access to modern medical
techniques. This is evident in both higher mortality rates for children and in
reduced life expectancy for adults. Critics have also made note of serious
injury that has resulted from falsely labelled "healings", where patients
erroneously consider themselves cured and cease or withdraw from treatment. For
example, at least six people have died after faith healing by their church and
being told they had been healed of HIV and could stop taking their medications.
It is the stated position of the AMA that "prayer as therapy should not delay
access to traditional medical care." Christian theological criticism of faith
healing. Christian theological criticism of faith healing broadly falls into
two distinct levels of disagreement. The first is widely termed the "open-but-
cautious" view of the miraculous in the church today. This term is deliberately
used by Robert L. Saucy in the book "Are Miraculous Gifts for Today?". Don
Carson is another example of a Christian teacher who has put forward what has
been described as an "open-but-cautious" view. In dealing with the claims of
Warfield, particularly "Warfield's insistence that miracles ceased," Carson
asserts, "But this argument stands up only if such miraculous gifts are
theologically tied exclusively to a role of attestation; and that is
demonstrably not so." However, while affirming that he does not expect healing
to happen today, Carson is critical of aspects of the faith healing movement,
"Another issue is that of immense abuses in healing practises... The most
common form of abuse is the view that since all illness is directly or
indirectly attributable to the devil and his works, and since Christ by his
cross has defeated the devil, and by his Spirit has given us the power to
overcome him, healing is the inheritance right of all true Christians who call
upon the Lord with genuine faith." The second level of theological disagreement
with Christian faith healing goes further. Commonly referred to as
cessationism, its adherents either claim that faith healing will not happen
today at all, or may happen today, but it would be unusual. Richard Gaffin
argues for a form of cessationism in an essay alongside Saucy's in the book
"Are Miraculous Gifts for Today"? In his book "Perspectives on Pentecost"
Gaffin states of healing and related gifts that "the conclusion to be drawn is
that as listed in 1 Corinthians 12(vv. 9f., 29f.) and encountered throughout
the narrative in Acts, these gifts, particularly when exercised regularly by a
given individual, are part of the foundational structure of the church... and
so have passed out of the life of the church." Gaffin qualifies this, however,
by saying "At the same time, however, the sovereign will and power of God today
to heal the sick, particularly in response to prayer (see e.g. James 5:14,15),
ought to be acknowledged and insisted on." Fraud. Skeptics of faith healers
point to fraudulent practices either in the healings themselves (such as plants
in the audience with fake illnesses), or concurrent with the healing work
supposedly taking place and claim that faith healing is a quack practice in
which the "healers" use well known non-supernatural illusions to exploit
credulous people in order to obtain their gratitude, confidence and money.
James Randi's "The Faith Healers" investigates Christian evangelists such as
Peter Popoff, who claimed to heal sick people and to give personal details
about their lives, but was receiving radio transmissions from his wife,
Elizabeth, who was off-stage reading information that she and her aides had
gathered from earlier conversations with members of the audience. The book also
questioned how faith healers use funds that were sent to them for specific
purposes. Physicist Robert L. Park and doctor and consumer advocate Stephen
Barrett have called into question the ethicality of some exorbitant fees. There
have also been legal controversies. For example, in 1955 at a Jack Coe revival
service in Miami, Florida, Coe told the parents of a three year old boy that he
healed their son who had polio. Coe then told the parents to remove the boy's
leg braces. However, their son was not cured of polio and removing the braces
left the boy in constant pain. As a result, Coe was arrested and charged on
February 6, 1956 with practicing medicine without a license, a felony in the
state of Florida. A Florida Justice of the Peace dismissed the case on grounds
that Florida exempts divine healing from the law. Later that year Coe was
diagnosed with bulbar polio, and died a few weeks later at Dallas' Parkland
Hospital on December 17, 1956.
