Divine grace Divine grace is a theological term which is present in many and
varied spiritual traditions. Generally Grace means the blessings that come from
above regardless of merit. Grace in this context is something that is God-
given, made possible only by Jesus Christ and none other. It is God's gift of
salvation granted to sinners for their salvation. Common Christian teaching is
that grace is unmerited mercy (favor) that God gave to humanity by sending his
son to die on a cross, thus delivering eternal salvation. For example (King
James Version) "And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with
wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him." In this example when using the
definition of grace to mean unmerited favor it does not make sense that the
sinless Christ would need this. Equally how can one fall short of grace () or
meekness attract it and pride repel it () if it is unmerited. James Ryle has
suggested "Grace is the empowering Presence of God enabling you to be who He
created you to be, and to do what He has called you to do." Alternatively Bill
Gothard has suggested "Grace gives us the desire and the power that God gives
us to do his will." Both of these definitions make good sense of the word grace
throughout the Bible. In the New Testament, the word translated as grace is the
Greek word "charis" (Greek ), pronounced khar'-ece, for which Strong's
Concordance gives this definition; "Grace, the state of kindness and favor
towards someone, often with a focus on a benefit given to the object." A Greek
word that is related to "charis" is "charisma" (gracious gift). Both these
words originated from another Greek word "chairo" (to rejoice, be glad,
delighted). In the Old Testament, the Hebrew term used is "chen" (), which is
defined in Strong's as "favor, grace or charm; grace is the moral quality of
kindness, displaying a favorable disposition". In the King James translation,
Chen is translated as "grace" 38 times, "favour" 26 times, twice as "gracious",
once as "pleasant", and once as "precious". Within Christianity, there are
differing conceptions of grace. In particular, Catholics and Protestants use
the word in substantially different ways. It has been described as "the
watershed that divides Catholicism from Protestantism, Calvinism from
Arminianism, modern liberalism from conservatism". Catholic doctrine teaches
that God has imparted Divice Grace upon humanity, and uses the sacraments to
facilitate the reception of His grace. Protestants, generally, do not share
this sacramental view. In the Catholic Church a state of grace is granted by
God from baptism firstly, instead of plainly by faith, and from the sacrament
of reconciliation after if a mortal sin is committed. A mortal sin makes the
state of grace lost even if faith is still present. Hinduism. Hindu devotional
or bhakti literature available throughout India is replete with references to
grace (kripa) as the ultimate key required for spiritual self-realization.
Some, such as the ancient sage Vasistha, in his classical work Yoga Vasistha,
considered it to be the only way to transcend the bondage of lifetimes of
karma.[http://www.venkatesaya.com/241_vasistha01_months_tags/
index.vasistha01_months_tags.php?m=12&d=27] One Hindu philosopher,
Madhvacharya, held that grace was not a gift from God, but rather must be
earned. Islam. Dr. Umar Al-Ashqar, dean of the Faculty of Islamic Law, at al-
Zarqaâ€™ University in Zarqa, Jordan wrote that "Paradise is something of
immense value; a person cannot earn it by virtue of his deeds alone, but by the
Grace and Mercy of Allah." This stance is supported by hadith: according to Abu
Huraira, Muhammad once said that "None amongst you can get into Paradise by
virtue of his deeds alone ... not even I, but that Allah should wrap me in his
grace and mercy."
