Documentary hypothesis The documentary hypothesis, (DH) (sometimes called the
Wellhausen hypothesis), holds that the Torah was derived from originally
independent, parallel and complete narratives, which were subsequently combined
into the current form by a series of redactors (editors). The number of these
is usually set at four, but this is not an essential part of the hypothesis.
The hypothesis was developed in the 18th and 19th centuries from the attempt to
reconcile inconsistencies in the biblical text. Biblical scholars, using source
criticism, eventually arrived at the theory that the Torah was composed of
selections woven together from separate, at times inconsistent, sources, each
originally a complete and independent document. By the end of the 19th century
it was generally agreed that there were four main sources, combined into their
final form by a series of redactors, R. These four sources came to be known as
the Yahwist, or Jahwist, J (J being the German equivalent of the English letter
Y); the Elohist, E; the Deuteronomist, D, (the name comes from the Book of
Deuteronomy, D's contribution to the Torah); and the Priestly Writer, P. While
the hypothesis has been increasingly challenged by other models in the last
part of the 20th century, its terminology and insights continue to provide the
framework for modern theories on the origins of the Torah. Outline of the
hypothesis (Wellhausen's formulation). Wellhausen's documentary hypothesis
proposes that the Torah was originally four distinct narratives, each complete
in itself, each dealing with the same incidents and characters, but with
distinctive "messages". The four were combined twice by editors ("redactors")
who strove to keep as much as possible of the original documents. J, Jahwist
source. The documentary hypothesis attributes anthropomorphic descriptions of
Yahweh, personal visits from Yahweh, and use of the personal name prior to
Exodus 3 to the Jahwist source. It is a misunderstanding of the documentary
hypothesis to attribute all use of the personal name Yahweh to the hypothetical
Jahwist source; the hypothetical Deuteronomist, Elohist, and Priestly source
documents all contain numerous uses of the personal name Yahweh, but the
Jahwist source document is the only one to use the personal name Yahweh prior
to Exodus 3. Believed to be the oldest source, concerned with narratives,
making up half of Genesis and half of Exodus, plus fragments of Numbers. J has
a special interest in the territory of the Kingdom of Judah and individuals
connected with its history. J has an eloquent style. Scholars estimate the date
of composition as c. 950¬ BC, not long before the split of the united Kingdom
of Israel into the northern kingdom of Israel and the southern kingdom of Judah
in 922¬ BC. The Jahwist presents a theology of history, rather than timeless
philosophical theology. Yahweh‚Äôs character is known by his actions. The
Jahwist picture of Yahweh begins with the creation of human beings and the
early history of mankind in general (Genesis 2-11). The Jahwist contributions
in this material do not intend to present an exhaustive history, but rather
certain episodes with particular importance to later generations. These
episodes explain human mortality, the need to work for a living, the existence
of many languages, rivalry among brothers, and man‚Äôs attempt to break through
God‚Äôs limits. The family is often in view in theological contexts, and the
sequence of sin-punishment-mercy appears several times. The Jahwist picture of
a theology of history continues with the call of Abraham and the subsequent
history of Israel and their ancestors. The Jahwist presents the nation of
Israel as Yahweh‚Äôs own people, which he brought into being, protected, and
settled in the land of Canaan, in fulfillment of promises to Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. The Jahwist source presents a history of Israel that also
illustrates themes of sin-punishment-grace, but more especially one that
portrays Yahweh as a powerful deliverer and provider of his people‚Äôs needs.
Faith in Yahweh alone is the primary virtue. The Jahwist also emphasizes
Israel‚Äôs destiny to be a great nation who will rule over her neighbors and
have a king from the tribe of Judah. The theology of the Jahwist extends beyond
Israel and includes notice that all nations will be blessed through Abraham (or
bless themselves through Abraham); furthermore, the report of the destruction
of Sodom and Gomorrah is attributed to the Jahwist. E, Elohist source. Use of
the generic word for deity, Elohim, rather than the more personal name, YHWH,
prior to Exodus 3, and descriptions of Yahweh of a more impersonal nature (for
example, speaking through dreams, prophets, and angels rather than personal
appearances) indicate the Elohist source, according to the documentary
hypothesis. The Elohist‚Äôs narrative does not begin with a depiction of
Yahweh‚Äôs creation of humankind, but with the divine address to Abraham, the
ancestor of Israel. Because both the Jahwist source and the Elohist source use
"Yahweh" for God after Exodus 3, it is more difficult to discern Elohist from
Jahwist source material from that point onward. E parallels J, often
duplicating the narratives. E makes up a third of Genesis and half of Exodus,
plus fragments of Numbers. E describes a human-like God initially called
"Elohim", and "Yahweh" subsequent to the incident of the burning bush, at which
Elohim reveals himself as Yahweh. E focuses on the Kingdom of Israel and on the
Shiloh priesthood, and has a moderately eloquent style. Scholars suggest the
Elohist source was composed c. 850¬ BC. The theology of the Elohist focuses on
four key elements: 1) prophetic leadership, 2) the fear of God, 3) covenant,
and 4) the theology of history. Prophetic leadership is emphasized by building
the narrative on four key ancestors (Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, and Moses) who are
presented as prophets who receive revelations from God in visions and dreams.
The Elohist‚Äôs concept of the fear of God goes beyond reverent awe and is the
root of Abraham‚Äôs obedience to the command to slay his son. Covenant is
emphasized by the Elohist on a number of occasions, notably the covenant
ceremony of Exodus 24, establishment of the tent of meeting, and Israel‚Äôs
rebellion at Sinai with worship of the golden calf which presents the
Elohist‚Äôs gloomy view of Israel‚Äôs propensity to violate her covenant with
God. The Elohist theology of history is focused on the nation of Israel and
more inclined than the Jahwist to focus on the specifically religious aspects
of prayer, sacrifice, and prophetic revelations. The goal of history for Israel
is explicitly religious: to be ‚Äúa kingdom of priests and a holy nation.‚Äù D,
Deuteronomist source. According to M. Noth, the Deuteronomist wrote in the
middle of the 6th century BC with the purpose of addressing contemporaries in
the Babylonian exile to show them that ‚Äútheir sufferings were fully deserved
consequences of centuries of decline in Israel‚Äôs loyalty to Yahweh.‚Äù
Loyalty to Yahweh was measured in terms of obedience to the Deuteronomic law.
Since Israel and Judah had failed to follow that law, their histories had ended
in complete destruction in accordance with the divine judgment envisaged by
Deuteronomy. ‚ÄúBut it shall come to pass, if you will not listen to the voice
of Yahweh your God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes
which I command you this day, that all these curses shall come on you, and
overtake you.‚Äù D in the Pentateuch is restricted to the book of Deuteronomy,
although it continues into the subsequent books of Joshua, Judges and Kings. It
takes the form of a series of sermons about the Law, as well as recapitulating
the narrative of Exodus and Numbers. Its distinctive term for God is "YHWH
Eloheinu", traditionally translated in English as "The Lord our God." Scholars
estimate this source may have been composed c. 650‚Äì621¬ BC, which would have
been prior to the Babylonian Exile (587-539¬ BC). According to Gerhard von Rad,
Noth‚Äôs view of the purpose of the Deuteronomist emphasized the theme of
judgment and missed the theme of Yahweh‚Äôs grace in the Deuteronomistic
History. The Deuteronomist reported repeated instances of Yahweh‚Äôs word at
work in describing previously reported oracles of Yahweh‚Äôs prophets being
precisely fulfilled in events described later. On the one hand, destruction of
Israel and Judah was portrayed as according to the prophetic pronouncement of
doom in retaliation for disobedience. On the other hand, the final destruction
was restrained by Yahweh‚Äôs promise to David found in Nathan‚Äôs oracle in 2
Samuel 7 and reiterated throughout 1-2 Kings. H.W. Wolff describes the purpose
of the Deuteronomist in the pattern of apostasy, punishment, repentance, and
deliverance common in the Deuteronomistic History. According to Wolff, the
Deuteronomist‚Äôs intent was to show the exiles that they were in the second
stage of the pattern and therefore needed to ‚Äúcry out to Yahweh in
repentance.‚Äù According to the pattern of Yahweh‚Äôs previous dealings with
Israel, the imperative for the exiles was simply to turn back to God. P,
Priestly source. The documentary hypothesis describes the Priestly source as
using the title Elohim as the general name for God in the primeval period
(Genesis 1-11). El Shaddai is the first special name for God and it is revealed
to the patriarchs and reserved for that era. Yahweh is the personal name for
God that is revealed to Moses and never set in the mouth of any speaker by the
Priestly source prior to Moses. The Priestly source portrays God/Yahweh as the
creator of the whole world, which he declared to be good, and on which he has
bestowed his blessing. Humanity is created in God‚Äôs image (or as God‚Äôs
image) implying dominion over the whole earth. P includes many lists
(especially genealogies), dates, numbers and laws. Portrayals of God viewed as
distant and unmerciful are ascribed to P. P partly duplicates J and E, but
alters details to stress the importance of the priesthood. P consists of about
a fifth of Genesis (including its famous first chapter), substantial portions
of Exodus and Numbers, and almost all of Leviticus. According to Wellhausen, P
has a low level of literary style. Scholars estimate its composition c.
600‚Äì400¬ BC. The Priestly source portrays Yahweh as a God who is interested
in ritual. The covenant of circumcision, the dietary laws, and the emphasis on
making a tabernacle according to a divinely revealed plan are all ascribed to
the Priestly source. Yahweh‚Äôs presence and Yahweh‚Äôs blessings are described
in the Priestly source not to be mediated by the king, but by the high priest
mediating at the central place of worship. The Priestly source depicts a formal
structure in terms of space, time, and social structure. The spatial center of
the universe is the sanctuary which is first modeled in the tabernacle and
later in the temple modeled after the pattern revealed to Moses. It is at this
specific location that Yahweh wanted to make himself present to his people.
Yahweh has arranged the temporal order around progressive layers of Sabbaths:
seven days, seven months, seven years, seven times seven years. In terms of
social structure, the Priestly source portrays Yahweh as granting his presence
to the particular people ‚Äúwho know his name.‚Äù The priesthood, the ritual
system, and the law represent the cosmic order in a priestly garment. Before
Wellhausen. The traditional view that Moses was the author of the Torah came
under increasing and detailed scrutiny in the 17th century. In 1651 Thomas
Hobbes, in chapter 33 of "Leviathan", cited several passages, such as Deut 34:
6 ("no man knoweth of his sepulchre to this day", implying an author living
long after Moses' death); Num 21:14 (referring to a previous book of Moses'
deeds); both, according to the Latin based translation and Gen 12:6 ("and the
Canaanite was then in the land", implying an author living in a time when the
Canaanite was no longer in the land); and concluded that none of these could be
by Moses. Others, including Isaac de la Peyr√®re, Baruch Spinoza, Richard
Simon, and John Hampden came to the same conclusion, but their works were
condemned, several of them were imprisoned and forced to recant, and an attempt
was made on Spinoza's life. In 1753 Jean Astruc printed (anonymously)
"Conjectures sur les m√©moires originaux, dont il para√Æt que Mo√Øse s'est
servi pour composer le livre de la Gen√®se" ("Conjectures on the original
accounts of which it appears Moses availed himself in composing the Book of
Genesis"). Astruc's motive was to refute Hobbes and Spinoza ‚Äì "the sickness
of the last century", as he called their work. To do this, he applied to
Genesis the tools of literary analysis which scholars were already using with
Classical texts such as the Iliad to sift variant traditions and arrive at the
most authentic text. He began by identifying two markers which seemed to
identify consistent variations, the use of "Elohim" or "YHWH" (Yahweh) as the
name for God, and the appearance of duplicated stories, or doublets, such as
the two accounts of the creation in the first and second chapters of Genesis
and the two accounts of Sarah and a foreign king (Gen.12 and Gen.20). He
assigned verses to ruled columns, the "Elohim" verses in one column, the "YHWH"
verses in another, and the members of the doublets in their own columns beside
these. The parallel columns thus constructed contained two long narratives,
each dealing with the same incidents. Astruc suggested that these were the
original documents used by Moses, and that Genesis as written by Moses had
looked just like this, parallel accounts meant to be read separately. According
to Astruc, a later editor had combined the columns into a single narrative,
creating the confusions and repetitions noted by Hobbes and Spinoza. The tools
adapted by Astruc for biblical source criticism were developed much further by
subsequent scholars, most of them German. From 1780 onwards Johann Gottfried
Eichhorn extended Astruc's analysis beyond Genesis to the entire Pentateuch,
and by 1823 he had concluded that Moses had had no part in writing any of it.
In 1805 Wilhelm de Wette concluded that Deuteronomy represented a third
independent source. About 1822 Friedrich Bleek identified Joshua as a
continuation of the Pentateuch via Deuteronomy, while others identified signs
of the Deuteronomist in Judges, Samuel, and Kings. In 1853 Hermann Hupfeld
suggested that the Elohist was really two sources and should be split, thus
isolating the Priestly source; Hupfeld also emphasized the importance of the
Redactor, or final editor, in producing the Torah from the four sources. Not
all the Pentateuch was traced to these four sources: numerous smaller sections
were identified, such as the Holiness Code contained in Leviticus 17 to 26.
Scholars also attempted to identify the sequence and dates of the four sources,
and to propose who might have produced them, and why. De Wette had concluded in
1805 that none of the Pentateuch was composed before the time of David; since
Spinoza, D was connected with the priests of the Temple in Jerusalem during the
reign of Josiah in 621¬ BC; beyond this, scholars argued variously for
composition in the order PEJD, or EJDP, or JEDP: the subject was far from
settled. The Wellhausen (or Graf‚ÄìWellhausen) hypothesis. In 1876/77 Julius
Wellhausen published "Die Composition des Hexateuch und der historischen
B√ºcher des Alten Testaments" ("The Composition of the Hexateuch and the
historical books of the Old Testament", i.e. the Pentateuch plus the book of
Joshua), in which he set out the four-source hypothesis of Pentateuchal
origins; this was followed in 1878 by "Prolegomena zur Geschichte Israels"
("Prolegomena to the History of Israel"), a work which traced the development
of the religion of the ancient Israelites from an entirely secular, non-
supernatural standpoint. Wellhausen contributed little that was new, but sifted
and combined the previous century of scholarship into a coherent, comprehensive
theory on the origins of the Torah and of Judaism, one so persuasive that it
dominated scholarly debate on the subject for the next hundred years.
Distinguishing the sources. Wellhausen's criteria for distinguishing between
sources were those developed by his predecessors over the previous century:
style (including but not exclusively the choice of vocabulary); divine names;
doublets and occasionally triplets. J was identified with a rich narrative
style, E was somewhat less eloquent, P's language was dry and legalistic.
Vocabulary items such as the names of God, or the use of Horeb (E and D) or
Sinai (J and P) for God's mountain; ritual objects such as the ark, mentioned
frequently in J but never in E; the status of judges (never mentioned in P) and
prophets (mentioned only in E and D); the means of communication between God
and humanity (J's God meets in person with Adam and Abraham, E's God
communicates through dreams, P's can only be approached through the
priesthood): all these and more formed the toolkit for discriminating between
sources and allocating verses to them. Dating the sources. Wellhausen's
starting point for dating the sources was the event described in 2 Kings 22:
8‚Äì20: a "scroll of Torah" (which can be translated "instruction" or "law") is
discovered in the Temple in Jerusalem by the High Priest Hilkiah in the
eighteenth year of king Josiah, who had ascended the throne as a child of
eight. What Josiah reads there causes him to embark on a campaign of religious
reform, destroying all altars except that in the Temple, prohibiting all
sacrifice except at the Temple, and insisting on the exclusive worship of
Yahweh. In the 4th century Jerome had speculated that the scroll may have been
Deuteronomy; de Wette in 1805 suggested that it might have been only the law-
code at Deuteronomy 12‚Äì26 that Hilkiah found, and that he might have written
it himself, alone or in collaboration with Josiah. The Deuteronomistic
historian certainly held Josiah in high regard: 1 Kings 13 names him as one who
will be sent by Yahweh to slaughter the apostate priests of Beth-el, in a
prophecy allegedly made 300 years before his birth. With D anchored in history,
Wellhausen proceeded to place the remaining sources around it. He accepted Karl
Heinrich Graf's conclusion that the sources were written in the order J-E-D-P.
This was contrary to the general opinion of scholars at the time, who saw P as
the earliest of the sources, "the official guide to approved divine worship",
and Wellhausen's sustained argument for a late P was the great innovation of
the "Prolegomena". J and E he ascribed to the early monarchy, approximately
950¬ BC for J and 850¬ BC for E; P he placed in the early Persian post-Exilic
period, around 500¬ BC. His argument for these dates was based on what was seen
in his day as the natural evolution of religious practice: in the pre-and early
monarchic society described in Genesis and Judges and Samuel, altars were
erected wherever the Patriarchs or heroes such as Joshua chose, anyone could
offer the sacrifice, and portions were offered to priests as the one offering
the sacrifice chose; by the late monarchy sacrifice was beginning to be
centralized and controlled by the priesthood, while pan-Israelite festivals
such as Passover were instituted to tie the people to the monarch in a joint
celebration of national history; in post-Exilic times the temple in Jerusalem
was firmly established as the only sanctuary, only the descendants of Aaron
could offer sacrifices, festivals were linked to the calendar instead of to the
seasons, and the schedule of priestly entitlements was strictly mandated. The
four sources were combined by a series of Redactors (editors), first J with E
to form a combined JE, then JE with D to form a JED text, and finally JED with
P to form JEDP, the final Torah. Taking up a scholarly tradition stretching
back to Spinoza and Hobbes, Wellhausen named Ezra, the post-Exilic leader who
re-established the Jewish community in Jerusalem at the behest of the Persian
emperor Artaxerxes I in 458¬ BC, as the final redactor. After Wellhausen. For
much of the 20th century Wellhausen's hypothesis formed the framework within
which the origins of the Pentateuch were discussed, and even the Vatican came
to urge that the "light derived from recent research" not be neglected by
Catholic scholars, urging them especially to pay attention to "the sources
written or oral" and "the forms of expression" used by the "sacred writer".
Some important modifications were introduced, notably by Albrecht Alt and
Martin Noth, who argued for the oral transmission of ancient core
beliefs‚Äîguidance out of Egypt, conquest of the Promised Land, covenants,
revelation at Sinai/Horeb, etc. Simultaneously, the work of the American
Biblical archaeology school under William F. Albright seemed to confirm that
even if Genesis and Exodus were only given their final form in the first
millennium BC, they were still firmly grounded in the material reality of the
second millennium. The overall effect of such refinements was to aid the wider
acceptance of the basic hypothesis by reassuring believers that even if the
final form of the Pentateuch was late and not due to Moses himself, it was
nevertheless possible to recover a credible picture of the period of Moses and
of the patriarchal age. Hence, although challenged by scholars such as Umberto
Cassuto, opposition to the documentary hypothesis gradually waned, and until
the 1970s it was almost universally accepted. This changed when R. N. Whybray
in 1987 restated almost identical arguments with far greater consequences. By
that time three separate models for the composition of the Pentateuch had been
proposed: the documentary (the Torah as a compilation of originally separate
but complete books), the supplementary (a single original book, supplemented
with later additions/deletions), and the fragmentary (many fragmentary works
and editions). Whybray pointed out that of the three possible models the
documentary was the most difficult to demonstrate, for while the supplemental
and fragmentary models propose relatively simple, logical processes and can
account for the unevenness of the final text, the process envisaged by the DH
is both complex and extremely specific in its assumptions about ancient Israel
and the development of its religion. Whybray went on to assert that these
assumptions were illogical and contradictory, and did not offer real
explanatory power: why, for example, should the authors of the separate sources
avoid duplication, while the final redactor accepted it? "Thus the hypothesis
can only be maintained on the assumption that, while consistency was the
hallmark of the various documents, inconsistency was the hallmark of the
redactors!" Since Whybray there has been a proliferation of theories and models
regarding the origins of the Torah, many of them radically different from
Wellhausen's model. Thus, to mention some of the major figures from the last
decades of the 20th century, H. H. Schmid almost completely eliminated J,
allowing only a late Deuteronomical redactor. With the idea of identifiable
sources disappearing, the question of dating also changes its terms.
Additionally, some scholars have abandoned the Documentary hypothesis entirely
in favour of alternative models which see the Pentateuch as the product of a
single author, or as the end-point of a process of creation by the entire
community. Rolf Rendtorff and Erhard Blum saw the Pentateuch developing from
the gradual accretion of small units into larger and larger works, a process
which removes both J and E, and, significantly, implied a fragmentary rather
than a documentary model for Old Testament origins; and John Van Seters, using
a different model, envisaged an ongoing process of supplementation in which
later authors modified earlier compositions and changed the focus of the
narratives. The most radical contemporary proposal has come from Thomas L.
Thompson, who suggests that the final redaction of the Torah occurred as late
as the early Hasmonean monarchy. The documentary hypothesis still has many
supporters, especially in the United States, where William H. Propp has
completed a two-volume translation and commentary on Exodus for the Anchor
Bible Series from within a DH framework, and Antony F. Campbell and Mark A.
O‚ÄôBrien have published a "Sources of the Pentateuch" presenting the Torah
sorted into continuous sources following the divisions of Martin Noth. Richard
Elliott Friedman's "Who Wrote the Bible?" (1987) and "The Bible with Sources
Revealed" (2003) were in essence an extended response to Whybray, explaining,
in terms based on the history of ancient Israel, how the redactors could have
tolerated inconsistency, contradiction and repetition, indeed had it forced
upon them by the historical setting in which they worked. Friedman's classic
four-source division differed from Wellhausen in accepting Yehezkel Kaufmann's
dating of P to the reign of Hezekiah; this in itself is no small modification
of Wellhausen, for whom a late dating of P was essential to his model of the
historical development of Israelite religion. Friedman argued that J appeared a
little before 722¬ BC, followed by E, and a combined JE soon after that. P was
written as a rebuttal of JE (c. 715‚Äì687¬ BC), and D was the last to appear,
at the time of Josiah (c. 622¬ BC), before the Redactor, whom Friedman
identifies as Ezra, collated the final Torah. While the terminology and
insights of the documentary hypothesis‚Äînotably its claim that the Pentateuch
is the work of many hands and many centuries, and that its final form belongs
to the middle of the 1st millennium BC‚Äîcontinue to inform scholarly debate
about the origins of the Pentateuch, it no longer dominates that debate as it
did for the first two thirds of the 20th century. "The verities enshrined in
older introductions the subject of the origins of the Pentateuch have
disappeared, and in their place scholars are confronted by competing theories
which are discouragingly numerous, exceedingly complex, and often couched in an
expository style that is (to quote John van Seter's description of one seminal
work) 'not for the faint-hearted.'"
