Dogma Dogma is the official system of belief or doctrine held by a religion, or
a particular group or organization. It serves as part of the primary basis of
an ideology or belief system, and it can not be changed or discarded without
affecting the very system's paradigm, or the ideology itself. Although it
generally refers to religious beliefs that are accepted regardless of evidence,
they can refer to acceptable opinions of philosophers or philosophical schools,
public decrees, or issued decisions of political authorities. The term derives
from Greek "that which seems to one, opinion or belief" and that from
("dokeo"), "to think, to suppose, to imagine". Dogma came to signify laws or
ordinances adjudged and imposed upon others by the First Century. The plural is
either "dogmas" or "dogmata", from Greek . The term "dogmatics" is used as a
synonym for systematic theology, as in Karl Barth's defining textbook of neo-
orthodoxy, the 14-volume "Church Dogmatics". In religion. Dogmata are found in
religions such as Christianity, Judaism, and Islam, where they are considered
core principles that must be upheld by all followers of that religion. As a
fundamental element of religion, the term "dogma" is assigned to those
theological tenets which are considered to be well demonstrated, such that
their proposed disputation or revision effectively means that a person no
longer accepts the given religion as his or her own, or has entered into a
period of personal doubt. Dogma is distinguished from theological opinion
regarding those things considered less well-known. Dogmata may be clarified and
elaborated but not contradicted in novel teachings (e.g., Galatians 1:6-9).
Rejection of dogma may lead to expulsion from a religious group. In
Christianity, religious beliefs are defined by the Church. It is usually on
scripture or communicated by church authority. It is believed that these dogmas
will lead human beings towards redemption and thus the â€œpaths which lead to
God". For Catholicism and Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Christianity, the
dogmata are contained in the Nicene Creed and the canon laws of two, three,
seven, or twenty-one ecumenical councils (depending on whether one is
Nestorian, Oriental Orthodox, Eastern Orthodox, or Roman Catholic). These
tenets are summarized by St. John of Damascus in his "Exact Exposition of the
Orthodox Faith", which is the third book of his main work, titled "The Fount of
Knowledge". In this book he takes a dual approach in explaining each article of
the faith: one, for Christians, where he uses quotes from the Bible and,
occasionally, from works of other Fathers of the Church, and the second,
directed both at non-Christians (but who, nevertheless, hold some sort of
religious belief) and at atheists, for whom he employs Aristotelian logic and
dialectics. The decisions of fourteen later councils that Catholics hold as
dogmatic and two decrees promulgated by Popes' exercising papal infallibility
(see Immaculate Conception and Assumption of Mary) are considered as being a
part of the Church's sacred body of doctrine. Roman Catholic dogmata are a
distinct form of doctrine taught by the Church. Protestants to differing
degrees affirm portions of these dogmata, and often rely on denomination-
specific 'Statements of Faith' which summarize their chosen dogmata (see, e.g.,
Eucharist). In Islam, the dogmatic principles are contained in the "aqidah".
Within many Christian denominations, dogma is referred to as "doctrine". Other
usage. As a possible reaction to skepticism, dogmatism is a set of beliefs or
doctrines that are established as undoubtedly in truth. They are regarded as
(religious) truths relating closely to the nature of faith. The term "dogmatic"
can be used disparagingly to refer to any belief that is held stubbornly,
including political and scientific beliefs. I called this idea the central
dogma, for two reasons, I suspect. I had already used the obvious word
hypothesis in the sequence hypothesis, and in addition I wanted to suggest that
this new assumption was more central and more powerful. ... As it turned out,
the use of the word dogma caused almost more trouble than it was worth... Many
years later Jacques Monod pointed out to me that I did not appear to understand
the correct use of the word dogma, which is a belief that cannot be doubted. I
did apprehend this in a vague sort of way but since I thought that all
religious beliefs were without foundation, I used the word the way I myself
thought about it, not as most of the world does, and simply applied it to a
grand hypothesis that, however plausible, had little direct experimental
support.
