Dogmatic definition In Catholicism, a dogmatic definition is an extraordinary
infallible statement published by a pope or an ecumenical council concerning a
matter of faith or morals, the belief in which the Catholic Church requires of
all Catholics (although Christians who are not Catholic do not recognize the
Catholic Church's authority in such matters). The term most often refers to the
infallible teaching of a truth believed "bona fina de fide credenda", meaning
one defined as explicitly revealed in the deposit of faith and demanding
supernatural faith in itself on the authority of the Word of God: Public
Revelation in Scripture and Tradition. Popes and ecumenical councils may also
extraordinarily infallibly define truths to be held "de fide tenenda," that is
to say discerned as logically implied or intrinsically connected to the deposit
of faith and guaranteed as infallible by the Holy Spirit, but not necessarily
specifically and explicitly Revealed and so demanding supernatural faith not in
themselves specifically, but as part of the faith in the Holy Spirit's
guarantee of the infallibility and authority of the Church in such matters. The
difference is technical; such teachings upon further discernment may be
advanced to the status of "de fide credenda," and denial of either makes one a
heretic as they are both infallible. Contrary to the stereotype that Catholics
think that everything that the pope says is infallible (or that the pope is
impeccable, unable to sin), dogmatic definitions by popes are in fact very
rare. Throughout the entire history of the Church, Papal Infallibility has only
been invoked, at least unambiguously, twice: Ineffabilis Deus, the definition
by Pope Pius IX in 1854 concerning the Immaculate Conception of Mary, and
Munificentissimus Deus, the definition by Pope Pius XII in 1950 concerning the
Assumption of Mary. Beyond these two, theologians disagree on which, if any,
previous papal declarations may be considered as possible examples of
extraordinary infallible dogmatic definitions on the part of a pope. Dogmatic
definitions by ecumenical councils, on the other hand, are significantly more
common throughout history, including, for example, the Trinitarian and
Christological dogmas of the early councils, the teachings on Grace,
Justification, and the Sacraments by the Council of Trent, and most recently
the definition of Papal Infallibility itself by Vatican I. The Church holds her
teachings to be infallible beyond merely those doctrines that have been
dogmatically defined extraordinarily by a pope or ecumenical council. The so-
called ordinary and universal magisterium of the Church is held to be
infallible too, and in fact the ordinary manifestation of infallibility. The
common consensus of the bishops throughout the world and over time is held to
be infallible regardless of whether a Pope or Council has extraordinarily
defined the teaching. This is to avoid a positivistic notion of Truth and
belief. Like extraordinary definitions, the ordinary magisterium may propose
teachings both "de fide credenda" and "de fide tenenda", and the latter may
advance to the status of the former, and both are held to be infallible. John
Paul II, for example, clarified that the reservation of ordination to males
only is infallible by the infallibility of the ordinary magisterium, without
going so far as issuing a separate extraordinary dogmatic definition. Far from
meaning that Catholics are thus free to question this teaching, it means that
it is infallible and unchangeable, demands supernatural faith, and one who
denies it is a heretic. It has been suggested that the reason that John Paul
did not simply define it extraordinarily was in order to not weaken the
understanding that the ordinary magisterium is also infallible, to remind
Catholics that it is not merely the extraordinary definitions that are
infallible and irreversible as if doctrine were positivistic â€” that it holds
"only if the pope says so with a particular formula".
