Dominus Iesus Dominus Iesus () is a declaration by the Congregation for the
Doctrine of the Faith. It was approved in a Plenary meeting of the
Congregation, and bears the signature of its then Prefect, Cardinal Joseph
Ratzinger, now Pope Benedict XVI, and of its then Secretary, Archbishop
Tarcisio Bertone, now Cardinal Secretary of State. The declaration was approved
by Pope John Paul II and was published on August 6, 2000. It is subtitled "On
the Unicity and Salvific Universality of Jesus Christ and the Church". It is
most widely known for its recapitulation of the Catholic dogma that the
Catholic Church is the sole true Church of Christ. On one hand, the document
says that non-Catholic Christian ecclesial communities that have not preserved
a valid episcopate and the genuine and integral substance of the Eucharistic
mystery are not Churches in the proper sense and that non-Christians are
seriously deficient in terms of access to the means of salvation in comparison
with those who in the Church have the full means of salvation. This excludes
the Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Churches, whom the Catholic Church
recognizes as having validly ordained bishops. A Catholic dogma, "Extra
Ecclesiam Nulla Salus" (literally "no salvation outside the Church") has
sometimes been interpreted as denying salvation to non-Catholic Christians as
well as non-Christians, though constant Catholic teaching has stressed the
possibility of salvation for persons invincibly ignorant (through no fault of
their own) of the Catholic Church's necessity and thus not culpable for lacking
communion with the Church. In the 20th century this inclusive approach was
expressed in the condemnation of Feeneyism and in the declaration of the Second
Vatican Council, which said that "the plan of salvation also includes those who
acknowledge the Creator," although this is ambiguous and numerous
interpretations have arisen. Vatican II further affirmed that salvation could
be available to people who had not even heard of Christ (cf. Acts 17:23)â€” but
that all who gain salvation do so only by membership in the Catholic Church,
whether that membership is ordinary (explicit) or by extraordinary means
(implicit). Nicene Creed. The document quotes the Niceno-Constantinopolitan
Creed in its original form, without "Filioque", which was first added to the
creed by the Third Council of Toledo in 589. In the document, that part
therefore reads: "I believe in the Holy Spirit ... who proceeds from the
Father" or, in Latin, "Credo in Spiritum Sanctum ... qui ex Patre procedit."
The phrase "and the Son" (in Latin, "Filioque") was one of the elements that
led to the great schism of 1054 that split Chalcedonian Christianity and has
not yet been healed. The Catholic Church recognizes that the addition of "and
the Son" to the Greek form of the Creed would be wrong, because of the specific
meaning of the Greek verb that is translated as "proceeds", but it holds that
both forms of the text, with and without "Filioque", are orthodox in other
languages, where "proceeds" can also represent a different Greek verb, used by
Greek Fathers when saying that the Holy Spirit "proceeds" (in that sense) from
the Son. The Orthodox Church holds that it was illicit to add the phrase, and
also objects to its content, although both Catholics and Orthodox have agreed
that the formula "and "through" the Son", articulated at the Council of
Florence, is theologically unproblematic. Non-Christian religions. Such Vatican
documents have led some to question the Church's commitment to ecumenism . Pope
John Paul II personally endorsed "Dominus Iesus," and ratified and confirmed it
"with sure knowledge and by his apostolic authority" (a formal sentence used at
the beginning or at the point of signature of an official document). This
document [http://www.vatican.va/roman_curia/congregations/cfaith/documents/
rc_con_cfaith_doc_20000806_dominus-iesus_en.html] states that people outside of
Christianity are "in a gravely deficient situation in comparison with those
who, in the Church, have the fullness of the means of salvation", and that non-
Catholic Christian communities had "defects." This is because, it states, the
Catholic Church was the only Church historically established by Christ and is
the true Church, the mystical body of Christ. Response to criticisms. "1.
Concerning salvation:"
