Eastern Catholic Churches The Eastern Catholic Churches (historically known by
the now non-complimentary term Uniate Churches, which is still in use in some
areas, and also by the inaccurate term eastern-rite Churches) are autonomous,
self-governing (in Latin, "sui iuris") particular churches in full communion
with the Bishop of Rome, the Pope. Together with the Latin Church, they compose
the worldwide Catholic Church. They preserve many centuries-old eastern
liturgical, devotional, and theological traditions, shared in most cases with
the various other Eastern Christian churches with which they were once
associated. A few have never been out of communion with the Pope, a claim made,
for instance, by the Maronites. Although the Churches with which most were
formerly associated may be of traditions out of communion with each other
(Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodoxy, Church of the East), Eastern
Catholic Churches of whatever tradition are all in communion with one another
and with the Latin or Western Church. However, they vary in theological
emphasis, forms of liturgical worship and popular piety, canonical discipline
and terminology. They all recognize the central role of the Bishop of Rome
within the College of Bishops and his infallibility when speaking ex cathedra.
As a number of theological issues separate them from their counterparts who are
of similar traditions, but who are out of communion with Rome, they do not
admit them to the Eucharist or the other sacraments. In the case of the Eastern
Orthodox Churches, these issues result primarily, though not exclusively, from
differences in the understanding of the role and the exent of the authority of
the Bishop of Rome. Historically, Eastern Catholic Churches were located in
Eastern Europe, the Asian Middle East, Northern Africa, and India. Due to
migration they are now also in Western Europe, the Americas and Oceania, where
eparchies have been established alongside the Latin dioceses. Eritrea has only
an Eastern Catholic hierarchy, with no Latin structure. The terms "Byzantine
Catholic" and "Greek Catholic" are used of those who belong to Churches that
use the Byzantine Rite. The terms "Oriental Catholic" and "Eastern Catholic"
include these, but are broader, since they also cover Catholics who follow the
Alexandrian, Antiochian, Armenian and Chaldean liturgical traditions. Juridical
status. The term "Eastern Catholic Churches" refers to 22 of the 23 autonomous
particular Churches in communion with the Bishop of Rome. (Every diocese is a
particular Church, but not an autonomous one in the sense in which the word is
applied to these 22 Churches.) They follow different Eastern Christian
liturgical traditions: Alexandrian, Antiochian, Armenian, Byzantine and
Chaldean. Canonically, each Eastern Catholic Church is "sui iuris" or
autonomous with respect to other Catholic Churches, whether Eastern or Latin,
though all accept the spiritual and juridical authority of the Pope. Thus a
Maronite Catholic is normally subject only to a Maronite bishop. However, if
members of a particular Church are so few that no hierarchy of their own has
been established, their spiritual care is entrusted to a bishop of another
ritual Church. For example, in Eritrea Latin Rite Catholics are in the care of
the Ethiopian Catholic Church. Theologically, all the particular Churches can
be viewed as "sister Churches". According to the Second Vatican Council these
Eastern Churches, along with the larger Latin Church share "equal dignity, so
that none of them is superior to the others as regards rite, and they enjoy the
same rights and are under the same obligations, also in respect of preaching
the Gospel to the whole world (cf. Mark 16:15) under the guidance of the Roman
Pontiff." The Eastern Catholic Churches are in full communion of faith with the
whole of the Catholic Church. Whilst they accept the canonical authority of the
See of Rome, they retain their distinctive liturgical rites, laws and customs,
traditional devotions and have their own theological emphases. Terminology may
vary: for instance, "diocese" and "eparchy", "vicar general" and
"protosyncellus", "confirmation" and "chrismation" are respectively Western and
Eastern terms for the same realities. The mysteries (sacraments) of baptism and
chrismation are generally administered, according to the ancient tradition of
the Church, one immediately after the other. Infants who are baptized and
chrismated are also given the Eucharist. The Eastern Catholic Churches are
represented in the Holy See and the Roman Curia through the Congregation for
the Oriental Churches, which "is made up of a Cardinal Prefect (who directs and
represents it with the help of a Secretary) and 27 Cardinals, one Archbishop
and 4 Bishops, designated by the Pope ad quiquennium. Members by right are the
Patriarchs and the Major Archbishops of the Oriental Churches and the President
of the Pontifical Council for the Promotion of Unity among Christians."
Terminology. Although Eastern Catholics are in communion with the Pope, and are
members of the larger Catholic Church, also called the Roman Catholic Church,
they are not members of the Western or Latin Church, which uses the Latin
liturgical rites, among which the Roman Rite is the most widespread. "Rite".
Care must be taken to distinguish differing meanings of the word ""rite"".
Apart from its reference to the liturgical patrimony of a particular Church,
the word has been and is still sometimes, even if rarely, used of the
particular Church itself. Thus, the term "Latin rite" can refer either to the
Latin Church or to one or more of the Latin liturgical rites, which include the
majority Roman Rite, but also the Ambrosian Rite, the Mozarabic Rite, and
others. In the "Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches" (published in 1990),
the terms "autonomous Church" and "rite" are thus defined: "A group of
Christian faithful linked in accordance with the law by a hierarchy and
expressly or tacitly recognized by the supreme authority of the Church as
autonomous is in this Code called an autonomous Church" (canon 27); "1. A rite
is the liturgical, theological, spiritual and disciplinary patrimony, culture
and circumstances of history of a distinct people, by which its own manner of
living the faith is manifested in each autonomous iuris Church. 2. The rites
treated in this code, unless otherwise stated, are those that arise from the
Alexandrian, Antiochene, Armenian, Chaldean and Constantinopolitan traditions"
(canon 28) When speaking of the Eastern Catholic Churches, the 1983 Latin Code
of Canon Law uses the terms "ritual Church" or "ritual Church sui iuris"
(canons 111 and 112), and also speaks of "a subject of an Eastern rite" (canon
1015 ยง2), "Ordinaries of another rite" (canon 450 ยง1), "the faithful of a
specific rite" (canon 476), etc. The Second Vatican Council spoke of the
Eastern Catholic Churches as "particular Churches or rites". The use of the
term "rite" to refer to the Eastern and Western Churches has now become rare. A
publication of the then-National Council of Catholic Bishops explains: "We have
been accustomed to speaking of the Latin (Roman or Western) Rite or the Eastern
Rites to designate these different Churches. However, the Church's contemporary
legislation as contained in the "Code of Canon Law" and the "Code of Canons of
the Eastern Churches" makes it clear that we ought to speak, not of rites, but
of Churches. Canon 112 of the Code of Canon Law uses the phrase 'autonomous
ritual Churches' to designate the various Churches." And a writer in a
periodical of January 2006 declared: "The Eastern Churches are still mistakenly
called 'Eastern-rite' Churches, a reference to their various liturgical
histories. They are most properly called Eastern Churches, or Eastern Catholic
Churches." "Uniate". The term "Uniat" or "Uniate" is applied to those Eastern
Catholic churches which were previously Eastern Orthodox churches, primarily by
Eastern Orthodox. The term is considered to have a derogatory connotation,
though it was occasionally used by Latin and Eastern Catholics, prior to the
Second Vatican Council. Official Catholic documents no longer use the term, due
to its perceived negative overtones. According to Professor John Erickson of
Saint Vladimir's Orthodox Theological Seminary, "The term 'uniate' itself, once
used with pride in the Roman communion, had long since come to be considered as
pejorative. 'Eastern Rite Catholic' also was no longer in vogue because it
might suggest that the Catholics in question differed from Latins only in the
externals of worship. The Second Vatican Council affirmed rather that Eastern
Catholics constituted "churches", whose vocation was to provide a bridge to the
separated churches of the East." Emergence of Eastern Catholics. Most Eastern
Catholic Churches arose when a group within an ancient Christian Church that
was in disagreement with the See of Rome returned to full communion with that
See. Three Eastern Catholic churches have never broken communion with the
Bishop of Rome since the beginning: (a) The Maronite Church was never out of
communion with Rome, and has no counterpart in the Eastern Orthodox communion.
(b) The Italo-Albanian Catholic Church which, unlike the Maronite Church, uses
the same liturgical rite as the Eastern Orthodox Church.(c) The Syro-Malabar
Church, based in Kerala, India. Other Christians of Kerala, who were originally
of the same East-Syrian tradition, passed instead to the West-Syrian tradition
and now form part of Oriental Orthodoxy. Some from the Oriental Orthodox in
India reunited with the Bishop of Rome in 1930 and became the Syro-Malankara
Catholic Church, another Eastern sui juris church within the Catholic Church.
The canon law that the Eastern Catholic Churches have in common was codified in
the 1990 "Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches". The dicastery that works
with the Eastern Catholic Churches is the Congregation for the Oriental
Churches, which, by law, includes as members all Eastern Catholic patriarchs
and major archbishops. Supreme authority of the Church. Under the Code of
Canons of the Eastern Churches, the Pope has supreme, full, immediate and
universal ordinary authority in the Church, which he can always freely
exercise. The full description is under Title 3, Canons 42 to 54 of the Code of
Canons of the Eastern Churches. Eastern patriarchs and major archbishops. The
Catholic patriarchs and major archbishops derive their titles from the sees of
Alexandria (Copts), Antioch (Syrians, Melkites, Maronites), Babylonia
(Chaldaeans), Cilicia (Armenians), Kiev-Halych (Ukrainians), Ernakulam-Angamaly
(Syro-Malabars), Trivandrum (Syro-Malankaras), and Fฤgฤraล-Alba Iulia
(Romanians). The Eastern Churches are governed under the Code of Canons of the
Eastern Churches. Historical background. Communion between Christian Churches
has been broken over matters of faith, when each side accused the other of
heresy or departure from the true faith (orthodoxy). Communion has been broken
also because of disagreement about questions of authority or the legitimacy of
the election of a particular bishop. In these latter cases, each side accuses
the other of schism, but not of heresy. Within each Church, no longer in
communion with the Church of Rome, there arose a group that considered it
important to restore that communion. The See of Rome accepted them without
requiring that they adopt the customs of the Latin Church, so that they all
have their own "liturgical, theological, spiritual and disciplinary heritage,
differentiated by peoples' culture and historical circumstances, that finds
expression in each "sui iuris" Church's own way of living the faith". At a
meeting at Balamand Monastery, Lebanon in June 1993, the Joint International
Commission for the Theological Dialogue between the Catholic Church and the
Orthodox Church declared that these initiatives that "led to the union of
certain communities with the See of Rome and brought with them, as a
consequence, the breaking of communion with their Mother Churches of the East
... took place not without the interference of extra-ecclesial interests"
(section 8 of the document). Likewise, the Commission acknowledged that
"unacceptable means" were used in attempts to force Eastern Catholics to return
to the Orthodox Church (paragraph 11). The missionary outlook and proselytism
that accompanied the Unia (paragraph 10), was recognized to be incompatible
with the rediscovery of each other as "Sister Churches" (section 12). Thus, the
Commission concluded that the "missionary apostolate ... which has been called
'uniatism', can no longer be accepted either as a method to be followed nor as
a model of the unity our Churches are seeking." Numbers. Eastern Catholic
Churches make up a small percentage of the membership in the Catholic Church
when compared to the Latin Rite, which has over one billion members. The 2008
statistics collected by the CNEWA show that Syriac Christians make up 47% of
Eastern Catholics and Byzantine Christians make up 46%. The three largest
Eastern churches are the Byzantine Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church with 4.3
million members (25%), the Syriac Syro-Malabar Catholic Church at 3.9 million
faithful (23%), and the Maronite Catholic Church of Lebanon with 3.29 million
faithful (20%). Orientalium Dignitas. "Orientalium Dignitas", opening paragraph
As Adrian Fortescue wrote, Pope Leo "begins by explaining again that the
ancient Eastern rites are a witness to the Apostolicity of the Catholic Church,
that their diversity, consistent with unity of the faith, is itself a witness
to the unity of the Church, that they add to her dignity and honour. He says
that the Catholic Church does not possess one rite only, but that she embraces
all the ancient rites of Christendom; her unity consists not in a mechanical
uniformity of all her parts, but on the contrary, in their variety, according
in one principle and vivified by it." Leo declared still in force Pope Benedict
XIV's encyclical "Demandatam", addressed to the Patriarch and the Bishops of
the Melkite Catholic Church, in which Pope Benedict forbade Latin Rite clergy
to induce Melkite Catholics to transfer to the Latin rite, and he broadened
this prohibition to cover all Eastern Catholics, declaring: "Any Latin rite
missionary, whether of the secular or religious clergy, who induces with his
advice or assistance any Eastern rite faithful to transfer to the Latin rite,
will be deposed and excluded from his benefice in addition to the "ipso facto"
suspension "a divinis" and other punishments that he will incur as imposed in
the aforesaid Constitution "Demandatam"." Modern reforms. There had been
confusion on the part of Western clergy as to the legitimacy of a presence of
the Churches of the East in countries seen as belonging to the West, despite
firm and repeated papal confirmation of these Churches' universal character.
The Second Vatican Council brought the reform impulse to visible fruition.
Several documents, both during and after Vatican II have led to significant
reform and development within the Eastern Catholic Churches. Orientalium
Ecclesiarum. In the decree "Orientalium Ecclesiarum" (21 November 1964),
dealing with the Churches of Eastern Christianity, the Second Vatican Council
directed that the traditions of the Eastern Catholic Churches should be
maintained. It declared that "it is the mind of the Catholic Church that each
individual Church or Rite should retain its traditions whole and entire and
likewise that it should adapt its way of life to the different needs of time
and place" (paragraph 2), and that they should all "preserve their legitimate
liturgical rite and their established way of life, and ... these may not be
altered except to obtain for themselves an organic improvement" (para. 6; cf.
22). It confirmed and approved the ancient discipline of the sacraments
existing in the Eastern Churches, and the ritual practices connected with their
celebration and administration, and declared its ardent desire that this should
be re-established, if circumstances warranted (para. 12). It applied this in
particular to administration of Confirmation by priests (para. 13). It
expressed the wish that, where the permanent diaconate (ordination as deacons
of men who are not intended afterwards to become priests) had fallen into
disuse, it should be restored (section 17). Paragraphs 7-11 are devoted to the
powers of the patriarchs and major archbishops of the Eastern Churches, whose
rights and privileges, it says, should be re-established in accordance with the
ancient tradition of each of the Churches and the decrees of the ecumenical
councils, adapted somewhat to modern conditions. Where there is need, new
patriarchates should be established either by an ecumenical council or by the
Bishop of Rome. Lumen Gentium. De iuribus Sedium patriarchalium, cfr. Conc.
Nicaenum, I can. 6 de Alexandria et Antiochia, et can. 7 de Hierosolymis: Conc.
I Oec. Decr., p. 8. Conc. Later. IV, anno 1215, Constit. V: De dignigate
Patriarcharum: ibid. p. 212.-| Conc. Ferr.-Flor.: ibid. p. 504. This variety of
local churches with one common aspiration is splendid evidence of the
catholicity of the undivided Church. In like manner the Episcopal bodies of
today are in a position to render a manifold and fruitful assistance, so that
this collegiate feeling may be put into practical application. Unitatis
Redintegratio. The decree Unitatis Redintegratio (also of 21 November 1964)
deals with the Eastern Catholic Churches in paragraphs 14-17. Code of Canons of
the Eastern Churches. During the First Vatican Council the need for a common
code for the Eastern Churches was discussed, but no concrete action was taken.
Only after the benefits of the 1917 Latin Code were appreciated was a serious
effort made to create a similar code for the Eastern Catholic Churches. This
came to fruition with the promulgation in 1990 of the Code of Canons of the
Eastern Churches, which came into effect in 1991. It is a framework document
that lays out the canons that are a consequence of the "common" patrimony of
the Churches of the East: each individual sui iuris Church has its own canons,
its own particular law, layered on top of this code. Liturgical prescriptions.
Section 5 of the Instruction Past interventions by the Holy See, the
Instruction said, were in some ways defective and needed revision, but often
served also as a safeguard against aggressive initiatives. "Ritus praestantior"
means "preeminent rite". This attitude may have led to interventions in the
Eastern liturgical texts which today, in light of theological studies and
progress, have need of revision, in the sense of a return to ancestral
traditions. The work of the commissions, nevertheless, availing themselves of
the best experts of the times, succeeded in safeguarding a major part of the
Eastern heritage, often defending it against aggressive initiatives and
publishing precious editions of liturgical texts for numerous Eastern Churches.
Today, particularly after the solemn declarations of the Apostolic Letter
"Orientalium Dignitas" by Leo XIII, after the creation of the still active
special Commission for the liturgy within the Congregation for the Eastern
Churches in 1931, and above all after the Second Vatican Council and the
Apostolic Letter "Orientale Lumen" by John Paul II, respect for the Eastern
liturgies is an indisputable attitude and the Apostolic See can offer a more
complete service to the Churches. List of Churches. The Holy See's Annuario
Pontificio gives the following list of Eastern Catholic Churches with the
principal see of each and the countries (or larger political areas) where they
have ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to which are here added the date of union or
foundation in parenthesis and the membership in brackets. The total membership
is about 16,336,000. (EWTN gives the same list, except that it does not place
the liturgical traditions in the alphabetical order in which they are given by
both the Annuario Pontificio and [http://www.intratext.com/IXT/ENG1199/__PS.HTM
canon 28 of the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches and, as noted below, it
treats the Apostolic Exarchate for Byzantine-Rite Catholics in the Czech
Republic, which for the Holy See is part of the Ruthenian Catholic Church, as
if it were a separate autonomous church.). Note: Georgian Byzantine-Rite
Catholics are not recognized as a particular Church (cf. canon 27 of the Code
of Canons of the Eastern Churches). The majority of Eastern Catholic Christians
in the Georgian Republic worship under the form of the Armenian liturgical
rite. The list shows that an individual autonomous particular Church may have
distinct jurisdictions (local particular Churches) in several countries. The
Ruthenian Catholic Church is organized in an exceptional way because of a
constituent metropolia: the Byzantine Catholic Metropolitan Church of
Pittsburgh is also, unofficially, referred to as the Byzantine Catholic Church
in America. Canon law treats it as if it held the rank of an autonomous ("sui
iuris") metropolitan particular Church because of the circumstances surrounding
its 1969 establishment as an ecclesiastical province. At that time, conditions
in the Rusyn homeland, known as Carpatho-Rus, admitted no other solution
because the Byzantine Catholic Church had been forcibly suppressed by the
Soviet authorities. When Communist rule ended, the Eparchy of Mukacheve
(founded in 1771) re-emerged. It has some 320,000 adherents, greater than the
number in the Pittsburgh metropolia. In addition, an apostolic exarchate
established in 1996 for Catholics of Byzantine rite in the Czech Republic is
classed as another part of the Ruthenian Catholic Church. On the EWTN website
the Apostolic Exarchate for Byzantine-rite Catholics in the Czech Republic is
mentioned in a list of Eastern Churches, of which all the rest are autonomous
particular Churches. This is a mistake, since recognition within the Catholic
Church of the autonomous status of a particular Church can only be granted by
the Holy See (cf. canon 27 of the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches),
which instead classifies this Church as one of the constituent local particular
Churches of the autonomous ("sui iuris") Ruthenian Catholic Church. Byzantine-
rite Catholics of Georgian nationality or descent. Some have treated Byzantine
Rite Catholics within the Georgian Catholic Church as a separate particular
Church with a reunion date of either 1861 or 1917. A study by Deacon Methodios
Stadnik states: "The Georgian Byzantine Catholic Exarch, Fr. Shio Batmanishviii
(sic), and two Georgian Catholic priests of the Latin rite were executed by the
Soviet authorities in 1937 after having been held in captivity in Solovki
prison and the northern gulags from 1923." In his book "The Forgotten:
Catholics of the Soviet Union Empire from Lenin through Stalin", Father
Christopher Zugger writes: "By 1936, the Byzantine Catholic Church of Georgia
had two communities, served by a bishop and four priests, with 8,000
believers", and he identifies the bishop as Shio Batmalashvili. The Ukrainian
Helsinki Human Rights Union mentions "the Catholic administrator for Georgia
Shio Batmalashvili" as one of those who were executed as "anti-Soviet elements"
in 1937. The second of these sources calls Batmalashvili a bishop. The first is
ambiguous, calling him an Exarch but giving him the title of Father. The third
merely refers to him as "the Catholic administrator" without specifying whether
he was a bishop or a priest and whether he was in charge of a Latin or a
Byzantine jurisdiction. If Batmalashvili was an "Exarch", and not instead a
bishop connected with the Latin diocese of Tiraspol, which had its seat at
Saratov on the Volga River, to which Georgian Catholics even of Byzantine rite
belonged this would mean that a Georgian Byzantine-Rite Catholic Church
existed, even if only as a local particular Church. However, since the
establishment of a new hierarchical jurisdiction must be published in the Acta
Apostolicae Sedis, and no mention of the setting up of such a jurisdiction for
Byzantine Georgian Catholics exists in that official gazette of the Holy See,
the claim appears to be unfounded. The Annuario Pontificio of the Catholic
Church does not mention Batmalashvili in its editions of the 1930s. If indeed
he was a bishop, he may then have been one of those secretly ordained for the
service of the Church in the Soviet Union by French Jesuit Bishop Michel
d'Herbigny, who was head of the Pontifical Commission for Russia from 1925 to
1934. In the circumstances of that time, the Holy See would have been incapable
of setting up a new Byzantine exarchate within the Soviet Union, since
Byzantine Catholics in the Soviet Union were being forced to join the Russian
Orthodox Church. Batmalashvili's name is not among those given in Roman
Catholic Regional Hierarchy as the four "underground" apostolic administrators
(only one of whom appears to have been a bishop) for the four sections into
which the diocese of Tiraspol was divided after the resignation in 1930 of its
already exiled last bishop, Joseph Aloysius Kessler. This source gives Father
Stefan Demurow as apostolic administrator of "Tbilisi and Georgia" and says he
was executed in 1938. Other sources associate Father Demurow with Azerbaijan
and say that, rather than being executed, he died in a Siberian concentration
camp. Until 1994, the United States annual publication "Catholic Almanac" used
to go further, listing "Georgian" among the Byzantine Churches. Until corrected
in 1995, it appears to have been making a mistake similar to that made on the
equally unofficial EWTN site about the Czech Byzantine Catholics. There was
also a short-lived Byzantine Catholic movement among the ethnic Estonians in
the Orthodox Church in Estonia during the interwar period of the 20th century,
consisting of two to three parishes, not raised to the level of a local
particular church with its own head. This group was liquidated by the Soviet
regime and is now extinct. Bi-ritual faculties. While "clerics and members of
institutes of consecrated life are bound to observe their own rite faithfully,"
priests are occasionally given permission to celebrate the liturgy of a rite
other than the priest's own rite, by what is known as a grant of "biritual
faculties". The reason for this permission is usually the service of Catholics
who have no priest of their own rite. Thus priests of the Syro-Malabar Church
working as missionaries in areas of India in which there were no structures of
their own Church, were authorized to use the Roman Rite in those areas, and
Latin-Rite priests are, after due preparation, given permission to use an
Eastern rite for the service of members of an Eastern Catholic Church living in
a country in which there are no priests of their own particular Church. For a
just cause, and with the permission of the local bishop, priests of different
autonomous ritual Churches may concelebrate; however, the rite of the principal
celebrant is used whilst each priest wears the vestments of his own rite. For
this no indult of bi-ritualism is required. Biritual faculties may concern not
only clergy but also religious, enabling them to become members of an institute
of an autonomous Church other than their own. The laity should foster an
appreciation of their own rite, and should observe that rite unless there is
good reason e.g. a Latin Rite Catholic living in an exclusively Ethiopian Rite
country. This does not forbid occasional or even, for a just cause, habitual
participation in the liturgy of a different autonomous Church, Western or
Eastern. The obligation of assisting at the Eucharist or, for members of some
Eastern Churches, at Vespers, is satisfied wherever the liturgy is celebrated
in a Catholic rite. Clerical celibacy. Eastern and Western Christian churches
have different traditions concerning clerical celibacy and the resulting
controversies have played a role in the relationship between the two groups in
some Western countries. Most Eastern Churches distinguish between "monastic"
and "non-monastic" clergy. Monastics do not necessarily live as monks or in
monasteries, but have spent at least part of their period of training in such a
context. Their monastic vows include a vow of celibate chastity. Bishops are
normally selected from the monastic clergy, and in most Eastern Catholic
Churches a large percentage of priests and deacons also are celibate, while a
portion of the clergy (typically, parish priests) may be married. If someone
preparing for the diaconate or priesthood wishes to marry, this must happen
before ordination. In countries where Eastern traditions prevail, a married
clergy caused little controversy; but it aroused opposition in other countries
to which Eastern Catholics migrated; this was particularly so in the United
States. In response to requests from the Latin bishops of those countries, the
Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith set out rules in a letter
of 2 May 1890 to Franรงois-Marie-Benjamin Richard, the Archbishop of Paris,
which the Congregation applied on 1 May 1897 to the United States, stating that
only celibates or widowed priests coming without their children should be
permitted in the United States. This celibacy mandate for Eastern Catholic
priests in the United States was restated with special reference to Catholics
of Ruthenian Rite by the 1 March 1929 decree "Cum data fuerit", which was
renewed for a further ten years in 1939. Dissatisfaction by many Ruthenian
Catholics in the United States gave rise to the American Carpatho-Russian
Orthodox Diocese. This mandate was abolished with the promulgation of the
"Decree on the Eastern Catholic Churches" at the Second Vatican Council. Since
then, married men have been ordained to the priesthood in the United States,
and numerous married priests have come from eastern countries to serve parishes
in the Americas. Some Eastern Catholic Churches have adopted mandatory clerical
celibacy, as in the Latin Church: the India-based Syro-Malankara Catholic
Church and Syro-Malabar Catholic Church, and the Coptic Catholic Church.
