Sociological classifications of religious movements Sociologists have proposed
various classifications of religious movements. The most widely used
classification in the sociology of religion is the church-sect typology. The
typology states that churches, ecclesia, denominations and sects form a
continuum with decreasing influence on society. Sects are break-away groups and
tend to be in tension with society. Cults and new religious movements fall
outside this continuum and in contrast to aforementioned groups often have a
novel teaching. They have been classified on their attitude towards society and
the level of involvement of their adherents. Sociological church-sect typology.
This church-sect typology has its origins in the work of Max Weber. The basic
premise is that there is a continuum along which religions fall, ranging from
the protest-like orientation of "sects" to the equilibrium maintaining
"churches". Along this continuum are several additional types, each of which
will be discussed in turn. The reader may notice that many of labels for the
types of religion are commonly employed by non-sociologists to refer to
religions and tend to be used interchangeably. Sociologists, when speaking
technically, will not use these labels interchangeably as they are designations
for religions with very specific characteristics. These differing religions are
often classified by sociologists as "ideal types". Ideal types are "pure"
examples of the categories. Because there is significant variation in each
religion, how closely an individual religion actually holds as their "ideal
type" catagorisation will vary. Nevertheless, the catagorisation scheme is
useful as it also outlines a sort of developmental process for religions.
Church and ecclesia. The "church" classification describes religions that are
all-embracing of religious expression in a society. Religions of this type are
the guardians of religion for all members of the societies in which they are
located and tolerate no religious competition. They also strive to provide an
all-encompassing worldview for their adherents and are typically enmeshed with
the political and economic structures of society. The classical example of a
"church" by this definition is the Roman Catholic Church, especially in the
past, such as the State church of the Roman Empire. Today, the Roman Catholic
Church has been forced into the denomination category because of religious
pluralism, or competition among religions. This is especially true of
Catholicism in the United States. The change from a "church" to a
"denomination" is still under way in many Latin American countries where the
majority of citizens remain Catholics. Islam is a church in the strongest sense
in most Middle Eastern countries (especially Saudi Arabia), where there is no
separation of church and state. The Basic Law of Saudi Arabia states:
"Constitution of Saudi Arabia is God's Book Qur'an and the Sunnah of His
Prophet The Basic Law - Saudi Arabia Information. These nations are ruled under
a strict interpretation of religious law (a "Salafi" interpretation of
"shari'a" in the case of KSA) with no equivalent secular legal system, or with
religious law predominating, and never less than equal to secular law. Of all
of Johnstone's criteria for a church, Islam is lacking only an ordained clergy
and a strictly hierarchical structure, but has a form of clergy and hierarchy
in the "ulema". In the Shi'a denominations, there is a professional clergy led
by a Grand Ayatollah. A slight modification of the "church" type is that of
"ecclesia". Ecclesias include the above characteristics of churches with the
exception that they are generally less successful at garnering absolute
adherence among all of the members of the society and are not the sole
religious body. The state churches of some European nations would fit this
type. Denominations. Most of the major Christian bodies formed post-reformation
are denominations by this definition (e.g., Baptists, Methodists, Lutherans,
Seventh-day Adventists). Sects. Sociologically, a "sect" is defined as a newly
formed religious group that formed to protest elements of its parent religion
(generally a denomination). Their motivation tends to be situated in
accusations of apostasy or heresy in the parent denomination; they often decry
liberal trends in denominational development and advocate a return to so-called
"true" religion. Leaders of sectarian movements (i.e., the formation of a new
sect) tend to come from a lower socio-economic class than the members of the
parent denomination, a component of sect development that is not yet entirely
understood. Most scholars believe that when sect formation involves social
class distinctions, they reflect an attempt to compensate for deficiencies in
lower social status. An often seen result of such factors is the incorporation
into the theology of the new sect a distaste for the adornments of the wealthy
(e.g., jewelry or other signs of wealth). After their formation, sects can take
only three paths - dissolution, institutionalization, or eventual development
into a denomination. If the sect withers in membership, it will dissolve. If
the membership increases, the sect is forced to adopt the characteristics of
denominations in order to maintain order (e.g., bureaucracy, explicit doctrine,
etc.). And even if the membership does not grow or grows slowly, norms will
develop to govern group activities and behavior. The development of norms
results in a decrease in spontaneity, which is often one of the primary
attractions of sects. The adoption of denomination-like characteristics can
either turn the sect into a full-blown denomination or, if a conscious effort
is made to maintain some of the spontaneity and protest components of sects, an
"institutionalized sect" can result. Institutionalized sects are halfway
between sects and denominations on the continuum of religious development. They
have a mixture of sect-like and denomination-like characteristics. Examples
include: Hutterites, Iglesia ni Cristo, and the Amish. Most of the well-known
denominations of the U.S. existing today originated as sects breaking away from
denominations (or Churches, in the case of Lutheranism and Anglicanism).
Examples include: Methodists, Baptists, and Seventh-day Adventists. Cults or
new religious movements. By sociological typology, "cults" are, like sects, new
religious groups. But, unlike sects, they can form without breaking off from
another religious group, though this is by no means always the case. The
characteristic that most distinguishes cults from sects is that they are not
advocating a return to "pure" religion but rather the embracement of something
new or something that has been completely lost or forgotten (e.g., lost
scriptures or new prophecy). Cults are also much more likely to be led by
"charismatic leaders" than are other religious groups and the charismatic
leaders tend to be the individuals who bring forth the new or lost component
that is the focal element of the cult. Cults, like sects, often integrate
elements of existing religious theologies, but cults tend to create more
esoteric theologies synthesized from many sources. Cults tend to emphasize the
individual and individual peace. Cults, like sects, can develop into
denominations. As cults grow, they bureaucratize and develop many of the
characteristics of denominations. Some scholars are hesitant to grant cults
denominational status because many cults maintain their more esoteric
characteristics. But given their closer semblance to denominations than to the
"cult" type, it is more accurate to describe them as denominations. Some
denominations in the U.S. that began as cults include Christian Science and the
Nation of Islam. Finally, there is a push in the social scientific study of
religion to begin referring to "cults" as "New Religious Movements" (NRMs).
This is the result of the often pejorative and derogatory meanings attached to
the word ""cult"" in popular language. Criticism. Religious scholar John A.
Saliba notes the many attempts to draw a classification or typology of cults
and/or sects, but concludes that the divergences that exist in these groups'
practices, doctrines, and goals do not lend themselves to a simple
classification that has universal approval. He argues that the influx of
Eastern religious systems, including Taoism, Confucianism and Shintoism, which
do not fit within the traditional distinctions between church, sect,
denomination and cult, have compounded typological difficulties. Wallis'
distinction between cults and sects. The sociologist Roy Wallis (1945â€“1990)
introduced differing definitions of sects and cults. He argued that a cult is
characterized by "epistemological individualism" by which he means that "the
cult has no clear locus of final authority beyond the individual member."
Cults, according to Wallis, are generally described as "oriented towards the
problems of individuals, loosely structured, tolerant, non-exclusive", making
"few demands on members", without possessing a "clear distinction between
members and non-members", having "a rapid turnover of membership", and are
transient collectives with vague boundaries and fluctuating belief systems
Wallis asserts that cults emerge from the "cultic milieu". Wallis contrast a
cult with a sect that he asserts are characterized by "epistemological
authoritarianism": sects possess some authoritative locus for the legitimate
attribution of heresy. According to Wallis, "sects lay a claim to possess
unique and privileged access to the truth or salvation, such as collective
salvation, and their committed adherents typically regard all those outside the
confines of the collectivity as 'in error'". Cult and/or new religious
movements. Stark and Bainbridge. The sociologist Paul Schnabel has argued that
the Church of Scientology originated from an "audience cult" (the readership of
Hubbard's book "" and the "Astounding Science Fiction" article which had
preceded it) into a "client cult" (Dianetics) and finally into a cult movement
(the Church of Scientology). Roy Wallis. The sociologist Roy Wallis introduced
a classification system of new religious movements based on movements' views on
and relationships with the world at large.
