Filioque The Latin text speaks of the Holy Spirit as proceeding "from the
Father "and the Son"". Together with papal primacy, differences over this
doctrine have been and remain the primary causes of schism between the Western
and Eastern Orthodox churches. The "Filioque" has been an ongoing source of
conflict between the East and West, contributing, in part, to the East-West
Schism of 1054 and proving an obstacle to attempts to reunify the two sides.
and elsewhere. In the 9th century, Pope Leo III, while accepting the doctrine,
like his predecessor Pope Leo I, tried in vain to suppress the addition of the
"Filioque". In 1014, however, singing of the Creed, with "Filioque" included,
was adopted in the celebration of the Mass in Rome. Since its denunciation by
Photios I of Constantinople (see the Photian schism of 863-867), --> Underlying
issues. There are two separate issues in the Filioque controversy: the
orthodoxy of the doctrine itself and the liceity of the interpolation of the
phrase into the Nicene Creed. Although the debate over the orthodoxy of the
doctrine preceded the question of the admissibility of the phrase as inserted
into the Creed, the two issues became linked when the insertion received the
approval of the pope in the eleventh century. After that point, the debate was
no longer solely about the orthodoxy of the doctrine but also about the
authority of the pope to define what was and was not orthodox. Anthony E.
Siecienski writes that "ltimately what was at stake was not only God's
trinitarian nature, but also the nature of the Church, its teaching authority
and the distribution of power among its leaders." Hubert Cunliffe-Jones
identifies two opposing views among Eastern Orthodox regarding the Filioque: a
"liberal" view and a "rigorist" view. The "liberal" view sees the controversy
as being largely a matter of mutual miscommunication and misunderstanding. In
this view, both East and West are at fault for failing to allow for a
"plurality of theologies". Each side went astray in considering their
theological framework as the only one that was doctrinally valid and
applicable. Thus, neither side would accept that the dispute was not so much
about conflicting dogmas as it was about different "theologoumena" or
theological perspectives. While all Christians must be in agreement on
questions of dogma, there is room for diversity in theological approaches.
However, this "liberal" view is vehemently opposed by those Eastern Orthodox
whom Cunliffe-Jones identifies as holding a "rigorist" view. According to
standard Eastern Orthodox position, as pronounced by Photius, Mark of Ephesus
and modern Orthodox theologians such as Vladimir Lossky, the Filioque question
hinges on fundamental issues of dogma and cannot be dismissed as simply one of
different "theologoumena". Many in the "rigorist" camp consider the Filioque to
have resulted in the role of the Holy Spirit being underestimated by the
Western Church and thus leading to serious doctrinal error. In a similar vein,
Siecienski comments that, although it was common in the twentieth century to
view the Filioque as just another weapon in the power struggle between Rome and
Constantinople and although this was occasionally the case, for many involved
in the dispute the theological issues outweighed by far the ecclesiological
concerns. According to Siecienski, the deeper question was perhaps whether
Eastern and Western Christianity had wound up developing "differing and
ultimately incompatible teachings about the nature of God." Moreover,
Siecienski asserts that the question of whether the teachings of East and West
were truly incompatible became almost secondary to the fact that, starting
around the eighth or ninth century, Christians on both sides of the dispute
began to believe that the differences "were" irreconcilable. From the view of
the West, the Eastern rejection of the Filioque denied the consubstantiality of
the Father and the Son and was thus a form of crypto-Arianism. In the East, the
interpolation of the Filioque seemed to many to be an indication that the West
was teaching a "substantially different faith". Siecienski asserts that, as
much as power and authority were central issues in the debate, the strength of
emotion rising even to the level of hatred can be ascribed to a belief that the
other side had "destroyed the purity of the faith and refused to accept the
clear teachings of the fathers on the Spirit's procession." History. New
Testament. Anthony E. Siecienski asserts that "the New Testament does not
explicitly address the procession of the Holy Spirit as later theology would
understand the doctrine", although there are "certain principles established in
the New Testament that shaped later Trinitarian theology, and particular texts
that both Latins and Greeks exploited to support their respective positions
vis-√ -vis the "filioque"". In contrast,Veli-Matti K√§rkk√§inen says that
Eastern Orthodox believe that the absence of an explicit mention of the double
procession of the Holy Spirit is a strong indication that the Filioque is a
theologically erroneous doctrine. In Jesus says of the Holy Spirit "he will
"take" what is mine and declare it to you", and it is argued that in the
relations between the Persons of the Trinity one Person cannot "take" or
"receive" (ŒªŒÆœàŒµœÑŒ±Œπ) anything from either of the others except by way of
procession. Texts such as ("He breathed on them and said: Receive the Holy
Spirit"), were seen by Fathers of the Church, especially Athanasius, Cyril of
Alexandria and Epiphanius of Cyprus as grounds for saying that the Spirit
"proceeds substantially from both" the Father and the Son. Other texts that
have been used include , , where the Holy Spirit is called "the Spirit of the
Son", "the Spirit of Christ", "the Spirit of Jesus Christ", and texts in the
Gospel of John on the sending of the Holy Spirit by Jesus (, ,). The Nicene
Creed. The first ecumenical council, that of Nicaea (325) ended its Creed with
the words "and in the Holy Spirit". The second, that of Constantinople in 381
spoke of the Holy Spirit as "proceeding from the Father" (·ºêŒ∫ œÑŒø·ø¶
Œ Œ±œÑœÅ·Ω∏œÇ ·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœÖœåŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒΩ). This last phrase is based on (·ΩÉ
œÄŒ±œÅ·Ω∞ œÑŒø·ø¶ œÄŒ±œÑœÅ·Ω∏œÇ ·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÑŒ±Œπ). While the Council of
Ephesus thus forbade setting up a different creed as a rival to that of the
first ecumenical council, it was the creed of the second ecumenical council
that was adopted liturgically in the East and later a Latin variant was adopted
in the West. The form of this creed that the West adopted had two additions:
"God from God" ("Deum de Deo") and "and the Son" ("Filioque"). The fourth
ecumenical council, that of Chalcedon (451), quoted the creed of 381 and
formally treated it as binding, together with that of 325. Within 80 years,
therefore, the creed of 381 was normative in defining the Christian faith. In
the early sixth century, it was widely used in the liturgy in the East and at
the end of the same century in parts of the West, perhaps beginning with the
Council of Toledo in 589. Possible earliest use in the Creed. Recent
discoveries have shown that the earliest known introduction of "and the Son"
into the Nicene Creed may have been the work of a local council in the east,
the Council of Seleucia-Ctesiphon in Persia in about 410. This was some twenty
years before the Nestorian Schism divided the Church in Persia, which after the
schism became known as the Church of the East, from the Church in the Roman
Empire. The Church of the East does not include "and the Son" in the Creed.
Church fathers. The writings of the early Church Fathers, both eastern and
western, sometimes speak of the Holy Spirit as proceeding or spirating from the
Father and the Son. Before the creed of 381 became known in the West and even
before it was adopted by the First Council of Constantinople, Christian writers
in the West, of whom Tertullian (c. 160 ‚Äì c. 220), Jerome (347‚Äì420),
Ambrose (c. 338 ‚Äì 397) and Augustine (354‚Äì430) are representatives, spoke
of the Spirit as coming from the Father and the Son, while the expression
‚Äúfrom the Father through the Son‚Äù is also found among them. Tertullian,
writing at the beginning of the third century, emphasizes that Father, Son and
Holy Spirit all share a single divine substance, quality and power, which he
conceives of as flowing forth from the Father and being transmitted by the Son
to the Spirit. One Christian source for Augustine was Marius Victorinus (c.
280-365), who in his arguments against Arians strongly connected the Son and
the Spirit. Hilary of Poitiers, in the mid-fourth century, speaks of the Spirit
as "coming forth from the Father" and being "sent by the Son" (De Trinitate
12.55); as being "from the Father through the Son" (ibid. 12.56); and as
"having the Father and the Son as his source" (ibid. 2.29); in another passage,
Hilary points to John 16.15 (where Jesus says: 'All things that the Father has
are mine; therefore I said that Spirit shall take from what is mine and declare
it to you'), and wonders aloud whether "to receive from the Son is the same
thing as to proceed from the Father" (ibid. 8.20). Ambrose of Milan, writing in
the 380s, openly asserts that the Spirit "proceeds from ("procedit a") the
Father and the Son", without ever being separated from either (On the Holy
Spirit 1.11.20). "None of these writers, however, makes the Spirit‚Äôs mode of
origin the object of special reflection; all are concerned, rather, to
emphasize the equality of status of all three divine persons as God, and all
acknowledge that the Father alone is the source of God‚Äôs eternal being." As
for the Greek Fathers, there is, according to A. Edward Siecienski, no citable
basis for the claim historically made by both sides, that they explicitly
either supported or denied the later theologies concerning the procession of
the Spirit from the Son. However, they did enunciate important principles later
invoked in support of one theology or the other. These included the insistence
on the unique hypostatic properties of each Divine Person, in particular the
Father's property of being, within the Trinity, the one cause, while they also
recognized that the Persons, through distinct, cannot be separated, and that
not only the sending of the Spirit to creatures but also the Spirit's eternal
flowing forth (œÄœÅŒøœäŒ≠ŒΩŒ±Œπ) from the Father within the Trinity is "through
the Son" (Œ¥Œπ·Ω∞ œÑŒø·ø¶ Œ•·º±Œø·ø¶). Cyril of Alexandria, in particular,
provides "a host of quotations that seemingly speak of the Spirit's
'procession' from both the Father and the Son". In these passages he uses the
Greek verbs œÄœÅŒøœäŒ≠ŒΩŒ±Œπ (like the Latin "procedere") and
œÄœÅŒøœáŒµ·øñœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ (flow from), not the verb ·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ, the
verb that appears in the Greek text of the Nicene Creed. Siecienski remarked
that, "while the Greek fathers were still striving to find language capable of
expressing the mysterious nature of the Son's relationship to the Spirit, Latin
theologians, even during Cyril's lifetime, had already found their answer - the
Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son ("ex Patre et Filio
procedentem"). The degree to which this teaching was compatible with, or
contradictory to, the emerging Greek tradition remains, sixteen centuries
later, subject to debate." Yves Congar commented, "'The walls of separation do
not reach as high as heaven.'" And Aidan Nichols remarked that "the "Filioque"
controversy is, in fact, a casualty of the theological pluralism of the
patristic Church", on the one hand the Latin and Alexandrian tradition, on the
other the Cappadocian and later Byzantine tradition. Procession of the Holy
Spirit. As early as the fourth century, a distinction was made, in connection
with the Trinity, between the two Greek verbs ·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ (the
verb used in the original Greek text of the 381 Nicene Creed) and
œÄœÅŒøœäŒ≠ŒΩŒ±Œπ. In his Oration on the Holy Lights (XXXIX), Saint Gregory of
Nazianzus wrote: "The Holy Ghost is truly Spirit, coming forth
(œÄœÅŒøœäŒ≠ŒΩŒ±Œπ) from the Father indeed, but not after the manner of the Son,
for it is not by Generation but by Procession (·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ)".
That the Holy Spirit "proceeds" from the Father and the Son in the sense of the
Latin word "procedere" and the Greek "œÄœÅŒøœäŒ≠ŒΩŒ±Œπ" (as opposed to the
Greek "·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ") was taught by the early fifth century by
Saint Cyril of Alexandria in the East The Athanasian Creed, probably of the
middle of the fifth century, and a dogmatic epistle of Pope Leo I, who declared
in 446 that the Holy Spirit proceeds from both Father and Son. Although the
Eastern Fathers were aware that in the West the procession of the Holy Spirit
from the Father and the Son was taught, they did not generally regard it as
heretical: "a whole series of Western writers, including popes who are
venerated as saints by the Eastern church, confess the procession of the Holy
Spirit also from the Son; and it is even more striking that there is virtually
no disagreement with this theory." The phrase "Filioque" first appears as an
anti-Arian interpolation in the Creed at the Third Council of Toledo (589), at
which Visigothic Spain renounced Arianism, accepting Catholic Christianity. The
addition was confirmed by subsequent local councils in Toledo and soon spread
throughout the West, not only in Spain, but also in the kingdom of the Franks,
who had adopted the Catholic faith in 496, and in England, where the Council of
Hatfield imposed it in 680 as a response to Monothelitism. However, it was not
adopted in Rome. In the Vulgate the Latin verb "procedere", which appears in
the "Filioque" passage of the Creed in Latin, is used to translate several
Greek verbs. While one of those verbs, ·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ, the one in
the corresponding phrase in the Creed in Greek, "was beginning to take on a
particular meaning in Greek theology designating the Spirit's unique mode of
coming-to-be ... "procedere" had no such connotations". Although Hilary of
Poitiers is often cited as one of "the chief patristic source(s) for the Latin
teaching on the filioque", Siecienski says that "there is also reason for
questioning Hilary's support for the "filioque" as later theology would
understand it, especially given the ambiguous nature of (Hilary's) language as
it concerns the procession." However, a number of Latin Church Fathers of the
4th and 5th centuries explicitly speak of the Holy Spirit as proceeding "from
the Father and the Son", the phrase in the present Latin version of the Nicene
Creed. Examples are what is called the creed of Pope Damasus I, Ambrose of
Milan ("one of the earliest witnesses to the explicit affirmation of the
Spirit's procession from the Father "and" the Son"), Augustine of Hippo (whose
writings on the Trinity "became the foundation of subsequent Latin trinitarian
theology and later served as the foundation for the doctrine of the
"filioque"". and Pope Leo I (but Easterners have argued that his acceptance of
the Council of Chalcedon, with its reaffirmation of the Nicene Creed, which in
the original text is without the "Filioque", proves that he questioned the
"Filioque", something that his successors never did). Thereafter, Eucherius of
Lyon, Gennadius of Massilia, Boethius, Agnellus, Bishop of Ravenna,
Cassiodorus, Gregory of Tours are witnesses that the idea "that" the Holy
Spirit proceeds from the Son was well established as part of the (Western)
Church's faith, before Latin theologians began to concern themselves about
"how" the Spirit proceeds from the Son. Pope Gregory the Great is usually
counted as teaching the Spirit's procession from the Son, although Byzantine
theologians, quoting from Greek translations of his work rather than the
original, present him as a witness against it, and although he sometimes speaks
of the Holy Spirit as proceeding from the Father without mentioning the Son.
Siecienski says that, in view of the widespread acceptance by then that the
Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, it would be strange if
Gregory did not advocate the teaching, "even if he did not understand the
"filioque" as later Latin theology would - that is, in terms of a 'double
procession'". "From the Father through the Son". Church Fathers also use the
phrase "from the Father through the Son". Cyril of Alexandria, who undeniably
several times states that the Holy Spirit issues from the Father "and" the Son,
also speaks of the Holy Spirit coming from the Father "through" the Son, two
different expressions that for him are complementary: the procession of the
Holy Spirit from the Father does not exclude the Son's mediation and the Son
receives from the Father a participation in the Holy Spirit's coming. He was
attacked by Theodoret for saying the Holy Spirit has his existence "either from
the Son or through the Son", but continued to use such formulae. The Roman
Catholic Church accepts both phrases, and considers that they do not affect the
reality of the same faith and instead express the same truth in slightly
different ways. The influence of Augustine of Hippo made the phrase "proceeds
from the Father through the Son" popular throughout the West. but, while used
also in the East, "through the Son" was later, according to Philip Schaff,
dropped or rejected by some as being nearly equivalent to "from the Son" or
"and the Son". Others spoke of the Holy Spirit proceeding "from the Father", as
in the text of the Nicaeno-Constantinopolitan Creed, which "did not state that
the Spirit proceeds from the Father "alone"". First Eastern opposition. The
first recorded objection by a representative of Eastern Christianity against
the Western belief that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son
occurred when Patriarch Paul II of Constantinople (642-653) made accusations
against either Pope Theodore I (642-649) or Pope Martin I (649-653) of Rome for
using the expression. Patriarch Paul was an adherent of Monothelitism, and for
that reason Pope Theodore excommunicated him in 647. In response to the attack
by Patriarch Paul, Maximus the Confessor, (c. 580 ‚Äì 13 August 662) a Greek
opponent of Monothelitism, declared that it was wrong to condemn the Roman use
of "and the Son" because the Romans "have produced the unanimous evidence of
the Latin Fathers, and also of Cyril of Alexandria [...] On the basis of these
texts, they have shown that they have not made the Son the cause of the Spirit
‚Äì they know in fact that the Father is the only cause of the Son and the
Spirit, the one by begetting and the other by procession ‚Äì but that they have
manifested the procession through him and have thus shown the unity and
identity of the essence." He also indicated that the differences between the
Latin and Greek languages were an obstacle to mutual understanding, since "they
cannot reproduce their idea in a language and in words that are foreign to them
as they can in their mother-tongue, just as we too cannot do". Later
developments. Widespread use of the Filioque in the West led to controversy
with envoys of the Byzantine Emperor Constantine V at a synod held at Gentilly
in 767. The use of "Filioque" was defended by Saint Paulinus II, the Patriarch
of Aquileia, at the Synod of Friuli, Italy in 796, and it was endorsed in 809
at the local Council of Aachen. At the beginning of the ninth century in 808,
John, a Greek monk of the monastery of St. Sabas, charged the monks of Mt.
Olivet with heresy, since they had inserted the Filioque into the Creed. As the
practice of chanting the Latin "Credo" at Mass spread in the West, the
"Filioque" became a part of the Latin rite liturgy. This practice was adopted
in Emperor Charlemagne's court in 798 and spread through his empire, but,
although it was in use in parts of Italy by the eighth century, was not
accepted in Rome until 1014. Beginning around 796 or 797, Paulinus, bishop of
Aquileia, held a council for the region of Friuli (the part of Italy containing
Aquileia). Paulinus was appointed the task of addressing Adoptionism and Arians
as taught by a group of Spanish bishops including Elipando. Paulinus‚Äô council
spent a fair amount of time addressing the subject of the filioque, taking the
position that a new council could add a valid interruption to the Creed.
Paulinus primary argumentation is that the Filioque could be added and or
subtracted if the addition or subtraction does not go against the Fathers‚Äô
‚Äúintention‚Äù and was ‚Äúa blameless discernment.‚Äù According to John
Meyendorff, and John Romanides Pope Leo rejected the request of Charlemagne's
emissaries for approval of inclusion of the "Filioque" in the Latin Creed used
in Rome. So, during the time of Pope Leo's leadership, 795-816, and for another
two centuries, there was no Creed at all in the Roman rite Mass. Although he
approved the Filioque doctrine, Pope Leo III in 810 opposed adding the Filioque
to the Creed, and had two heavy silver shields made and displayed in St
Peter's, containing the original text of the Creed of 381 in both Greek and
Latin, adding: "I, Leo, have placed these for love and protection of the
orthodox faith". In 808 or 809 controversy arose in Jerusalem between the Greek
monks of one monastery and the Frankish Benedictines of another: the Greeks
reproached the latter for, among other things, singing the creed with the
"Filioque" included. In response, the theology of the "Filioque" was expressed
in the 809 local Council of Aachen. Photian controversy. Around 860 the
controversy over the Filioque and the Frankish monks broke out in the course of
the disputes between Saint Photius and Patriarch Ignatius of Constantinople. In
867, Photius was Patriarch of Constantinople and issued an "Encyclical to the
Eastern Patriarchs", and called a council in Constantinople in which he charged
the Western Church with heresy and schism because of differences in practices,
in particular for the "Filioque" and the authority of the Papacy. This moved
the issue from jurisdiction and custom to one of dogma. This council declared
Pope Nicholas anathema, excommunicated and deposed. Photius excluded not only
"and the Son" but also "through the Son" with regard to the eternal procession
of the Holy Spirit: for him "through the Son" applied only to the temporal
mission of the Holy Spirit (the sending in time). He maintained that the
eternal procession of the Holy Spirit is "from the Father "alone"". This phrase
was verbally a novelty However, Orthodox theologians generally hold that in
substance the phrase was only a reaffirmation of traditional teaching. Sergei
Bulgakov, on the other hand, declared that Photius's doctrine itself
"represents a sort of novelty for the Eastern church". Photius's importance
endured in regard to relations between East and West. He is recognized as a
Saint by the Eastern Orthodox Church and his line of criticism has often been
echoed later, making reconciliation between East and West difficult. At least
three councils (in 867, 869, and 879) were held in Constantinople over the
actions of Emperor Michael III in deposing Ignatius and replacing him with
Photius. The Council of Constantinople 867 was convened by Photius, so to
address the question of Papal Supremacy over all of the churches and their
patriarchs and the use of the filioque. The council of 867 was followed by the
Council of Constantinople 869, which reversed the previous council and was
promulgated by Rome. The Council of Constantinople in 879 restored Photius to
his see. It was attended by Western legates Cardinal Peter of St Chrysogonus,
Paul Bishop of Ancona and Eugene Bishop of Ostia who approved its canons, but
it is unclear whether it was ever promulgated by Rome. Adoption in the Roman
Rite. It was only in 1014, at the request of the German King Henry II who had
come to Rome to be crowned Emperor and was surprised at the different custom in
force there, that Pope Benedict VIII, who owed to Henry his restoration to the
papal throne after usurpation by Antipope Gregory VI, had the Creed, with the
addition of "Filioque", sung at Mass in Rome for the first time. In some other
places "Filioque" was incorporated in the Creed even later: at Paris seemingly
not even by 1240, 34 years before the Second Council of Lyon defined that the
Holy Spirit "proceeds eternally from the Father and from the Son, not as from
two principles but from a single principle, not by two spirations but by a
single spiration". Since then the "Filioque" phrase has been included in the
Creed throughout the Latin Rite except where Greek is used in the liturgy,
although it was never adopted by Eastern Catholic Churches. East-West
controversy. Eastern opposition to the Filioque strengthened with the East-West
Schism of 1054. Two councils that were held to heal the break discussed the
question. The Second Council of Lyon (1274) accepted the profession of faith of
Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos in the Holy Spirit, "proceeding from the
Father and the Son" and the Greek participants, including Patriarch Joseph I of
Constantinople sang the Creed three times with the "Filioque" addition. Most
Byzantine Christians feeling disgust and recovering from the Latin Crusaders'
conquest and betrayal, refused to accept the agreement made at Lyon with the
Latins. In 1282, Emperor Michael VIII died and Patriarch Joseph I's successor,
John XI, who had become convinced that the teaching of the Greek Fathers was
compatible with that of the Latins, was forced to resign, and was replaced by
Gregory II, who was strongly of the opposite opinion. The council required
Eastern churches wishing to be reunited with Rome to accept the Filioque as a
legitimate expression of the faith, while it did not require those Christians
to change the recitation of the creed in their liturgy. The council of Lyons
also condemned "all who presume to deny that the holy Spirit proceeds eternally
from the Father and the Son, or rashly to assert that the Holy Spirit proceeds
from the Father and the Son as from two principles and not as from one. "
Another attempt at reunion was made at the fifteenth-century Council of
Florence, to which Emperor John VIII Palaiologos, Ecumenical Patriarch Joseph
II of Constantinople, and other bishops from the East had gone in the hope of
getting Western military aid against the looming Ottoman Empire. Thirteen
public sessions held in Ferrara from 8 October to 13 December 1438 the
"Filioque" question was debated without agreement. The Greeks held that any
addition whatever, even if doctrinally correct, to the Creed had been forbidden
by the Council of Ephesus, while the Latins claimed that this prohibition
concerned meaning, not words. During the council of Florence in 1439, accord
continued to be elusive, until the argument prevailed among the Greeks
themselves that, though the Greek and the Latin saints expressed their faith
differently, they were in agreement substantially, since saints cannot err in
faith; and by 8 June the Greeks accepted the Latin statement of doctrine. On 10
June Patriarch Joseph II died. A statement on the "Filioque" question was
included in the "Laetentur Caeli" decree of union, which was signed on 5 July
1439 and promulgated the next day, with Mark of Ephesus being the only bishop
to refuse his signature. The Eastern Church refused to consider the agreement
reached at Florence binding, since the death of Joseph II had for the moment
left it without a Patriarch of Constantinople. There was strong opposition to
the agreement in the East, and when in 1453, 14 years after the agreement, the
promised military aid from the West still had not arrived and Constantinople
fell to the Turks, neither Eastern Christians nor their new rulers wished union
between them and the West. Council of Jerusalem in 1583 AD. The 1583 Synod of
Jerusalem condemned those who do not believe the Holy Spirit proceeds from the
Father alone in essence, and from Father and Son in time. In addition, this
synod re-affirmed adherence to the decisions of Council of Nicaea I in AD 325.
Council of Jerusalem in 1672 AD. Re-affirmed procession of the Holy Spirit from
the Father alone. Reformation. Although the Protestant Reformation challenged a
number of church doctrines, they accepted the filioque without reservation.
However, they did not have a polemical insistence on the Western view of the
Trinity. In the second half of the sixteenth century, Lutheran scholars from
the University of T√ºbingen initiated a dialogue with the Patriarch Jeremy II
of Constantinople. The T√ºbingen Lutherans defended the filioque arguing that,
without it, "the doctrine of the Trinity would lose its epistemological
justification in the history of revelation." In the centuries that followed,
the filioque was considered by Protestant theologians to be a key component of
the doctrine of the Trinity, although it was never elevated to being a pillar
of Protestant theology. Zizioulas and Knight characterize Protestants as
finding themselves "in the same confusion as those fourth century theologians
who were unable to distinguish between the two sorts of procession, 'proceeding
from' and 'sent by'." Present position of various churches. Roman Catholicism.
The Roman Catholic Church holds, as a truth dogmatically defined since as far
back as Pope Leo I in 446, who followed a Latin and Alexandrian tradition, that
the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son. It rejects the notion
that the Holy Spirit proceeds jointly and equally from two principles (Father
and Son) and teaches dogmatically that "the Holy Spirit proceeds eternally from
the Father and the Son, not as from two principles but as from one single
principle". It holds that the Father, as the "principle without principle", is
the first origin of the Spirit, but also that he, as Father of the only Son, is
with the Son the single principle from which the Spirit proceeds. It also holds
that the procession of the Holy Spirit can be expressed as "from the Father
through the Son". The agreement that brought about the 1595 Union of Brest
expressly declared that those entering full communion with Rome "should remain
with that which was handed down to (them) in the Holy Scriptures, in the
Gospel, and in the writings of the holy Greek Doctors, that is, that the Holy
Spirit proceeds, not from two sources and not by a double procession, but from
one origin, from the Father through the Son." The Roman Catholic Church
recognizes that the Creed, as confessed at the First Council of Constantinople,
did not add "and the Son", when it spoke of the Holy Spirit as proceeding from
the Father, and that this addition was admitted to the Latin liturgy between
the 8th and 11th centuries When quoting the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, as
in the 6 August 2000 document "Dominus Iesus", it does not include "Filioque".
It views as complementary the Eastern-tradition expression "who proceeds from
the Father" (profession of which it sees as affirming that he comes from the
Father through the Son) and the Western-tradition expression "who proceeds from
the Father and the Son", with the Eastern tradition expressing firstly the
Father's character as first origin of the Spirit, and the Western tradition
giving expression firstly to the consubstantial communion between Father and
Son; and it believes that, provided this legitimate complementarity does not
become rigid, it does not affect the identity of faith in the reality of the
same mystery confessed. The monarchy of the Father is a doctrine upheld not
only by those who like Photius speak of a procession from the Father alone. It
is also asserted by theologians who speak of a procession from the Father
through the Son or from the Father and the Son. Examples cited in the book "
The Filioque: History of a Doctrinal Controversy" by A. Edward Siecienski
include Bessarion, Maximus the Confessor, Bonaventure, and the Council of Worms
(868), The same remark is made by J√ºrgen Moltmann. The Pontifical Council for
Promoting Christian Unity also states that not only the Eastern tradition, but
also the Latin "Filioque" tradition "recognize that the 'Monarchy of the
Father' implies that the Father is the sole Trinitarian Cause (Œ±·º∞œÑŒØŒ±) or
Principle (principium) of the Son and of the Holy Spirit." The Roman Catholic
Church recognizes that, in the Greek language, the word used in the Niceno-
Constantinopolitan Creed (·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœÖœåŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒΩ, "who proceeds") to
signify the proceeding of the Holy Spirit cannot appropriately be used with
regard to the Son, but only with regard to the Father, a difficulty that does
not exist in other languages. For this reason, even in the liturgy of Latin
Rite Catholics, it does not add the phrase corresponding to "Filioque" (Œ∫Œ±·Ω∂
œÑŒø·ø¶ Œ•·º±Œø·ø¶) to the Greek text of the Creed containing the word
·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœÖœåŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒΩ. Eastern Catholic Churches are in full communion
with Rome, which accepts the "Filioque" in its liturgy as well as in its dogma,
but they do not have to include the "Filioque" in their versions of the Niceno-
Constantinopolitan Creed. Indeed, the Holy See encourages even those Eastern
Catholic Churches, not of Greek tradition, that in the past have incorporated
the "Filioque" into their recitation of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed to
omit it. Anglicanism. In 1978 the Anglican Communion's Lambeth Conference
requested "that all member Churches of the Anglican Communion should consider
omitting the Filioque from the Nicene Creed, and that the Anglican-Orthodox
Joint Doctrinal Commission through the Anglican Consultative Council should
assist them in presenting the theological issues to their appropriate synodical
bodies and should be responsible for any necessary consultation with other
Churches of the Western tradition." In 1988 the conference "ask(ed) that
further thought be given to the Filioque clause, recognising it to be a major
point of disagreement (with the Orthodox) ... recommending to the provinces of
the Anglican Communion that in future liturgical revisions the Niceno-
Constantinopolitan Creed be printed without the Filioque clause." At a
subsequent joint meeting of the Anglican Primates and Anglican Consultative
Council in 1993, a resolution was passed urging Anglican churches to comply
with the request that "in future liturgical revisions the Niceno-
Constantinopolitan Creed be printed without the Filioque clause." The
recommendation was not specifically renewed in the 1998 and 2008 Lambeth
Conferences and has not been implemented. In 1985 the General Convention of The
Episcopal Church (USA) recommended that the Filioque clause should be removed
from the Nicene Creed, if this were endorsed by the 1988 Lambeth Council.
Accordingly, at its 1994 General Convention, the Episcopal Church reaffirmed
its intention to remove the words "and the son" from the Nicene Creed in the
next revision of its Book of Common Prayer. The Episcopal Book of Common Prayer
was last revised in 1979, and has not been revised since the resolution.
Protestantism. Among modern Protestant theologians, Karl Barth was perhaps the
staunchest defender of the filioque doctrine. Barth was harshly critical of the
ecumenical movement which advocated dropping the filioque in order to
facilitate reunification of the Christian churches. Barth's vigorous defense of
the filioque ran counter to the stance of many Protestant theologians of the
latter half of the twentieth century who favored abandoning the use of the
filioque in the liturgy. Eastern Orthodoxy. William La Due describes modern
Orthodox theological scholarship as split between a group of scholars that hold
to a "strict traditionalism going back to Photius" and other scholars that are
"not so adamantly opposed (to the filioque)". The "strict traditionalist" camp
is exemplified by the stance of Vladimir Lossky who insisted that any notion of
a double procession of the Holy Spirit from both the Father and the Son was
incompatible with Orthodox theology. For Lossky, this incompatibility was so
fundamental that "hether we like it or not, the question of the procession of
the Holy Spirit has been the sole dogmatic grounds of the separation of East
and West." Orthodox scholars who share Lossky's view include Dumitru
StƒÉniloae, John Romanides and Michael Pomazansky. Sergius Bulgakov, however,
was of the opinion that the filioque did not represent an insurmountable
obstacle to reunion of the Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches. The
Eastern Orthodox interpretation is that the Holy Spirit originates, has his
cause for existence or being (manner of existence) from the Father alone as
"One God, One Father", and that the filioque confuses the theology as it was
defined at the councils at both Nicene and Constantinople. Views of Eastern
Orthodox saints. The addition of the "Filioque" to the Niceno-
Constantinipolitan Creed has been condemned as heretical by many important
Fathers and saints of the Eastern Orthodox Church, including Photios I of
Constantinople, Gregory Palamas and Mark of Ephesus, sometimes referred to as
the Three Pillars of Orthodoxy. However, the statement 'The Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Father and the Son' can be understood in an orthodox sense if
it is clear from the context that 'procession from the Son' refers to the
sending forth of the Spirit "in time", not to an eternal, double procession
within the Trinity Itself. Hence, Saint Maximus the Confessor defended the
Western use of the "Filioque" in a context other than that of the Niceno-
Constantinipolitan Creed. According to Metropolitan Hierotheos (Vlachos) of
Nafpaktos, it is Eastern Orthodox tradition that Saint Gregory of Nyssa himself
composed the section of the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed referring to the
Holy Spirit adopted by the Second Ecumenical Council at Constantinople in 381.
Eastern Orthodox view of Roman Catholic theology. Eastern Orthodox theologians
(e.g., Michael Pomazansky) say that the Nicene Creed as a Symbol of Faith, as
dogma, is to address and define church theology specifically the Orthodox
Trinitarian understanding of God. In the hypostases of God as correctly
expressed against the teachings considered outside the church. The Father
hypostasis of the Nicene Creed is the origin of all. Eastern Orthodox
theologians see this as teaching of philosophical speculation rather than from
actual experience of God via "theoria. The Father is the eternal, infinite and
uncreated reality, that the Christ and the Holy Spirit are also eternal,
infinite and uncreated, in that their origin is not in the ousia of God, but
that their origin is in the hypostasis of God called the Father. The double
procession of the Holy Spirit bears some resemblance to the teachings of
Macedonius and his sect called the Pneumatomachians in that the Holy Spirit is
created by the Son and a servant of the Father and the Son. It was Macedonius'
position that caused the specific wording of the section on the Holy Spirit by
St Gregory of Nyssa in the finalized Nicene creed.[http://www.intratext.com/
IXT/ENG0824/_P17.HTM] The following are points of the filioque as Roman
Catholic dogma seen as in contention with Eastern Orthodoxy. In the judgment of
these Orthodox, the Roman Catholic Church is in fact teaching as a matter of
Roman Catholic dogma that the Holy Spirit derives his origin and being
(equally) from both the Father and the Son, making the Filioque a double
procession. This being the very thing that Maximus the Confessor was stating in
his work from the 7th century that would be wrong and that the West was not
doing. They thus perceive the West as teaching through more than one type of
theological Filioque a different origin and cause of the Holy Spirit. That
through the dogmatic Roman Catholic Filioque the Holy Spirit is subordinate to
the Father and the Son and not a free and independent and equal to the Father,
hypostasis that receives his uncreatedness from the origin of all things, the
Father hypostasis. Trinity expresses the idea of message, messenger and
revealer, or mind, word and meaning. Eastern Orthodox Christians believe in one
God the Father, whose person is uncaused and unoriginate, who, because He is
love and communion, always exists with His Word and Spirit. Eastern Orthodox
theology. In Eastern Orthodox Christianity theology starts with the Father
hypostasis, not the essence of God, since the Father is the God of the Old
Testament. The Father is the origin of all things and this is the basis and
starting point of the Orthodox trinitarian teaching of one God in Father, one
God, of the essence of the Father (as the uncreated comes from the Father as
this is what the Father is). In Eastern Orthodox theology, God's uncreatedness
or being or essence in Greek is called ousia. Each hypostasis of God is a
specific and unique existence of God. Each has the same essence (coming from
the origin, without origin, Father (God) they are uncreated). Each specific
quality that constitutes a hypostasis of God, is non-reductionist and not
shared. It is this immanence of the Trinity that was defined in the finalized
Nicene Creed. The economy of God, as God expresses himself in reality (his
energies) was not what the Creed addressed directly. Nor the specifics of God's
interrelationships of his existences, is again not what is defined within the
Nicene Creed. The attempt to use the Creed to explain God's energies by
reducing God existences to mere energies (actualities, activities, potentials)
could be perceived as the heresy of semi-modalism. Eastern Orthodox theologians
have complained about this problem in the Roman Catholic dogmatic teaching of
actus purus. Orthodox theologians who do not condemn the "Filioque". Not all
Orthodox theologians share the view taken by Vladimir Lossky, Dumitru
StƒÉniloae, John Romanides and Michael Pomazansky, who condemn the "Filioque".
Kallistos Ware considers this the "rigorist" position within the Orthodox
Church. Ware states that a more "liberal" position on this issue "was the view
of the Greeks who signed the act of union at Florence. It is a view also held
by many Orthodox at the present time". He writes that "according to the
'liberal' view, the Greek and the Latin doctrines on the procession of the Holy
Spirit may both alike be regarded as theologically defensible. The Greeks
affirm that the Spirit proceeds from the Father "through" the Son, the Latins
that He proceeds from the Father "and" from the Son; but when applied to the
relationship between Son and Spirit, these two prepositions 'through' and
'from' amount to the same thing." The "Encyclopedia of Christian Theology"
lists Vasily Bolotov, Paul Evdokimov, I. Voronov and Sergei Bulgakov as seeing
the "Filioque" as a permissible theological opinion or "theologoumenon."
Bolotov defined theologoumena as theological opinions "of those who for every
catholic are more than just theologians: they are the theological opinions of
the holy fathers of the one undivided church", opinions that Bolotov rated
highly but that he sharply distinguished from dogmas. Since a theologoumenon is
a theological opinion outside of dogma, in the case of any Orthodox theologians
open to the filioque as opinion, it is unclear if they would accept that the
filioque ever be added into the Creed for the whole church, or just something
exclusive for the Latin language based church of the West. even if they do not
themselves adopt that opinion. It must be mentioned Bolotov firmly rejects the
Filioque in the procession of the Spirit from the Father. As an Orthodox
theologian, Bulgakov (Bulgakov is regarded as heretical by the Orthodox church)
acknowledges that dogma can only be established by an ecumenical council. Boris
Bobrinskoy sees the "Filioque" as having positive theological content. Church
of the East. Two of the present-day churches derived from the Church of the
East, the Assyrian Church of the East and the Ancient Church of the East do not
use "and the Son" when reciting the Nicene Creed. The other, known as the
Chaldean Church, has recently, at the request of the Holy See, removed "and the
Son" from its version of the Nicene Creed. Recent theological perspectives.
Linguistic issues. Bishop Kallistos Ware suggests that the problem is of
semantics rather than of basic doctrinal differences. Saint Theophylact of
Ohrid likewise held that the difference was linguistic in nature and not
actually theological. " Praying together: agreed liturgical texts prepared by
the English Language Liturgical Consultation 1988." Norwich: Canterbury Press,
1988, pp. 14-15. In 1995 the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity
published in various languages a study on "The Greek and the Latin Traditions
regarding the Procession of the Holy Spirit", which pointed out an important
difference in meaning between the Greek verb ·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ and the
Latin verb "procedere", both of which are commonly translated as "proceed". The
pontifical council stated that the Greek verb ·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ
indicates that the Spirit "takes his origin from the Father¬ ... in a
principal, proper and immediate manner", while the Latin verb, which
corresponds rather to the verb œÄœÅŒøœäŒ≠ŒΩŒ±Œπ in Greek, can be applied to
proceeding even from a mediate channel. Thus the PCPU recognized that, in the
Greek language, the word used in the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed
(·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœÖœåŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒΩ, "who proceeds") to signify the proceeding of the
Holy Spirit cannot appropriately be used with regard to the Son, but only with
regard to the Father, a difficulty that does not exist in other languages.
Metropolitan John Zizioulas, while maintaining the explicit Orthodox position
of the Father as the single origin and source of the Holy Spirit, has declared
that the recent document the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity
shows positive signs of reconciliation. Zizioulas states "Closely related to
the question of the single cause is the problem of the exact meaning of the
Son's involvement in the procession of the Spirit. Saint Gregory of Nyssa
explicitly admits a 'mediating' role of the Son in the procession of the Spirit
from the Father. Is this role to be expressed with the help of the preposition
Œ¥ŒØŒ± (through) the Son (ŒµŒ∫ Œ Œ±œÑœÅœåœÇ Œ¥Œπ'Œ•ŒπŒøœç), as Saint Maximus
and other Patristic sources seem to suggest?" Zizioulas continues with "The
Vatican statement notes that this is 'the basis that must serve for the
continuation of the current theological dialogue between Catholic and
Orthodox'. I would agree with this, adding that the discussion should take
place in the light of the 'single cause' principle to which I have just
referred." Zizioulas continues with saying that this "constitutes an
encouraging attempt to clarify the basic aspects of the 'Filioque' problem and
show that a rapprochement between West and East on this matter is eventually
possible". Orthodox reconsideration of the Filioque. Several Orthodox
theologians have considered the "Filioque" anew, with a view to reconciliation
of East and West. In 1898, Orthodox theologian Vasily Bolotov published his
"Thesen √ºber das "Filioque"", in which he asserted that the "Filioque", like
Photios's "from the Father "alone"", was a permissible theological opinion (a
theologoumenon, not a dogma) that cannot be an absolute impediment to
reestablishment of communion. This thesis was supported by Orthodox theologians
Sergei Bulgakov, Paul Evdokimov and I. Voronov, but was rejected by Vladimir
Lossky. In 1986, Theodore Stylianopoulos provided an extensive, scholarly
overview of the contemporary discussion. Twenty years after writing the first
(1975) edition of his book, "The Orthodox Church", Metropolitan Kallistos of
Diokleia said that he had changed his mind and had concluded that "the problem
is more in the area of semantics and different emphases than in any basic
doctrinal differences": "the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father alone" and
"the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son" may "both" have orthodox
meanings if the words translated "proceeds" actually have different meanings.
For some Orthodox, then, the "Filioque", while still a matter of conflict,
would not impede full communion of the Roman Catholic and Orthodox Churches if
other issues were resolved. But many Orthodox consider that the "Filioque" is
in flagrant contravention of the words of Christ in the Gospel. has been
specifically condemned by the Orthodox Church, and remains a fundamental
heretical teaching which divides East and West. John Romanides too, while
personally opposing the "Filioque", has stated that in itself, outside the
Creed, the phrase is not considered to have been condemned by the 878-880
Council of Constantinople, "since it did not teach that the Son is 'cause' or
'co-cause' of the existence of the Holy Spirit"; however, it could not be added
to the Creed, "where 'procession' means 'cause' of existence of the Holy
Spirit". Inclusion in the Nicene Creed. Eastern Orthodox Christians object
that, even if the teaching of the "Filioque" can be defended, its medieval
interpretation and unilateral interpolation into the Creed is anti-canonical
and unacceptable. "The Catholic Church acknowledges the conciliar, ecumenical,
normative and irrevocable value, as expression of the one common faith of the
Church and of all Christians, of the Symbol professed in Greek at
Constantinople in 381 by the Second Ecumenical Council. No profession of faith
peculiar to a particular liturgical tradition can contradict this expression of
the faith taught and professed by the undivided Church." The Catholic Church
allows liturgical use of the Apostles' Creed as well of the Nicene Creed, and
sees no essential difference between the recitation in the liturgy of a creed
with orthodox additions and a profession of faith outside the liturgy such that
of the Patriarch of Constantinople Saint Tarasius, who developed the Nicene
Creed with an addition as follows: "the Holy Spirit, the Lord and giver of
life, who proceeds from the Father "through the Son"". It sees the addition of
"and the Son" in the context of the Latin ""qui ex Patre procedit"" (who
proceeds from the Father) as an elucidation of the faith expressed by the
Church Fathers, since the verb "procedere" signifies "the communication of the
consubstantial divinity from the Father to the Son and from the Father, through
and with the Son, to the Holy Spirit". The elucidations that the Armenian
Apostolic Church adds to the Nicene Creed are much more numerous than the two
added by the Latin Church. Another change made to the text of the Nicene Creed
by both the Latins and the Greeks is to use the singular "I believe" in place
of the plural "we believe", while all the Churches of Oriental Orthodoxy, not
only the Armenian, but also the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, the
Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, the Malankara Orthodox Church, and the
Syrian Orthodox Church, have on the contrary preserved the "we believe" of the
original text. --> Focus on Saint Maximus as a point of mutual agreement.
Recently, theological debate about the filioque has focused on the writings of
Maximus the Confessor. Siecienski writes that, "Among the hundreds of figures
involved in the filioque debates throughout the centuries, Maximus the
Confessor enjoys a privileged position." During the lengthy proceedings at
Ferrara-Florence, the Orthodox delegates presented a text from Maximus the
Confessor that they felt could provide the key to resolving the theological
differences between East and West. The study published by the Pontifical
Council for Promoting Christian Unity states that, according to Saint Maximus,
the phrase "and from the Son" does not contradict the Holy Spirit's procession
from the Father as first origin (·ºêŒ∫œÄœåœÅŒµœÖœÉŒπœÇ), since it concerns only
the Holy Spirit's coming (in the sense of the Latin word "processio" and Saint
Cyril of Alexandria's œÄœÅŒøœäŒ≠ŒΩŒ±Œπ) from the Son in a way that excludes any
idea of subordinationism. Orthodox theologian and Metropolitan of Pergamon,
John Zizioulas, says: "For Saint Maximus the Filioque was not heretical because
its intention was to denote not the ·ºêŒ∫œÄŒøœÅŒµœçŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ (ekporeuesthai)
but the œÄœÅŒøœäŒ≠ŒΩŒ±Œπ (proienai) of the Spirit." Metropolitan John Zizioulas
also wrote:[http://www.orthodoxresearchinstitute.org/articles/dogmatics/
john_zizioulas_single_source.htm] This is precisely what Saint Maximus said of
the Roman view, that "they have shown that they have not made the Son the cause
of the Spirit ‚Äì they know in fact that the Father is the only cause of the
Son and the Spirit, the one by begetting and the other by procession". In this
regard, the letter of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity on
"The Greek and the Latin Traditions regarding the Procession of the Holy
Spirit" upholds the monarchy of the Father as the "sole Trinitarian Cause or
principle [principium of the Son and the Holy Spirit" While the Council of
Florence proposed the equivalency of the two terms "cause" and "principle" and
therefore implied that the Son is a cause (aitia) of the subsistence of the
Holy Spirit, the letter of the Pontifical Council distinguishes Roman Catholic
theologian Avery Dulles, writing of the Eastern fathers who, while aware of the
currency of the "Filioque" in the West, did not generally regard it as
heretical, said: "Some, such as Maximus the Confessor, a seventh-century
Byzantine monk, defended it as a legitimate variation of the Eastern formula
that the Spirit proceeds from the Father through the Son." Michael Pomazansky
and John Romanides and wrote a special treatise about this dogma. for he
explained that, by "ekporeusis", "the Father is the sole cause of the Son and
the Spirit", but that, by "proienai", the Greek verb corresponding to
"procedere" (proceed) in Latin, the Spirit comes through the Son. Later again
at the Council of Florence in 1438, the West held that the two views were
contradictory. The Council of Florence in fact declared that the Greek formula
"from the Father through the Son" was equivalent to the Latin "from the Father
and the Son", not contradictory, and that those who used the two formulas "were
aiming at the same meaning in different words". Per filium. Recently some
Orthodox theologians have proposed the substitution of the formula "a patre per
filium / ek tou patros dia tou huiou" (from the Father through the Son) instead
of "a patre filioque" (from the Father and the Son). Recent attempts at
reconciliation. Starting in the latter half of the nineteenth century,
ecumenical efforts have gradually developed more nuanced understandings of the
issues underlying the Filioque controversy and worked to remove them as an
obstruction to Christian unity. Vladimir Lossky insists that the filioque is so
fundamentally incompatible with Orthodox Christianity as to be the central
issue dividing the two churches. Western churches have arrived at the position
that, although the Filioque is doctrinally sound, the way that it was inserted
into the Nicene Creed has created an unnecessary obstacle to ecumenical
dialogue. Thus, without abandoning the Filioque, some Western churches have
come to accept that it could be omitted from the Creed without violating any
core theological principles. This accommodation on the part of Western Churches
has the objective of allowing both East and West to once again to share a
common understanding of the Creed as the traditional and fundamental statement
of the Christian faith. Old Catholic Church. Immediately after the Old Catholic
Church separated from the Catholic Church in 1871, its theologians initiated
contact with the Orthodox Church. In 1874/75, representatives of the two
churches held "union conferences" in Bonn with theologians of the Anglican
Communion and the Lutheran Church in attendance in an unofficial capacity. The
conferences discussed a number of issues including the filioque controversy.
From the outset, Old Catholic theologians agreed with the Orthodox position
that the filioque had been introduced in the West in an unacceptably non-
canonical way. It was at these Bonn conferences that the Old Catholics became
the first Western church to omit the filioque from the Nicene Creed. Anglican
Communion. Three Lambeth Conferences (1888, 1978 and 1988) have recommended
that the Filioque be dropped from the Nicene Creed by churches that belong to
the Anglican Communion.--> The 1930 Lambeth Conference initiated formal
theological dialogue between representatives of the Anglican and Orthodox
churches. In 1976, the Agreed Statement of the Anglican-Orthodox Joint
Doctrinal Commission included a recommendation by Anglican members of the
commission that the filioque should be omitted from the Creed because its
inclusion had been effected without the authority of an Ecumenical Council. In
1994, the General Convention of the Episcopal Church resolved that the filioque
should be deleted from the Nicene Creed in the next edition of the Prayer Book.
The enthronement ceremonies of the last three archbishops of Canterbury have
included recitations of the Nicene Creed that omitted the filioque; this has
been considered to have been "a gesture of friendship toward Orthodox guests
and their Communions." World Council of Churches. In 1979, a study group was
established by the Faith and Order Commission of the World Council of Churches
to examine the filioque question. The report of the study group included the
"Klingenthal Memorandum" which recommended that "that the original form of the
Creed, without the filioque, should everywhere be recognized as the normative
one and restored, so that the whole Christian people may be able ... to confess
their common faith in the Holy Spirit." However, nearly a decade later, the WCC
lamented that very few member churches had implemented the recommendation.
Roman Catholic. Popes John Paul II and Benedict XVI have recited the Nicene
Creed jointly with Patriarchs Demetrius I and Bartholomew I in Greek without
the "Filioque" clause. In the judgment of the consultation, the question of the
"Filioque" is no longer a "Church-dividing" issue, which would impede full
reconciliation and full communion. It is for the bishops of the Catholic and
Orthodox Churches to review this work and to make whatever decisions would be
appropriate. Summary. The "Filioque" was originally proposed to stress more
clearly the connection between the Son and the Spirit, amid a heresy in which
the Son was taken as less than the Father because he does not serve as a source
of the Holy Spirit. When the "Filioque" came into use in Spain and Gaul in the
West, the local churches were not aware that their language of procession would
not translate well back into the Greek. Conversely, from Photius to the Council
of Florence, the Greek Fathers were also not acquainted with the linguistic
issues. While the Filioque doctrine was traditional in the West, being declared
dogmatically in 447 by Pope Leo I, the Pope whose Tome was approved at the
Council of Chalcedon, its inclusion in the Creed appeared in the anti-Arian
situation of seventh-century Spain. However, this dogma was never accepted in
the East. The "Filioque", included in the Creed by certain anti-Arian councils
in Spain, was a means to affirm the full divinity of the Son in relation to
both the Father and the Spirit. Ironically, a similar anti-Arian emphasis also
strongly influenced the development of the liturgy in the East, for example, in
promoting prayer to "Christ Our God", an expression which also came to find a
place in the West, where, largely as a result of "the Church's reaction to
Teutonic Arianism", "'Christ our God' ... gradually assumes precedence over
'Christ our brother'". In this case, a common adversary, namely, Arianism, had
profound, far-reaching effects, in the orthodox reaction in both East and West.
Church politics, authority conflicts, ethnic hostility, linguistic
misunderstanding, personal rivalry, forced conversions, large scale wars,
political intrigue, unfilled promises and secular motives all combined in
various ways to divide East and West. As regards the doctrine expressed by the
phrase in Latin (in which the word "procedit" that is linked with "Filioque"
does not have exactly the same meaning and overtones as the word used in
Greek), any declaration by the West that it is heretical (something that not
all Orthodox now insist on) would conflict with the Western doctrine of the
infallibility of the Church, since it has been upheld by Councils recognized by
the Roman Catholic Church as ecumenical and even by those Popes who, like Leo
III, opposed insertion of the word into the Creed. Bibliography. Much has been
written on the "Filioque"; what follows is selective. As time goes on, this
list will inevitably have to be updated.
