First Vatican Council The First Vatican Council was convoked by Pope Pius IX on
29 June 1868, after a period of planning and preparation that began on 6
December 1864. This twentieth ecumenical council of the Catholic Church, held
three centuries after the Council of Trent, opened on 8 December 1869 and
adjourned on 20 October 1870. Unlike the five earlier General Councils held in
Rome, which met in the Lateran Basilica and are known as Lateran Councils, it
met in the Vatican Basilica, hence its name. Its best-known decision is its
definition of papal infallibility. The Council was convoked to deal with the
contemporary problems of the rising influence of rationalism, liberalism, and
materialism. Its purpose was, besides this, to define the Catholic doctrine
concerning the Church of Christ. There was discussion and approval of only two
constitutions: the Dogmatic Constitution on the Catholic Faith and the First
Dogmatic Constitution on the Church of Christ, the latter dealing with the
primacy and infallibility of the Bishop of Rome. The first matter brought up
for debate was the dogmatic draft of Catholic doctrine against the manifold
errors due to Rationalism. Papal infallibility. The doctrine of papal
infallibility was not new and had been used by Pope Pius in defining as dogma,
in 1854, the Immaculate Conception of Mary, the mother of Jesus. However, the
proposal to define papal infallibility itself as dogma met with resistance, not
because of doubts about the substance of the proposed definition, but because
some considered it inopportune to take that step at that time. McBrien divides
the bishops attending Vatican I into three groups. The first group, which
McBrien calls the "active infallibilists", was led by Manning and Senestrey.
This group took an extreme view that argued that all papal teachings were
infallible and that papal infallibility was the foundation of the church's
infallibility. According to McBrien, the majority of the bishops were not so
much interested in a formal definition of papal infallibility as they were in
strengthening papal authority and, because of this, were willing to accept the
agenda of the infallibilists. A minority, some 20 percent of the bishops,
opposed the proposed definition of papal infallibility on both ecclesiastical
and pragmatic grounds. They opposed the ultramontane centralist model of the
Church because, in their opinion, it departed from the ecclesiastical structure
of the early Christian church. From a pragmatic perspective, they feared that
defining papal infallibility would alienate some Catholics, create new
difficulties for union with non-Catholics, and provoke interference by
governments in Church affairs. Those who held this view included most of the
German and Austro-Hungarian bishops, nearly half of the Americans, one third of
the French, most of the Chaldaeans and Melkites, and a few Armenians. Only a
few bishops appear to have had doubts about the dogma itself. Dei Filius. On 24
April 1870, the dogmatic constitution on the Catholic faith "Dei Filius" was
adopted unanimously. The draft presented to the Council on 8 March drew no
serious criticism, but a group of 35 English-speaking bishops, who feared that
the opening phrase of the first chapter, "Sancta romana catholica Ecclesia"
(the holy Roman Catholic Church), might be construed as favouring the Anglican
Branch Theory, later succeeded in having an additional adjective inserted, so
that the final text read: "Sancta catholica apostolica romana Ecclesia" (the
holy Catholic Apostolic Roman Church). The constitution thus set forth the
teaching of the "Holy Catholic Apostolic Roman Church" on God, revelation and
faith. Pastor aeternus. There was stronger opposition to the draft constitution
on the nature of the Church, which at first did not include the question of
papal infallibility, but the majority party in the Council, whose position on
this matter was much stronger, brought it forward. It was decided to postpone
discussion of everything in the draft except infallibility. On 13 July 1870,
the section on infallibility was voted on: 451 voted simply in favour
("placet"), 88 against ("non placet"), and 62 in favour but on condition of
some amendment ("placet iuxta modum"). This made evident what the final outcome
would be, and some 60 members of the opposition left Rome so as not to be
associated with approval of the document. The final vote, with a choice only
between "placet" and "non placet", was taken on 18 July 1870, with 433 votes in
favour and only 2 against defining as a dogma the infallibility of the pope
when speaking "ex cathedra". The two votes against were cast by Bishop Aloisio
Riccio, and Bishop Edward Fitzgerald. The dogmatic constitution states that the
Pope has "full and supreme power of jurisdiction over the whole Church"
(chapter 3:9); and that, when he "speaks "ex cathedra", that is, when, in the
exercise of his office as shepherd and teacher of all Christians, in virtue of
his supreme apostolic authority, he defines a doctrine concerning faith or
morals to be held by the whole Church, he possesses, by the divine assistance
promised to him in blessed Peter, that infallibility which the divine Redeemer
willed his Church to enjoy in defining doctrine concerning faith or morals"
(chapter 4:9). None of the bishops who had argued that proclaiming the
definition was inopportune refused to accept it. Some Catholics, mainly of
German language and largely inspired by the historian Johann Joseph Ignaz von
DÃ¶llinger (who did not formally join the new group) formed the separate Old
Catholic Church in protest. Suspension. Discussion of the rest of the document
on the nature of the Church was to continue when the bishops returned after a
summer break. However, in the meanwhile the Franco-Prussian War broke out. With
the swift German advance and the capture of Emperor Napoleon III, France was no
longer in a position to protect the Pope's rule in Rome. Consequently, on 20
September 1870 the Kingdom of Italy captured Rome and annexed it. One month
later, on 20 October 1870, Pope Pius IX suspended the Council indefinitely. It
was never reconvened and formally closed in 1960 prior to Second Vatican
Council.
