Jinn The jinn ( ', singular '; also spelled djinn), or genies, are supernatural
spirits mentioned in the Quran and Islamic mythology who inhabit an unseen
world in dimensions beyond the visible universe of humans. Together, the jinn,
humans and angels make up the three sentient creations of God. The Quran
mentions that the jinn are made of a smokeless and "scorching fire", and they
have the physical property of weight. Like human beings, the jinn can also be
good, evil, or neutrally benevolent. The jinn are mentioned frequently in the
Quran, and the 72nd sura of the Quran is entitled "S≈´rat al-Jinn". Etymology
and definitions. "Jinn" is a noun of the collective number in Arabic literally
meaning "hidden from sight", and it derives from the Arabic root ' meaning "to
hide" or "be hidden". Other words derived from this root are ' 'mad'
(literally, 'one whose intellect is hidden'), ' 'madness', and ' 'embryo,
fetus' ('hidden inside the womb'). The Arabic root ' means 'to hide, conceal'.
A word for garden or Paradise, "jannah", is a cognate of the Hebrew word ◊í◊ü
"gan" 'garden', derived from the same Semitic root. In arid climates, gardens
have to be protected against desertification by walls; this is the same concept
as in the word "paradise" from "pairi-da√™za", an Avestan word for garden that
literally means 'having walls built around'. Thus the protection of a garden
behind walls implies its being hidden from the outside. Arabic lexicons such as
Edward William Lane's "Arabic-English Lexicon" define ' not only as spirits,
but also anything concealed through time, status, and even physical darkness.
The word "genie" in English is derived from Latin "genius", meant a sort of
tutelary or guardian spirit thought to be assigned to each person at their
birth. English borrowed the French descendant of this word, "g√©nie"; its
earliest written attestation in English, in 1655, is a plural spelled "genyes."
The French translators of "The Book of One Thousand and One Nights" used
"g√©nie" as a translation of "jinnƒ´" because it was similar to the Arabic word
in sound and in meaning. This use was also adopted in English and has since
become dominant. Many cultural interpretations noted the Jinn as having
distinct male and females, they would often appear wearing vests and sashes,
various interpretations note that they tied their hair long vertically.
According to various stories Jinn could exist independently or bound to any
particular object. In Arabic, the word ' is in the collective number,
translated in English as plural (e.g., "several genies"); ' is in the
singulative number, used to refer to one individual, which is translated by the
singular in English (e.g., "one genie"). Therefore, the word 'jinn' in English
writing is treated as a plural. Jinn in the pre-Islamic era. Amongst
archaeologists dealing with ancient Middle Eastern cultures, any spirit less
than angels is often referred to as a "jinni", especially when describing stone
carvings or other forms of art. Inscriptions found in Northwestern Arabia seem
to indicate the worship of jinn, or at least their tributary status. For
instance, an inscription from Beth Fasi'el near Palmyra pays tribute to the
""Jinnaye"", the "good and rewarding gods". ""Yet, they join the jinns as
partners in worship with Allah, though He has created them (the jinns), and
they attribute falsely without knowledge sons and daughters to Him. Be He
Glorified and Exalted above (all) that they attribute to Him."" (Quran 6:100)
In the One Thousand and One Nights several types of Jinn are depicted that
coexist and interact with Humans: "Devil (Islam)", the "ghoul", the "marid",
the "ifrit", and the Angels. The One Thousand and One Nights seems to present
Ifrits as the most massive and strongest forms of Jinn and Marids are a type of
Jinn associated with seas and oceans. Jinn in Islam. In Islamic theology jinn
are said to be creatures with free will, made from smokeless fire by Allah as
humans were made of clay, among other things. According to the Quran, jinn have
free will, and "Devil (Islam)" abused this freedom in front of Allah by
refusing to bow to Adam when Allah ordered angels and jinn to do so. For
disobeying Allah, he was expelled from Paradise and called ""Devil (Islam)""
(Satan). Jinn are frequently mentioned in the Quran: Surah 72 (named "S≈´rat
al-Jinn") is named after the jinn, and has a passage about them. Another surah
("S≈´rat al-NƒÅs") mentions jinn in the last verse. The Quran also mentions
that Muhammad was sent as a prophet to both "humanity and the jinn," and that
prophets and messengers were sent to both communities. Similar to humans, jinn
have free will allowing them to do as they choose (such as follow any
religion). They are usually invisible to humans, and humans do not appear
clearly to them. Jinn have the power to travel large distances at extreme
speeds and are thought to live in remote areas, mountains, seas, trees, and the
air, in their own communities. Like humans, jinn will also be judged on the Day
of Judgment and will be sent to Paradise or Hell according to their deeds.
Classifications and characteristics. The social organization of the jinn
community resembles that of humans; e.g., they have kings, courts of law,
weddings, and mourning rituals. A few traditions (hadith), divide jinn into
three classes: those who have wings and fly in the air, those who resemble
snakes and dogs, and those who travel about ceaselessly. Other reports claim
that ‚ÄòAbd AllƒÅh ibn Mas‚Äò≈´d (d.¬ 652), who was accompanying Muhammad when
the jinn came to hear his recitation of the Quran, described them as creatures
of different forms; some resembling vultures and snakes, others tall men in
white garb. They may even appear as dragons, onagers, or a number of other
animals. In addition to their animal forms, the jinn occasionally assume human
form to mislead and destroy their human victims. Certain hadiths have also
claimed that the jinn may subsist on bones, which will grow flesh again as soon
as they touch them, and that their animals may live on dung, which will revert
to grain or grass for the use of the jinn flocks. Ibn Taymiyyah believed the
jinn were generally "ignorant, untruthful, oppressive and treacherous," thus
representing the very strict interpretations adhered by the Salafi schools of
thought. Ibn Taymiyyah believes that the jinn account for much of the "magic"
perceived by humans, cooperating with magicians to lift items in the air
unseen, delivering hidden truths to fortune tellers, and mimicking the voices
of deceased humans during seances. In Surah Al-Rahman (ayah 33) of the Muslim
Quran, Allah reminds Jinn as well as mankind that should 'when' they possess
the ability to pass beyond the furthest reaches of space, then it is only by
His authority shall they be able to pass. Then it goes on to say, ‚ÄúThen which
of the favors of your Lord do you deny?‚Äù In Surah Al-Jinn (ayahs 8 to 10) it
is narrated by Allah concerning the Jinn how they touched or ‚Äòsought the
limits‚Äô of the sky 'space' and found it full of stern guards and shooting
stars, as a warning to man. It goes on further to say how they ‚Äòthe Jinn‚Äô
used to take stations in the skies to listen to divine decrees passed down
through the ranks of the Angels, but those who attempt to listen now (during
and after the revelation of the Quran) shall find fiery sentinels awaiting
them. Qarƒ´n. A related belief is that every person is assigned one's own
special jinnƒ´, also called a "qarƒ´n", of the jinn that whisper to people's
souls and tell them to submit to evil desires. The notion of a "qarƒ´n" is not
universally accepted amongst all Muslims, but it is generally accepted that
Devil (Islam) whispers in human minds, and he is assigned to each human being.
In a hadith recorded by Muslim, the companion Ibn Mas'ud reported: 'The Prophet
Muhammad said: 'There is not one of you who does not have a jinn appointed to
be his constant companion ("qarƒ´n").' They said, 'And you too, O Messenger of
Allah?' He said, 'Me too, but Allah has helped me and he has submitted, so that
he only helps me to do good.' ' Jinn in Muslim cultures. The stories of the
Jinn can be found in various Muslim cultures around the world. In Sindh the
concept of the Jinni was introduced during the Abbasid Era and has become a
common part of the local folklore which also includes stories of both male Jinn
called "Jinn" and female Jinn called "Jiniri". Folk stories of female Jinni
include stories such as the "Jejhal Jiniri". More acclaimed stories of the Jinn
can be found in the One Thousand and One Nights story of the "Fisherman and the
Jinni"; more than three different types of Jinn are described in the story of
"Maruf the Cobbler"; a mighty Jinni helps young Aladdin in the story of
"Alladin and the Wonderful Lamp"; as Hassan Badr ad-Din weeps over the grave of
his father until sleep overcomes him he is awoken by a large group of
sympathetic Jinni in the "Tale of Ali Nur ad-Din and his son Badr ad-Din
Hassan". During the Rwandan genocide both Hutus and Tutsi avoided searching in
local Rwandan Muslim neighborhoods and widely believed myths that local Muslims
and Mosques were protected by the power of Islamic magic and the efficacious
Jinn. In Cyangugu, arsonists ran away instead of destroying the Mosque because
they believed Jinn were guarding the Mosque and feared their wrath.
Relationship of King Solomon and the genies. According to traditions, the jinn
stood behind the learned humans in Solomon's court, who in turn, sat behind the
prophets. The jinn remained in the service of Solomon, who had placed them in
bondage, and had ordered them to perform a number of tasks. ""And before
Solomon were marshalled his hosts,- of jinn and men and birds, and they were
all kept in order and ranks."" (Quran 27:17) The Quran relates that Solomon
died while he was leaning on his staff. As he remained upright, propped on his
staff, the jinn thought he was still alive and supervising them, so they
continued to work. They realized the truth only when Allah sent a creature to
crawl out of the ground and gnaw at Solomon's staff until his body collapsed.
The Quran then comments that if they had known the unseen, they would not have
stayed in the humiliating torment of being enslaved. ""Then, when We decreed
(Solomon's) death, nothing showed them his death except a little worm of the
earth, which kept (slowly) gnawing away at his staff: so when he fell down, the
jinn saw plainly that if they had known the unseen, they would not have tarried
in the humiliating Penalty (of their Task)"." (Quran 34:14) Difference in
perception of jinn between East and West. There is a significant difference in
how these beings are perceived in East (as jinn) and in West (as genies), which
is evident in the two separate articles for these terms. Western natives moving
to Eastern countries may experience a bout of culture shock when they are
confronted with the presence of jinn and the people who believe in them, and
two good examples of the struggle to adapt to a culture which believes in jinn
are The Caliph's House and In Arabian Nights by Tahir Shah, which describe his
family's experiences in moving from London to a jinn-inhabited home in Morocco.
Existence and usage of jinn in other cultures. In Guanche mythology from
Tenerife in the Canary Islands, there existed the belief in beings that are
similar to genies, such as the "maxios" or "dioses paredros" ('attendant gods',
domestic and nature spirits) and "tibicenas" (evil genies), as well as the
demon Guayota (aboriginal god of evil) that, like the Arabic "Devil (Islam)",
is sometimes identified with a genie. Jinn in the Bible. In Judeo-Christian
tradition, the word or concept of jinn as such does not occur in the original
Hebrew text of the Bible, but the Arabic word "" is often used in several old
Arabic translations. In several verses in those Arabic translations, the words:
Jinn () Jann ( ') Majnoon ( ') and ' () are mentioned as translations of
familiar spirit or ◊ê◊ï◊ë (ob) for Jann and the devil or ("daim√≥nion") for '.
In Van Dyck's Arabic translation of the Bible, these words are mentioned in
Leviticus 19:31, Lev 20:6, 1 Samuel 28:3, 1 Sa 28:9, 1 Sa 28:7, 1 Chronicles
10:13, Gospel of Matthew 4:1, Mat 12:22, Gospel of Luke 4:5, Luk 8:12, Gospel
of John 8:44 and other verses as well. Also, in the apocryphal book Testament
of Solomon, Solomon describes particular demons whom he enslaved to help build
the temple, the questions he put to them about their deeds and how they could
be thwarted, and their answers, which provide a kind of self-help manual
against demonic activity. Protection from jinn. An amulet, talisman or what is
referred to as a tawiz amongst Sufi circles is a form of protection against
many forms of spiritual evil, including protection against the jinn. It is
often worn around the neck in a pouch, close to the heart. One such popular
amulet was said to have been given to Sheikh Abdullah Daghistani by Muhammad in
a vision. In that vision he was instructed to give this amulet to people as a
protection for them in the last days. The amulet contains a depiction of the
Throne Room of Allah. The amulet contains theosophic names as well as the names
of folk saints. It is widely held to be very miraculous and a protection to
those who submit to Allah.. It is to be noted that Muslims believe that all
protection and help only comes from Allah, as it is a central Islamic tenet to
believe that there is no power nor might save God's. Often, these sorts of
practices are not widespread in the Islamic world and are mostly limited to
certain tribal communities in remote areas. Muslims faithfuls believe that
reciting the Verse of the Throne (Qur'an 2:255) and the final three concise
chapters of the Qur'an (chapters 112-114), are the most effective means of
seeking protection from satanic whispers and evil creatures. Other modern
methods of avoiding trouble from the jinn include leaving them food and
charcoal to keep them happy, asking permission before turning on water (as some
people believe that the jinn live in water pipes), and sprinkling salt on the
floor around one's bed to avoid nocturnal attacks by jinn.. These beliefs are
most likely cultural perceptions rather than religious-based practices. It is
noteworthy to mention that in the legal sources of Islam nothing is mentioned
about the mentioned practices and rituals. Other references to jinn in popular
culture. In Neil Gaiman's novel "American Gods", a salesman discontented with
his life has a sexual encounter with a jinn (specifically, an ifrit ) who is
working as a taxi driver in New York.
