Gersonides Levi ben Gershon (1288â€“1344), better known by his Latinised name
as Gersonides or the abbreviation of first letters as "RaLBaG", was a
philosopher, Talmudist, mathematician and astronomer/astrologer. He was born at
Bagnols in Languedoc, France. According to Abraham Zacuto and others, he was
the son of Gerson ben Solomon Catalan. Biography. As in the case of the other
medieval Jewish philosophers little is known of his life. His family had been
distinguished for piety and exegetical skill in Talmud, but though he was known
in the Jewish community by commentaries on certain books of the Bible, he never
seems to have accepted any rabbinical post. It has been suggested that the
uniqueness of his opinions may have put obstacles in the way of his preferment.
He is known to have been at Avignon and Orange during his life, and is believed
to have died in 1344, though Zacuto asserts that he died at Perpignan in 1370.
Works. Philosophical and religious works. Part of his writings consist of
commentaries on the portions of Aristotle then known, or rather of commentaries
on the commentaries of Averroes. Some of these are printed in the early Latin
editions of Aristotleâ€™s works. His most important treatise, that by which he
has a place in the history of philosophy, is entitled "Sefer Milhamot Ha-Shem",
("The Wars of the Lord"), and occupied twelve years in composition
(1317â€“1329). A portion of it, containing an elaborate survey of astronomy as
known to the Arabs, was translated into Latin in 1342 at the request of Pope
Clement VI. Gersonides was also the author of commentaries on the Pentateuch,
Joshua, Judges, I & II Samuel, I & II Kings, Proverbs, Job, Ecclesiastes, Song
of Songs, Ruth, Esther, Daniel, and Chronicles. He makes reference to a
commentary on Isaiah, but it is not extant. Views on God and omniscience. In
contrast to the theology held by other Jewish thinkers, Jewish theologian Louis
Jacobs argues, Gersonides held that God does not have complete foreknowledge of
human acts. "Gersonides, bothered by the old question of how God's
foreknowledge is compatible with human freedom, holds that what God knows
beforehand is all the choices open to each individual. God does not know,
however, which choice the individual, in his freedom, will make." Another
neoclassical Jewish proponent of self-limited omniscience was Abraham ibn Daud.
"Whereas the earlier Jewish philosophers extended the omniscience of God to
include the free acts of man, and had argued that human freedom of decision was
not affected by God's foreknowledge of its results, Ibn Daud, evidently
following Alexander of Aphrodisias, excludes human action from divine
foreknowledge. God, he holds, limited his omniscience even as He limited His
omnipotence in regard to human acts". Rabbi Isaiah Horowitz explained the
apparent paradox of his position by citing the old question, "Can God create a
rock so heavy that He cannot pick it up?" He said that we cannot accept free
choice as a creation of God's, and simultaneously question its logical
compatibility with omnipotence. See further discussion in "Free will in Jewish
thought". Views of the afterlife. Gersonides posits that people's souls are
composed of two parts: a material, or human, intellect; and an acquired, or
agent, intellect. The material intellect is inherent in every person, and gives
people the capacity to understand and learn. This material intellect is mortal,
and dies with the body. However, he also posits that the soul also has an
acquired intellect. This survives death, and can contain the accumulated
knowledge that the person acquired during their lifetime. For Gersonides,
Seymour Feldman points out, "Man is immortal insofar as he attains the
intellectual perfection that is open to him. This means that man becomes
immortal only if and to the extent that he acquires knowledge of what he can in
principle know, e.g. mathematics and the natural sciences. This knowledge
survives his bodily death and constitutes his immortality." Works in
mathematics and astronomy/astrology. Gersonides wrote "Maaseh Hoshev" in 1321
dealing with arithmetical operations including extraction of square and cube
roots, various algebraic identities, certain sums including sums of consecutive
integers, squares, and cubes, binomial coefficients, and simple combinatorial
identities. The work is notable for its early use of proof by mathematical
induction, and pioneering work in combinatorics. The title Maaseh Hoshev
literally means a Work of Calculation, but it is also a pun on a biblical
phrase meaning "clever work". Maaseh Hoshev is sometimes mistakenly referred to
as Sefer Hamispar (The Book of Number), which is an earlier and less
sophisticated work by Rabbi Abraham ben Meir Ibn Ezra (1090â€“1167). In 1342,
Levi wrote "On Sines, Chords and Arcs", which examined trigonometry, in
particular proving the sine law for plane triangles and giving five-figure sine
tables. One year later, at the request of the bishop of Meaux, he wrote "The
Harmony of Numbers" in which he considers a problem of Philippe de Vitry
involving so-called "harmonic numbers", which have the form 2"m"Â·3"n". The
problem was to characterize all pairs of harmonic numbers differing by 1.
Gersonides proved that there are only four such pairs: (1,2), (2,3), (3,4) and
(8,9). He is also credited to have invented the Jacob's staff, an instrument to
measure the angular distance between celestial objects. It is described as
consisting Levi observed a solar eclipse on March 3, 1337. After he had
observed this event he proposed a new theory of the sun which he proceeded to
test by further observations. Another eclipse observed by Levi was the eclipse
of the Moon on 3 October 1335. He described a geometrical model for the motion
of the Moon and made other astronomical observations of the Moon, Sun and
planets using a camera obscura. Some of his beliefs were well wide of the
truth, such as his belief that the Milky Way was on the sphere of the fixed
stars and shines by the reflected light of the Sun. Gersonides was also the
earliest known mathematician to have used the technique of mathematical
induction in a systematic and self-conscious fashion and anticipated
Galileoâ€™s error theory. The lunar crater Rabbi Levi is named after him.
Estimation of stellar distances and refutation of Ptolemy's model. Gersonides
is the only astronomer before modern times to have estimated correctly stellar
distances. Whereas all other astronomers put the stars on a rotating sphere
just beyond the outer planets, Gersonides estimated the distance to the stars
to be ten billion times greater, of the order of 100 light-years (in modern
units). Using data he collected from his own observations Gersonides' refuted
Ptolemy's model in what the notable physicist Yuval Ne'eman has considered as
"one of the most important insights in the history of science, generally missed
in telling the story of the transition from epicyclic corrections to the
geocentric model to Copernicus' heliocentric model". Ne'eman argued that after
Gersonides reviewed Ptolemy's model with its epicycles he realized that it
could be checked, by measuring the changes in the apparent brightnesses of Mars
and looking for cyclical changes along the conjectured epicycles. These thus
ceased being dogma, they were a theory that had to be experimentally verified,
"a la Popper". R. Levi developed tools for these measurements, essentially
pinholes and the camera obscura. The results of his observations did not fit
Ptolemy's model at all. Gersonides concluded that the model was no good. He
tried (unsuccessfully) to improve on it. That challenge was finally answered,
of course, by Copernicus three centuries later, but Gersonides was the only one
to falsify the Alexandrian dogma - the first known instance of modern
falsification philosophy. Levi also showed that Ptolemy's model for the Lunar
orbit, though reproducing correctly the evolution of the Moon's position, fails
completely in predicting the apparent sizes of the Moon in its motion.
Unfortunately, there is no evidence that the findings had an impact on later
generations of astronomers, even though Gersonides' writings were translated
and available. You state that Gersonides calculated that the stars were 10
billion times farther away from Earth than what Ptolemy claimed, i.e. in the
order of 100 light years. This should be about 100,000 light years (107,055 to
be more precise). As the mean radius is about 6,370Â km this works out to
127,323,954Â km. Gersonides however took it to be more than 159 x 1012. So
Gersonides works out to 1.012830 exp19 km. As a light year is 9.4608exp13 km it
works out to 107,550 light years, which is indeed very close to 10 billion
times as far as Ptolemy's distance. Talmudic works. Only the first work is
extant. In modern fiction. Gersonides is an important character in the novel
"The Dream of Scipio" by Iain Pears, where he is depicted as the mentor of the
protagonist Olivier de Noyen, a non-Jewish poet and intellectual. A (fictional)
encounter between Gersonides and Pope Clement VI at Avignon during the Black
Death is a major element in the book's plot.
