Gnosticism Gnosticism (from "gnostikos", "learned", from "gn≈çsis", knowledge;
) is the thought and practice, especially of various cults of late pre-
Christian and early Christian centuries, distinguished by the conviction that
matter is evil and that emancipation comes through "gnosis" (knowledge).
Gnosticism was primarily defined in a Christian context. Some scholars have
claimed that gnosticism pre-dated Christianity. Such discussions have included
pre-Christian religious beliefs and spiritual practices argued to be common to
early Christianity, Hellenistic Judaism, Greco-Roman mystery religions,
Zoroastrianism (especially Zurvanism), and Neoplatonism. The discussion of
gnosticism changed radically with the discovery of the Nag Hammadi library and
led to revision of older assumptions. Although some scholars still postulate
pre-Christian gnosticism, no evidence has been found to date. It is now
generally accepted that gnosticism developed into a coherent movement only in
the second century CE. Common characteristics. A common characteristic of some
of these groups was the teaching that the realisation of Gnosis (esoteric or
intuitive knowledge) is the way to salvation of the soul from the material
world. They saw the material world as created through an intermediary being
(demiurge) rather than directly by God. In most of the systems, this demiurge
was seen as imperfect, in others even as evil. Different gnostic schools
sometimes identified the demiurge as Adam Kadmon, Ahriman, El, Saklas, Samael,
Satan, Yaldabaoth, or Yahweh. Jesus is identified by some Gnostics as an
embodiment of the supreme being who became incarnate to bring "gn≈çsis" to the
earth. Others adamantly deny that the supreme being came in the flesh, claiming
Jesus to be merely a human who attained divinity through gnosis and taught his
disciples to do the same. Among the Mandaeans, Jesus was considered a "m≈°iha
kdaba" or "false messiah" who perverted the teachings entrusted to him by John
the Baptist. Still other traditions identify Mani and Seth, third son of Adam
and Eve, as salvific figures. The Christian groups first called "gnostic" a
branch of Christianity, however Joseph Jacobs and Ludwig Blau (Jewish
Encyclopedia, 1911) note that much of the terminology employed is Jewish and
note that this "proves at least that the principal elements of gnosticism were
derived from Jewish speculation, while it does not preclude the possibility of
new wine having been poured into old bottles." The movement spread in areas
controlled by the Roman Empire and Arian Goths, and the Persian Empire; it
continued to develop in the Mediterranean and Middle East before and during the
2nd and 3rd centuries. Conversion to Islam and the Albigensian Crusade
(1209‚Äì1229) greatly reduced the remaining number of Gnostics throughout the
Middle Ages, though a few Mandaean communities still exist. Gnostic and pseudo-
gnostic ideas became influential in some of the philosophies of various
esoteric mystical movements of the late 19th and 20th centuries in Europe and
North America, including some that explicitly identify themselves as revivals
or even continuations of earlier gnostic groups. The term "Gnosticism". The
English term "Gnosticism" derives from the use of the Greek adjective
"gnostikos" ("learned", "intellectual", Greek Œ≥ŒΩœâœÉœÑŒπŒ∫œåœÇ) by St.
Irenaeus (c.185 AD) to describe the school of Valentinus as "he legomene
gnostike haeresis" "the heresy called Learned (gnostic)". This occurs in the
context of Irenaeus' work "On the Detection and Overthrow of Knowledge Falsely
So Called," (Greek: "elenchos kai anatrope tes pseudonymou gnoseos" genitive
case, ·ºîŒªŒµŒ≥œáŒøœÇ Œ∫Œ±·Ω∂ ·ºÄŒΩŒ±œÑœÅŒøœÄ·Ω¥ œÑ·øÜœÇ œàŒµœÖŒ¥œâŒΩœçŒºŒøœÖ
Œ≥ŒΩœéœÉŒµœâœÇ) where the term "knowledge falsely so-called" (nominative case
"pseudonymos gnosis") covers various groups, not just Valentinus, and is a
quotation of the apostle Paul's warning against "knowledge falsely so-called"
in 1 Timothy 6:20. The Greek adjective "gnostikos", "learned". The usual
meaning of "gnostikos" in Classical Greek texts is "learned" or "intellectual",
such as used in the comparison of "practical" ("praktikos") and "intellectual"
("gnostikos") in Plato's dialogue between Young Socrates and the Foreigner in
his "The Statesman (258e)." Plato's use of "learned" is fairly typical of
Classical texts. By the Hellenistic period, it began to also be associated with
Greco-Roman mystery cults and ceremonies, becoming synonymous with the Greek
term "musterion". The adjective is not used in the New Testament, but Clement
of Alexandria in Book 7 of his "Stromateis" speaks of the "learned"
("gnostikos") Christian in complimentary terms. The use of "gnostikos" in
relation to heresy originates with interpreters of Irenaeus. Some scholars, for
example A. Rousseau and L. Doutreleau, translators of the French edition
(1974), consider that Irenaeus sometimes uses "gnostikos" to simply mean
"intellectual", as in 1.25.6, 1.11.3, 1.11.5, whereas his mention of "the
intellectual sect" (Adv. haer. 1.11.1) is a specific designation. Irenaeus'
comparative adjective "gnostikeron" "more learned", evidently cannot mean "more
Gnostic" as a name. Of those groups that Irenaeus identifies as "intellectual"
("gnostikos"), only one, the followers of Marcellina use the term "gnostikos"
of themselves. Later Hippolytus uses "learned" ("gnostikos") of Cerinthus and
the Ebionites, and Epiphanius applied "learned" ("gnostikos") to specific
groups. The English noun "Gnosticism". The term "Gnosticism" does not appear in
ancient sources, and was first coined by Henry More in a commentary on the
seven letters of the Book of Revelation, where More used the term "Gnosticisme"
to describe the heresy in Thyatira. Nature and structure of Gnosticism. The
main features of Gnosticism. The model limits itself to describing
characteristics of the Syrian-Egyptian school of Gnosticism. This is for the
reason that the greatest expressions of the Persian gnostic school¬ ‚Äî
Manicheanism and Mandaeanism¬ ‚Äî are typically conceived of as religious
traditions in their own right; indeed, the typical usage of "Gnosticism" is to
refer to the Syrian-Egyptian schools alone, while "Manichean" describes the
movements of the Persia school. This conception of Gnosticism has in recent
times come to be challenged (see below). Despite this, the understanding
presented above remains the most common and is useful in aiding meaningful
discussion of the phenomena that compose Gnosticism. Above all, the central
idea of "gn≈çsis", a knowledge superior to and independent of faith made it
welcome to many who were half-converted from paganism to Christianity. The
Valentinians, for example, considered "pistis" (Greek: "faith") as consisting
of accepting a body of teaching as true, being principally intellectual or
emotional in character. The age of the Gnostics was highly diverse, they seem
to have originated in Alexandria and coexisted with the early Christians until
the 4th century AD and due to there being no fixed church authority, syncretism
with pre-existing belief systems as well as new religions were often embraced.
According to Clement of Alexandria, "...¬ In the times of the Emperor Hadrian
appeared those who devised heresies, and they continued until the age of the
elder Antoninus." The relationship between Gnosticism and Orthodox Christianity
during the late 1st and the whole of the 2nd century is vital in helping us to
further understand the main doctrines of Gnosticism; due in part to the fact
that, prior to the discovery of the Nag Hammadi Library, much of what we know
today about gnosticism has only been preserved in the summaries and assessments
of early church fathers. Irenaeus declares in his treatise "Against Heresies"
that Gnostic movements subjected all morality to the caprice of the individual,
and made any fixed rule of faith impossible. The whim of the individual being a
subject that is of concern when discussing heresy and orthodoxy in relation to
spiritual mysticism, such as the mysticism of Henry Corbin, Thelema, and even
in fiction such as The Theologians by Jorge Luis Borges in Labyrinths.
According to Irenaeus, a certain sect known as the "Cainites" professed to
impart a knowledge "greater and more sublime" than the ordinary doctrine of
Christians, and believed that Cain derived his power from the superior Godhead.
Although a Christian who valued gnosis, Clement of Alexandria, a 2nd century
church father and the first notable member of the Church of Alexandria, raised
a criticism against the followers of Basilides and Valentinus in his
"Stromata": in his view it annulled the efficacy of baptism, in that it held no
value faith, the gift conferred in that sacrament. Dualism and monism.
Typically, Gnostic systems are loosely described as being "dualistic" in
nature, meaning that they have the view that the world consists of or is
explicable as two fundamental entities. Hans Jonas writes: "The cardinal
feature of gnostic thought is the radical dualism that governs the relation of
God and world, and correspondingly that of man and world." Within this
definition, they run the gamut from the "radical dualist" systems of
Manicheanism to the "mitigated dualism" of classic gnostic movements;
Valentinian developments arguably approach a form of monism, expressed in terms
previously used in a dualistic manner. Moral and ritual practice. Numerous
early Christian Fathers accused some Gnostic teachers of claiming to eschew the
physical realm, while simultaneously freely indulging their physical appetites;
however, there is reason to question the accuracy of these claims. Evidence in
the source texts indicates Gnostic moral behaviour as being generally ascetic
in basis, expressed most fluently in their sexual and dietary practice. Many
monks would deprive themselves of food, water, or necessary needs for living.
This presented a problem for the heresiologists writing on gnostic movements:
this mode of behaviour was one which they themselves favoured and supported, so
the Church Fathers, some modern-day Gnostic apologist presume, would be
required perforce to offer support to the practices of their theological
opponents. In order to avoid this, a common heresiological approach was to
avoid the issue completely by resorting to slanderous (and, in some cases,
excessive) allegations of libertinism (see the Cainites), or to explain Gnostic
asceticism as being based on incorrect interpretations of scripture, or simply
duplicitous in nature. Epiphanius provides an example when he writes of the
"Archontics": "Some of them ruin their bodies by dissipation, but others feign
ostensible fasts and deceive simple people while they pride themselves with a
sort of abstinence, under the disguise of monks" ("Panarion", 40.1.4). This
extract marks a definite shift away from the position of orthodoxy, that the
correct behaviour for Christians is best administered and prescribed by the
central authority of the Church, as transmitted through the Apostles to the
Church's bishops. Instead, the internalised inclination of the individual
assumes paramount importance; there is the recognition that ritualistic
behaviour, though well-intentioned, possesses no significance or effectiveness
unless its external prescription is matched by a personal, internal motivation.
Charges of Gnostic libertinism find their source in the works of Irenaeus.
According to this writer, Simon Magus (whom he has identified as the
prototypical source of Gnosticism, and who had previously tried to buy
sacramental authority of ordination from St. Peter the Apostle) founded the
school of moral freedom ('amoralism'). Irenaeus reports that Simon's argument
was that those who put their trust in him and his consort Helen need trouble
themselves no further with the biblical prophets or their moral exhortations
and are free "to do what they wish", as men are saved by his (Simon's) grace
and not by their "righteous works" ("Adversus Haereses"). Simon is not known
for any libertinistic practice, save for his curious attachment to Helen,
typically reputed to be a prostitute. There is, however, clear evidence in the
Testimony of Truth that followers of Simon did, in fact, get married and beget
children, so a general tendency to asceticism can likewise be ruled out.
Irenaeus reports of the Valentinians, whom he characterizes as eventual
inheritors of Simon, that they eat food "offered to idols" (idol-worship), are
sexually promiscuous ("immoderately given over to the desires of the flesh")
and are guilty of taking wives under the pretence of living with them as
adopted "sisters". In the latter case, Michael Allen Williams has argued
plausibly that Irenaeus was here broadly correct in the behaviour described,
but not in his apprehension of its causes. Williams argues that members of a
cult might live together as "brother" and "sister": intimate, yet not sexually
active. Over time, however, the self-denial required of such an endeavour
becomes harder and harder to maintain, leading to the state of affairs Irenaeus
criticizes. Irenaeus also makes reference to the Valentinian practise of the
Bridal Chamber, a ritualistic sacrament in which sexual union is seen as
analogous to the activities of the paired syzygies that constitute the
Valentinian Pleroma. Though it is known that Valentinus had a more relaxed
approach to sexuality than much of the Catholic Church (he allowed women to
hold positions of ordination in his community), it is not known whether the
Bridal Chamber was a ritual involving actual intercourse, or whether human
sexuality is here simply being used in a metaphorical sense. Of the
Carpocratians Irenaeus makes much the same report: they "are so abandoned in
their recklessness that they claim to have in their power and be able to
practise anything whatsoever that is ungodly (irreligious) and impious¬ ...
they say that conduct is only good or evil in the eyes of man". Once again a
differentiation might be detected between a man's actions and the grace he has
received through his adherence to a system of "gnosis"; whether this is due to
a common sharing of such an attitude amongst Gnostic circles, or whether this
is simply a blanket-charge used by Irenaeus is open to conjecture. On the
whole, it would seem that Gnostic behaviour tended towards the ascetic. This
said, the heresiological accusation of duplicity in such practises should not
be taken at face value; nor should similar accusations of amoral libertinism.
The Nag Hammadi library itself is full of passages which appear to encourage
abstinence over indulgence. Fundamentally, however, gnostic movements appear to
take the "ancient schema of the two ways, which leaves the decision to do what
is right to human endeavour and promises a reward for those who make the
effort, and punishment for those who are negligent" (Kurt Rudolph, "Gnosis:The
Nature and History of Gnosticism", 262). Major Gnostic movements and their
texts. As noted above, schools of Gnosticism can be defined according to one
classification system as being a member of two broad categories. These are the
"Eastern"/"Persian" school, and a "Syrian-Egyptic" school. The former possesses
more demonstrably dualist tendencies, reflecting a strong influence from the
beliefs of the Persian Zurvanist Zoroastrians. Among the Syrian-Egyptian
schools and the movements they spawned are a typically more Monist view.
Notable exceptions include relatively modern movements which seem to include
elements of both categories, namely: the Cathars, Bogomils, and Carpocratians
which are included in their own section. Persian Gnosticism. The Persian
Schools, which appeared in the western Persian province of Babylonia (in
particular, within the Sassanid province of Asuristan), and whose writings were
originally produced in the Aramaic dialects spoken in Babylonia at the time,
are representative of what is believed to be among the oldest of the Gnostic
thought forms. These movements are considered by most to be religions in their
own right, and are not emanations from Christianity or Judaism. Syrian-Egyptian
Gnosticism. The Syrian-Egyptian school derives much of its outlook from
Platonist influences. Typically, it depicts creation in a series of emanations
from a primal monadic source, finally resulting in the creation of the material
universe. As a result, there is a tendency in these schools to view evil in
terms of matter which is markedly inferior to goodness, evil as lacking
spiritual insight and goodness, rather than to emphasize portrayals of evil as
an equal force. These schools of gnosticism may be said to use the terms "evil"
and "good" as being "relative" descriptive terms, as they refer to the relative
plight of human existence caught between such realities and confused in its
orientation, with "evil" indicating the extremes of distance from the principle
and source of goodness, without necessarily emphasizing an "inherent"
negativity. As can be seen below, many of these movements included source
material related to Christianity, with some identifying themselves as
specifically Christian (albeit quite different from the Orthodox or Roman
Catholic forms). Syrian-Egyptic scripture. Most of the literature from this
category is known/confirmed to us in the modern age through the Library
discovered at Nag Hammadi. Later Gnosticism and Gnostic-influenced groups. For
the relationship between these medieval heresies and earlier Gnostic forms, see
historical discussion above. Important terms and concepts. Please note that the
following are only summaries of various Gnostic interpretations that exist. The
roles of familiar beings such as Jesus Christ, Sophia, and the Demiurge usually
share the same general themes between systems but may have somewhat different
functions or identities ascribed to them. √Üon. In many Gnostic systems, the
√¶ons are the various emanations of the superior God, who is also known by such
names as the One, the Monad, "Aion teleos" (Greek: "The Complete √Üon"), Bythos
(Greek: "ŒíœÖŒ∏ŒøœÇ", 'Depth' or 'profundity'), Proarkhe (Greek:
"œÄœÅŒøŒ±œÅœáŒ∑", "Before the Beginning'), E Arkhe (Greek: "·º° ·ºÄœÅœáŒÆ",
'The Beginning'), Ennoia (Greek: "Thought") of the Light or Sige (Greek:
"Œ£ŒπŒ≥Œ∑", "Silence"). From this first being, also an √¶on, a series of
different emanations occur, beginning in certain Gnostic texts with the
hermaphroditic Barbelo, from which successive pairs of aeons emanate, often in
male-female pairings called "syzygies"; the numbers of these pairings varied
from text to text, though some identify their number as being thirty. The aeons
as a totality constitute the "pleroma", the "region of light". The lowest
regions of the pleroma are closest to the darkness; that is, the physical
world. Two of the most commonly paired √¶ons were Jesus and "Sophia" (Greek:
"Wisdom"); the latter refers to Jesus as her "consort" in "A Valentinian
Exposition". "Sophia", emanating without her partner, resulting in the
production of the "Demiurge" (Greek: lit. "public builder"), who is also
referred to as "Yaldabaoth" and variations thereof in some Gnostic texts. This
creature is concealed outside the Pleroma; in isolation, and thinking itself
alone, it creates materiality and a host of co-actors, referred to as archons.
The demiurge is responsible for the creation of mankind, by create he traps
elements of the Pleroma stolen from Sophia in human bodies. In response, the
Godhead emanates two savior √¶ons, "Christ" and "the Holy Spirit"; Christ then
embodies itself in the form of Jesus, in order to be able to teach man how to
achieve gnosis, by which they may return to the Pleroma. Archon. In late
antiquity some variants of Gnosticism used the term "Archon" to refer to
several servants of the Demiurge. In this context they may be seen as having
the roles of the angels and demons of the Old Testament. According to Origen's
"Contra Celsum", a sect called the Ophites posited the existence of seven
archons, beginning with Iadabaoth or Ialdabaoth, who created the six that
follow: Iao, Sabaoth, Adonaios, Elaios, Astaphanos and Horaios. Similarly to
the Mithraic Kronos and Vedic Narasimha, a form of Vishnu, Ialdabaoth had a
head of a lion. Abraxas/Abrasax. The Egyptian Gnostic Basilideans referred to a
figure called "Abraxas" who was at the head of 365 spiritual beings (Irenaeus,
"Adversus Haereses", I.24); it is unclear what to make of Irenaeus' use of the
term "Archon", which may simply mean "ruler" in this context. The role and
function of Abraxas for Basilideans is not clear. The word Abraxas was engraved
on certain antique gemstones, called on that account Abraxas stones, which may
have been used as amulets or charms by Gnostic groups. In popular culture,
Abraxas is sometimes considered the name of a god who incorporated both Good
and Evil (God and Demiurge) in one entity, and therefore representing the
monotheistic God, singular, but (unlike, for example, the Christian God) not
omni-benevolent. (See Hesse's Demian, and Jung's Seven Sermons to the Dead.)
Opinions abound on Abraxas, who in recent centuries has been claimed to be both
an Egyptian god and a demon, sometimes even being associated with the dual
nature of Satan/Lucifer. The word abracadabra may be related to Abraxas. The
above information relates to interpretations of ancient amulets and to reports
of Christian heresy hunters which are not always clear. Actual ancient Gnostic
texts from the Nag Hammadi Library, such as the Coptic Gospel of the Egyptians,
refer to Abraxas as an Aeon dwelling with Sophia and other Aeons of the
Spiritual Fullness in the light of the luminary Eleleth. In several texts, the
luminary Eleleth is the last of the luminaries (Spiritual Lights) that come
forward, and it is the Aeon Sophia, associated with Eleleth, who encounters
darkness and becomes involved in the chain of events that leads to the Demiurge
and Archon's rule of this world, and the salvage effort that ensues. As such,
the role of Aeons of Eleleth, including Abrasax, Sophia, and others, pertains
to this outer border of the Divine Fullness that encounters the ignorance of
the world of Lack and interacts to rectify the error of ignorance in the world
of materiality. Words like or similar to Abraxas or Abrasax also appear in the
Greek Magical Papyri. There are similarities and differences between such
figures in reports about Basiledes' teaching, in the larger magical traditions
of the Graeco-Roman world, in the classic ancient Gnostic texts such as the
Gospel of the Egyptians, and in later magical and esoteric writings. The Swiss
Psychologist Carl Jung wrote a short Gnostic treatise in 1916 called The Seven
Sermons to the Dead, which called Abraxas a God higher than the Christian God
and Devil, that combines all opposites into one Being. Demiurge. The term
"Demiurge" derives from the Latinized form of the Greek term "dƒìmiourgos",
Œ¥Œ∑ŒºŒπŒøœÖœÅŒ≥œåœÇ (literally "public or skilled worker"), and refers to an
entity responsible for the creation of the physical universe and the physical
aspect of humanity. The term "dƒìmiourgos" occurs in a number of other
religious and philosophical systems, most notably Platonism. Moral judgements
of the demiurge vary from group to group within the broad category of
Gnosticism¬ ‚Äî such judgements usually correspond to each group's judgement of
the status of materiality as being inherently evil, or else merely flawed and
as good as its passive constituent matter will allow. "Samael", in the Judeo-
Christian tradition, refers to the evil angel of death, and corresponds to the
Christian demon of that name, one second only to Satan. Literally, it can mean
"blind god" or "god of the blind" in Aramaic (Syriac "s√¶m ªa- ºel"); another
alternative title is "Saklas", Aramaic for "fool" (Syriac "s√¶kla" "the foolish
one"). Gnostic myth recounts that Sophia (Greek, literally meaning "wisdom"),
the Demiurge's mother and a partial aspect of the divine Pleroma or "Fullness",
desired to create something apart from the divine totality, and without the
receipt of divine assent. In this abortive act of separate creation, she gave
birth to the monstrous Demiurge and, being ashamed of her deed, she wrapped him
in a cloud and created a throne for him within it. The Demiurge, isolated, did
not behold his mother, nor anyone else, and thus concluded that only he himself
existed, being ignorant of the superior levels of reality that were his
birthplace. The Gnostic myths describing these events are full of intricate
nuances portraying the declination of aspects of the divine into human form;
this process occurs through the agency of the Demiurge who, having stolen a
portion of power from his mother, sets about a work of creation in unconscious
imitation of the superior Pleromatic realm. Thus Sophia's power becomes
enclosed within the material forms of humanity, themselves entrapped within the
material universe: the goal of Gnostic movements was typically the awakening of
this spark, which permitted a return by the subject to the superior, non-
material realities which were its primal source. (See Sethian Gnosticism.)
Gnosis. The word "Gnosticism" is a modern construction, though based on an
antiquated linguistic expression: it comes from the Greek word meaning
"knowledge", "gnosis" (Œ≥ŒΩ·ø∂œÉŒπœÇ). However, "gnosis" itself refers to a
very specialised form of knowledge, deriving both from the exact meaning of the
original Greek term and its usage in Platonist philosophy. Unlike modern
English, ancient Greek was capable of discerning between several different
forms of knowing. These different forms may be described in English as being
propositional knowledge, indicative of knowledge acquired "indirectly" through
the reports of others or otherwise by inference (such as "I know "of" George
Bush" or "I know Berlin "is in" Germany"), and empirical knowledge acquired by
"direct participation" or "acquaintance" (such as "I know George Bush
personally" or "I know Berlin, having visited"). "Gnosis" (Œ≥ŒΩ·ø∂œÉŒπœÇ)
refers to knowledge of the second kind. Therefore, in a religious context, to
be "Gnostic" should be understood as being reliant not on knowledge in a
general sense, but as being specially receptive to mystical or esoteric
experiences of direct participation with the divine. Indeed, in most Gnostic
systems the sufficient cause of salvation is this "knowledge of" ("acquaintance
with") the divine. This is commonly identified with a process of inward
"knowing" or self-exploration, comparable to that encouraged by Plotinus (c.
205‚Äì270 AD). This is what helps separate Gnosticism from proto-orthodox
views, where the orthodox views are considered to be superficial. The
inadequate take then requires a correct form of interpretation. With "gnosis"
comes a fuller insight that is considered to be more spiritual. Greater
recognition of the deeper spiritual meanings of doctrines, scriptures, and
rituals are obtained with this insight. However, as may be seen, the term
"gnostic" also had precedent usage in several ancient philosophical traditions,
which must also be weighed in considering the very subtle implications of its
appellation to a set of ancient religious groups. Monad (apophatic theology).
In many Gnostic systems (and heresiologies), God is known as the "Monad", the
One, The Absolute, "Aion teleos" (The Perfect √Üon), "Bythos" (Depth or
Profundity, ŒíœÖŒ∏ŒøœÇ), "Proarkhe" (Before the Beginning, œÄœÅŒøŒ±œÅœáŒ∑), and
"E Arkhe" (The Beginning, Œ∑ Œ±œÅœáŒ∑). God is the high source of the pleroma,
the region of light. The various emanations of God are called √¶ons. Within
certain variations of Gnosticism, especially those inspired by Monoimus, the
"Monad" was the highest God which created lesser gods, or elements (similar to
√¶ons). According to Hippolytus, this view was inspired by the Pythagoreans,
who called the first thing that came into existence the "Monad", which begat
the dyad, which begat the numbers, which begat the point, begetting lines, etc.
This was also clarified in the writings of Plato, Aristotle and Plotinus. This
teaching being largely Neopythagorean via Numenius as well. This Monad is the
spiritual source of everything which emanates the pleroma, and could be
contrasted to the dark Demiurge (Yaldabaoth) that controls matter. The Sethian
cosmogony as most famously contained in the Apocryphon ("Secret book") of John
describes an unknown God, very similar to the orthodox apophatic theology,
although very different from the orthodox credal teachings that there is one
such god who is identified also as creator of heaven and earth. In describing
the nature of a creator god associated with Biblical texts, orthodox
theologians often attempt to define God through a series of explicit positive
statements, themselves universal but in the divine taken to their superlative
degrees: he is omniscient, omnipotent and truly benevolent. The Sethian
conception of the most hidden transcendent God is, by contrast, defined through
negative theology: he is immovable, invisible, intangible, ineffable; commonly,
"he" is seen as being hermaphroditic, a potent symbol for being, as it were,
"all-containing". In the Apocryphon of John, this god is good in that it
bestows goodness. After the apophatic statements, the process of the Divine in
action are used to describe the effect of such a god. An apophatic approach to
discussing the Divine is found throughout gnosticism, Vedanta, and Platonic and
Aristotelian theology as well. It is also found in some Judaic sources.
Pleroma. "Pleroma" (Greek œÄŒªŒ∑œÅœâŒºŒ±) generally refers to the totality of
God's powers. The term means "fullness", and is used in Christian theological
contexts: both in Gnosticism generally, and in Colossians 2.9. Gnosticism holds
that the world is controlled by evil archons, one of whom is the demiurge, the
deity of the Old Testament who holds the human spirit captive. The heavenly
pleroma is the center of divine life, a region of light "above" (the term is
not to be understood spatially) our world, occupied by spiritual beings such as
aeons (eternal beings) and sometimes archons. Jesus is interpreted as an
intermediary aeon who was sent from the pleroma, with whose aid humanity can
recover the lost knowledge of the divine origins of humanity. The term is thus
a central element of Gnostic cosmology. Pleroma is also used in the general
Greek language and is used by the Greek Orthodox church in this general form
since the word appears under the book of Colossians. Proponents of the view
that Paul was actually a gnostic, such as Elaine Pagels of Princeton
University, view the reference in Colossians as something that was to be
interpreted in the gnostic sense. Sophia. In Gnostic tradition, the term
"Sophia" (Œ£oœÜ√≠Œ±, Greek for "wisdom") refers to the final and lowest
emanation of God. In most if not all versions of the gnostic myth, Sophia
births the demiurge, who in turn brings about the creation of materiality. The
positive or negative depiction of materiality thus resides a great deal on
mythic depictions of Sophia's actions. She is occasionally referred to by the
Hebrew equivalent of "Achamoth" (this is a feature of Ptolemy's version of the
Valentinian gnostic myth). Jewish Gnosticism with a focus on Sophia was active
by 90. Almost all gnostic systems of the Syrian or Egyptian type taught that
the universe began with an original, unknowable God, referred to as the Parent
or Bythos, as the Monad by Monoimus, or the first Aeon by still other
traditions. From this initial unitary beginning, the One spontaneously emanated
further Aeons, pairs of progressively "lesser" beings in sequence. The lowest
of these pairs were Sophia and Christ. The Aeons together made up the Pleroma,
or fullness, of God, and thus should not be seen as distinct from the divine,
but symbolic abstractions of the divine nature. History. The development of the
Syrian-Egyptian school. Bentley Layton has sketched out a relationship between
the various gnostic movements in his introduction to "The Gnostic Scriptures"
(SCM Press, London, 1987). In this model, "Classical Gnosticism" and "The
School of Thomas" antedated and influenced the development of Valentinus, who
was to found his own school of Gnosticism in both Alexandria and Rome, whom
Layton called "the great reformer" and "the focal point" of Gnostic
development. While in Alexandria, where he was born, Valentinus probably would
have had contact with the Gnostic teacher Basilides, and may have been
influenced by him. Valentinianism flourished after the middle of the second
century CE. This movement was named after its founder Valentinus (c. 100‚Äì180
AD/CE). The school is also known to have been extremely popular: several
varieties of their central myth are known, and we know of "reports from
outsiders from which the intellectual liveliness of the group is evident." It
is known that Valentinus' students elaborated on his teachings and materials
(though the exact extent of their changes remains unknown), for example, in the
version of the Valentinian myth brought to us through Ptolemy. Valentinianism
might be described as the most elaborate and philosophically "dense" form of
the Syrian-Egyptian schools of Gnosticism, though it should be acknowledged
that this in no way debarred other schools from attracting followers.
Basilides' own school was popular also, and survived in Egypt until the 4th
century. Simone Petrement, in "A Separate God", in arguing for a Christian
origin of Gnosticism, places Valentinus after Basilides, but before the
Sethians. It is her assertion that Valentinus represented a moderation of the
anti-Judaism of the earlier Hellenized teachers; the demiurge, widely regarded
to be a mythological depiction of the Old Testament God of the Hebrews, is
depicted as more ignorant than evil. (See below.) The development of the
Persian school. An alternate heritage is offered by Kurt Rudolph in his book
"Gnosis: The Nature & Structure of Gnosticism" (Koehler and Amelang, Leipzig,
1977), to explain the lineage of Persian Gnostic schools. The decline of
Manicheism that occurred in Persia in the 5th century was too late to prevent
the spread of the movement into the east and the west. In the west, the
teachings of the school moved into Syria, Northern Arabia, Egypt and North
Africa (where Augustine was a member of the school from 373-382); from Syria it
progressed still farther, into Palestine, Asia Minor and Armenia. There is
evidence for Manicheans in Rome and Dalmatia in the 4th century, and also in
Gaul and Spain. The influence of Manicheanism was attacked by imperial elects
and polemical writings, but the religion remained prevalent until the 6th
century, and still exerted influence in the emergence of the Paulicians,
Bogomils and Cathari in the Middle Ages, until it was ultimately stamped out by
the Catholic Church. In the east, Rudolph relates, Manicheanism was able to
bloom, given that the religious monopoly position previously held by
Christianity and Zoroastrianism had been broken by nascent Islam. In the early
years of the Arab conquest, Manicheanism again found followers in Persia
(mostly amongst educated circles), but flourished most in Central Asia, to
which it had spread through Iran. Here, in 762, Manicheanism became the state
religion of the Uyghur Empire. Neoplatonism and Gnosticism. Historical
relations between antique Greek Philosophy and Gnosticism. The earliest origins
of Gnosticism are obscure and still disputed. For this reason, some scholars
prefer to speak of "gnosis" when referring to first century ideas that later
developed into gnosticism and to reserve the term "gnosticism" for the
synthesis of these ideas into a coherent movement in the second century.
Probable influences include Plato, Middle Platonism and Neo-Pythagoreanism
academies or schools of thought, and this seems to be true both of the more
Sethian Gnostics, and of the Valentinian Gnostics. Further, if we compare
different Sethian texts to each other in an attempted chronology of the
development of Sethianism during the first few centuries, it seems that later
texts are continuing to interact with Platonism. Earlier texts such as
Apocalypse of Adam show signs of being pre-Christian and focus on the Seth,
third son of Adam and Eve. These early Sethians may be identical to or related
to the Nazarenes (sect), Ophites or to the sectarian group called heretics by
Philo. Later Sethian texts such as Zostrianos and Allogenes draw on the imagery
of older Sethian texts, but utilize "a large fund of philosophical
conceptuality derived from contemporary Platonism, (that is late middle
Platonism) with no traces of Christian content." Indeed the doctrine of the
"triple-powered one" found in the text Allogenes, as discovered in the Nag
Hammadi Library, is "the same doctrine as found in the anonymous Parmenides
commentary (Fragment XIV) ascribed by Hadot to Porphyry [...] and is also found
in Plotinus' Ennead 6.7, 17, 13-26." Rejection by antique Greek Philosophy.
However, by the 3rd century Neoplatonists, such as Plotinus, Porphyry and
Amelius are all attacking the Sethians. It looks as if Sethianism began as a
pre-Christian tradition, possibly a syncretic that incorporated elements of
Christianity and Platonism as it grew, only to have both Christianity and
Platonism reject and turn against it. Professor John D Turner believes that
this double attack led to Sethianism fragmentation into numerous smaller groups
(Audians, Borborites, Archontics and perhaps Phibionites, Stratiotici, and
Secundians ). Scholarship on Gnosticism has been greatly advanced by the
discovery and translation of the Nag Hammadi texts, which shed light on some of
the more puzzling comments by Plotinus and Porphyry regarding the Gnostics.
More importantly, the texts help to distinguish different kinds of early
Gnostics. It now seems clear that "Sethian" and "Valentinian" gnostics
attempted "an effort towards conciliation, even affiliation" with late antique
philosophy, and were rebuffed by some Neoplatonists, including Plotinus.
Philosophical relations between Neoplatonism and Gnosticism. Gnostics borrow a
lot of ideas and terms from Platonism. They exhibit a keen understanding of
Greek philosophical terms and the Greek Koine language in general, and use
Greek philosophical concepts throughout their text, including such concepts as
hypostasis (reality, existence), ousia (essence, substance, being), and
demiurge (creator God). Good examples include texts such as the Hypostasis of
the Archons (Reality of the Rulers) or Trimorphic Protennoia (The first thought
in three forms). Criticism of gnosticism by antique Greek Philosophy. As a
pagan mystic Plotinus considered his opponents heretics and elitist
blasphemers, arriving at misotheism as the solution to the problem of evil,
being not traditional or genuine Hellenism (in philosophy or mysticism), but
rather one invented taking all their truths over from Plato, coupled with the
idea expressed by Plotinus that the approach to the infinite force which is the
One or Monad cannot be through knowing or not knowing (i.e., dualist, which is
of the dyad or demiurge). Although there has been dispute as to which Gnostics
Plotinus was referring to it appears they were indeed Sethian. Plotinus' main
objection to the Gnostics he was familiar with, however, was their rejection of
the goodness of the demiurge and the material world. He attacks the Gnostics as
vilifying Plato's ontology of the universe as contained in the Timaeus. He
accused Gnosticism of vilifying the Demiurge, or craftsman that crafted the
material world, and even of thinking that the material world is evil, or a
prison. As Plotinus explains, the demiurge is the nous (as the first emanation
of the One), the ordering principle or mind, and also reason. Plotinus was also
critical of the Gnostic origin of the demiurge as the offspring of wisdom,
represented as a deity called Sophia. She was anthropomorphically expressed as
a feminine spirit deity not unlike the goddess Athena or the Christian Holy
Spirit. Plotinus even went so far as to state at one point that if the Gnostics
did believe this world was a prison then they could at any moment free
themselves by committing suicide. To some degree the texts discovered in Nag
Hammadi support his allegations, but others such as the Valentinians and the
Tripartite Tractate insist on the goodness of the world and the Demiurge.
Buddhism and Gnosticism. The idea that Gnosticism was derived from Buddhism was
first proposed by the Victorian gem collector and numismatist Charles William
King (1864). Mansel (1875,) considered the principal sources of Gnosticism to
be Platonism, Zoroastrianism, and Buddhism However the influence of Buddhism in
any sense on either the "gnostikos" Valentinus (c.170) or the Nag Hammadi texts
(3rd C.) is not supported by modern scholarship, but in the later case
considered quite possible by Elaine Pagels (1979), who called for Buddhist
scholars to try to find parallels. 3rd Century contact with India. Early 3rd
century‚Äì4th century Christian writers such as Hippolytus and Epiphanius write
about a Scythianus, who visited India around 50 AD from where he brought "the
doctrine of the Two Principles". Karl Ritter (1838) suggested that when Cyril
of Jerusalem, remarks that one of Scythianus' pupils Terebinthus changed his
name to Buddas to escape detection while passing through Judea, and died in
Judea from a fall from a rooftop, that this is connected with Buddha. Also in
the 3rd century, the Syrian writer and Christian Gnostic theologian Bar Daisan
(154‚Äì222) described his exchanges with the religious missions of holy men
from India passing through Syria on their way to Elagabalus or another Severan
dynasty Roman Emperor. His accounts were quoted by Porphyry ("On Abstinence" 4:
17) and Stobaeus ("Eccles.", iii, 56, 141). Clement of Alexandria in his
"Stromateis" distinguishes Sramanas (Greek: Œ£Œ±œÅŒºŒ±ŒΩŒ±ŒØŒøŒπ) and Brahmans,
without making any gnostic connection. From the 3rd century to the 12th
century, some Gnostic religions such as Manichaeism, which combined Christian,
Hebrew and Buddhist influences (Mani, the founder of the religion, resided for
some time in Kushan lands), spread throughout the Old World, to Gaul and Great
Britain in the West, and to China in the East. Augustine of Hippo, like some
other leading Christian theologians, was Manichaean before converting to
orthodox Christianity. Christianity and Gnosticism. Although some scholars
hypothesize that gnosticism developed before or contemporaneous with
Christianity, no gnostic texts have been discovered which pre-date
Christianity. James M. Robinson, a noted proponent of pre-Christian Gnosticism,
has admitted "pre-Christian Gnosticism as such is hardly attested in a way to
settle the debate once and for all." Since pre-Christian Gnosticism, as such,
is strictly hypothetical, any influence of Gnosticism upon Christianity is
speculative. The necessity of immediate revelation through divine knowledge in
order to attain transcendence in a Supreme Deity in an important to understand
for identifying what evidence there is pertaining to Gnosticism in the NT,
which would influence orthodox teaching. Central Gnostic beliefs that differ
from Biblical teachings include: the creator as a lower being [‚ÄòDemiurge‚Äô]
and not a Supreme Deity; the belief that all matter is evil and the body is a
prison to be escaped from (against the New Testament teaching that there will
be a physical resurrection of all people, 1 Cor 15; John 11); scripture having
a deep, hidden meaning whose true message could only be understood through
‚Äúsecret wisdom‚Äù; and Jesus as a spirit that ‚Äúseemed‚Äù to be human,
leading to a rejection of the incarnation (Docetism). The traditional
‚Äúformula which enshrines the Incarnation‚Ä¶is that in some sense God, without
ceasing to be God, was made man‚Ä¶which is a prima facie [‚Äòat first sight‚Äô]
contradiction in theological terms‚Ä¶the nowhere reflects on the virgin birth
of Jesus as witnessing to the conjunction of deity and manhood in His
person‚Ä¶the deity of Jesus was not‚Ä¶clearly stated in words and [the book of
Acts gives no hint that it was‚Äù. This philosophy was known by the so-called
‚ÄúChurch Fathers‚Äù such as Origen, Irenaeus, and Tertullian. At its core,
Gnosticism formed a speculative interest in the relationship of the oneness of
God to the ‚Äòtriplicity‚Äô of his manifestations. It seems to have taken
Neoplatonic metaphysics of substance and hypostases [‚Äúbeing‚Äù] as a
departure point for interpreting the relationship of the ‚ÄúFather‚Äù to the
‚ÄúSon‚Äù in its attempt to define a new theology. This would point to the
infamous theological controversies by Arius against followers of the Greek
Alexandrian school, headed by Athanasius. The ancient Nag Hammadi Library,
discovered in Egypt in the 1940s, revealed how varied this movement was. The
writers of these manuscripts considered themselves ‚ÄòChristians‚Äô, but owing
to their syncretistic beliefs, borrowed heavily from the Greek philosopher
Plato. The find included the hotly debated Gospel of Thomas, which parallels
some of Jesus‚Äô sayings in the Synoptic Gospels. This may point to the
existence of a postulated lost textual source for the Gospels of Luke and
Matthew, known as the Q document. Thus, modern debate is split between those
who see Gnosticism as a pre-Christian form of ‚Äòtheosophy‚Äô and those who see
it as a post-Christian counter-movement. New Testament scripture was largely
unwritten, at least in the form of canon, existing in the practices, customs
and teachings of the early Christian community. What largely was communicated
generation to generation was an oral tradition passed from the apostles to the
Bishops and from Bishops and priests to the faithful through their preaching
and way of life. Constantine‚Äôs call for unity in the building of the new
Roman Church led to his request for Eusebius to produce some 50 copies of
manuscripts. These were approved and accepted by the emperor, which later
influenced the final stages of canonization. The best-known origin story in the
New Testament comes in the person of Simon Magus 8:9-24. Although little is
known historically about him, his first disciple is said to have been
Basilides. Paul‚Äôs epistles to Timothy contain refutations of ‚Äúfalse
doctrine myths‚Äù [1 Tim 1:3-5. The importance placed here, as in most NT
scripture, is to uphold the truth since through such knowledge God hopes for
‚Äúall men‚Äù to be saved Tim 2:4. Paul‚Äôs letters to the Corinthians have
much to say regarding false teachers (2 Co 11:4), ‚Äúspiritualists‚Äù
[ pneumatikos ‚Äî1 Co 2:14-15; 15:44-46] and their gnosis. They warn against
the ‚Äúwisdom of the wise‚Äù and their ‚Äúhollow and deceptive philosophy‚Äù (1
Co 1:19; 2:5‚ÄîNIV; cp. Col 2:1-10; 2:8). The book of Jude also contains
scripture exhorting believers to seek the true faith (Jude 3). The writings
attributed to the Apostle John contain the most significant amount of content
directed at combating the progenitors of heresies. Most Bible scholars agree
that these were some of the last parts of the NT written and as such, can offer
the most insights into a 1st century perspective. The writer‚Äôs repeated
adherence to true knowledge (‚Äúhereby we know‚Äù‚Äîinherent in Jesus‚Äô
ministry) and nature seem to challenge other speculative and opposing beliefs.
It is hard to sift through what actual evidence there is regarding Gnosticism
in the NT due to their historical synchronicity. The Hammadi library find
contains Pagan, Jewish, Greek and early Gnostic influences, further reinforcing
the need to tread lightly. The antiquity of the find being of utmost importance
since it shows primary evidence of texts that may also have influenced the
process of NT canonization. Judaism and Gnosticism. The "Jewish Encyclopedia"
(1906) contains an article "Gnosticism" by Joseph Jacobs and Ludwig Blau which
deals only with Jewish gnosticism. Jacobs and Blau cite from Hegesippus and
Harnack that many heads of gnostic schools identified as Jewish Christians by
Church Fathers, and that that Hebrew words and names of God were applied in
some gnostic systems. Jacobs and Blau viewed that cosmogonic speculations among
Christian "Gnostics" had partial origins in Ma'aseh Bereshit and Ma'aseh
Merkabah. Gnostic groups anti-semitic? Gershom Scholem once described
Gnosticism as "the Greatest case of metaphysical anti-Semitism". Professor
Steven Bayme said gnosticism would be better characterized as anti-Judaism.
Kabbalah. Gnostic ideas found a Jewish variation in the mystical study of
Kabbalah. Many core Gnostic ideas reappear in Kabbalah, where they are used to
dramatically reinterpret earlier Jewish sources according to this new system.
The Kabbalists originated in 13th century Provence, which was at that time also
the center of the Gnostic Cathars. While some scholars in the middle of the
20th century tried to assume an influence between the Cathar "gnostics" and the
origins of the Kabbalah, this assumption has proved to be an incorrect
generalization which is not substantiated by any original texts. On the other
hand, other scholars, such as Scholem, have postulated that there was
originally a "Jewish gnosticism", which influenced the early origins of
gnosticism. Kabbalah, does not employ the terminology or labels of non-Jewish
Gnosticism, but grounds the same or similar concepts in the language of the
Torah (the first five books of the Hebrew Bible). The 13th century Book of
Zohar ("Splendor"), a foundational text in Kabbalah, is written in the style of
a Jewish Aramaic Midrash, clarifying the five books of the Torah with a new
Kabbalistic system which uses completely Jewish terms. "Gnosticism" as a
potentially flawed category. In 1966 in Messina, Italy, a conference was held
concerning systems of "gnosis". Among its several aims were the need to
establish a program to translate the recently acquired Nag Hammadi library
(discussed above) and the need to arrive at an agreement concerning an accurate
definition of "Gnosticism". This was in answer to the tendency, prevalent since
the 18th century, to use the term "gnostic" less as its origins implied, but
rather as an interpretive category for "contemporary" philosophical and
religious movements. For example, in 1835, New Testament scholar Ferdinand
Christian Baur constructed a developmental model of Gnosticism that culminated
in the religious philosophy of Hegel; one might compare literary critic Harold
Bloom's recent attempts to identify Gnostic elements in contemporary American
religion, or Eric Voegelin's analysis of totalitarian impulses through the
interpretive lens of Gnosticism. In essence, it had been decided that
"Gnosticism" would become a historically specific term, restricted to mean the
Gnostic movements prevalent in the 3rd century, while "gnosis" would be a
universal term, denoting a system of knowledge retained "for a privileged
√©lite." However, this effort towards providing clarity in fact created more
conceptual confusion, as the historical term "Gnosticism" was an entirely
modern construction, while the new universal term "gnosis" "was" a historical
term: "something was being called "gnosticism" that the ancient theologians had
called 'gnosis'¬ ... concept of gnosis had been created by Messina that was
almost unusable in a historical sense". In antiquity, all agreed that knowledge
was centrally important to life, but few were agreed as to what exactly
"constituted" knowledge; the unitary conception that the Messina proposal
presupposed did not exist. These flaws have meant that the problems concerning
an exact definition of Gnosticism persist. It remains current convention to use
"Gnosticism" in a historical sense, and "gnosis" universally. Leaving aside the
issues with the latter noted above, the usage of "Gnosticism" to designate a
category of 3rd century religions has recently been questioned as well. Of note
is Michael Allen Williams' "Rethinking Gnosticism: An Argument for the
Dismantling of a Dubious Category", in which the author examines the terms by
which Gnosticism as a category is defined, and then closely compares these
suppositions with the contents of actual Gnostic texts (the newly recovered Nag
Hammadi library was of central importance to his argument). Williams argues
that the conceptual foundations on which the category of Gnosticism rests are
the remains of the agenda of the heresiologists. Too much emphasis has been
laid on perceptions of dualism, body- and matter-hatred, and anticosmism
without these suppositions being properly "tested". In essence, the
interpretive definition of Gnosticism that was created by the antagonistic
efforts of the early church heresiologists has been taken up by modern
scholarship and reflected in a "categorical" definition, even though the means
now existed to verify its accuracy. Attempting to do so, Williams contests,
reveals the dubious nature of categorical "Gnosticism", and he concludes that
the term needs replacing in order to more accurately reflect those movements it
comprises. Williams' observations have provoked debate; however, to date his
suggested replacement term "the Biblical demiurgical tradition" has not become
widely used. Gnosticism in modern times. A number of 19th century thinkers such
as William Blake, Arthur Schopenhauer, Albert Pike and Madame Blavatsky studied
Gnostic thought extensively and were influenced by it, and even figures like
Herman Melville and W. B. Yeats were more tangentially influenced. Jules Doinel
"re-established" a Gnostic church in France in 1890 which altered its form as
it passed through various direct successors (Fabre des Essarts as "Tau
Syn√©sius" and Joanny Bricaud as "Tau Jean II" most notably), and which,
although small, is still active today. Early 20th century thinkers who heavily
studied and were influenced by Gnosticism include Carl Jung (who supported
Gnosticism), Eric Voegelin (who opposed it), Jorge Luis Borges (who included it
in many of his short stories), and Aleister Crowley, with figures such as
Hermann Hesse being more moderatedly influenced. Rene Guenon founded the
gnostic review, Le Gnose in 1909 (before moving to a more "Perennialist"
position). Gnostic Thelemite organizations, such as Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica
and Ordo Templi Orientis, trace themselves to Crowley's thought. The discovery
and translation of the Nag Hammadi library after 1945 had a huge impact on
Gnosticism since World War II. Thinkers who were heavily influenced by
Gnosticism in this period include Hans Jonas, Philip K. Dick and Harold Bloom,
with Albert Camus and Allen Ginsberg being more moderately influenced. A number
of ecclesiastical bodies which think of themselves as Gnostic have been set up
or re-founded since World War II as well, including the Society of Novus
Spiritus, Ecclesia Gnostica, the Thomasine Church, the Apostolic Johannite
Church, the Alexandrian Gnostic Church, the North American College of Gnostic
Bishops. Celia Green has written on Gnostic Christianity in relation to her own
philosophy.
