Gregorian calendar The Gregorian calendar, also called the Western calendar and
the Christian calendar, is internationally the most widely accepted civil
calendar. It was introduced by Pope Gregory XIII, after whom the calendar was
named, by a decree signed on 24 February 1582; the decree, a papal bull, is
known by its opening words, "Inter gravissimas". The reformed calendar was
adopted later that year by a handful of countries, with other countries
adopting it over the following centuries. The motivation for the Gregorian
reform was that the Julian calendar assumes that the time between vernal
equinoxes is 365.25 days, when in fact it is presently almost 11 minutes
shorter. The discrepancy results in a drift of about three days every 400
years. At the time of Gregory's reform there had already been a drift of 10
days since Roman times, resulting in the spring equinox falling on 11 March
instead of the ecclesiastically fixed date of 21 March, and moving steadily
earlier in the Julian calendar. Because the spring equinox was tied to the
celebration of Easter, the Roman Catholic Church considered this steady
movement in the date of the equinox undesirable. The Gregorian reform contained
two parts: a reform of the Julian calendar as used prior to Pope Gregory's time
and a reform of the lunar cycle used by the Church, with the Julian calendar,
to calculate the date of Easter. The reform was a modification of a proposal
made by the Calabrian doctor Aloysius Lilius (or Lilio). Lilius' proposal
included reducing the number of leap years in four centuries from 100 to 97, by
making 3 out of 4 centurial years common instead of leap years: this part of
the proposal had been suggested before by, among others, Pietro Pitati. Lilio
also produced an original and practical scheme for adjusting the epacts of the
moon when calculating the annual date of Easter, solving a long-standing
obstacle to calendar reform. Introduction to Calendars. (13 September 2007).
United States Naval Observatory. In addition to the change in the mean length
of the calendar year from 365.25 days (365 days 6 hours) to 365.2425 days (365
days 5 hours 49 minutes 12 seconds), a reduction of 10 minutes 48 seconds per
year, the Gregorian calendar reform also dealt with the accumulated difference
between these lengths. Between AD 325 (when the First Council of Nicaea was
held, and the vernal equinox occurred approximately 21 March), and the time of
Pope Gregory's bull in 1582, the vernal equinox had moved backward in the
calendar, until it was occurring on about 11 March, 10 days earlier. The
Gregorian calendar therefore began by skipping 10 calendar days, to restore
March 21 as the date of the vernal equinox. Because Protestants and Eastern
Orthodox Christians did not recognize the authority of the Pope, many European
countries did not initially follow the Gregorian reform, and maintained their
old-style systems. Eventually other countries followed the reform for the sake
of consistency, but by the time the last adherents of the Julian calendar in
Eastern Europe (Russia and Greece) changed to the Gregorian system in the 20th
century, they had to drop 13 days from their calendars, due to the additional
difference between the two calendars accumulated after 1582. The Gregorian
calendar continued the previous year-numbering system ("Anno Domini"), which
counts years from the traditional date of the nativity, originally calculated
in the 6th century and in use in much of Europe by the High Middle Ages. This
year-numbering system, now also called Common Era, is the predominant
international standard today. Description. An intercalary day in a leap year is
known as a leap day. A leap day is the 29th day to February, which normally has
28 days. Since Roman times 24 February (bissextile) was counted as the leap
day, but now 29 February is the leap day in most countries. The main ongoing
difference between the Gregorian and Julian calendars are the rules relating to
the leap day. Unlike the Julian calendar, which inserts a leap day every 4
years, the Gregorian calendar omits 3 leap days every 400 years. This
difference would have been more noticeable in modern memory were it not that
the year 2000 was a leap year in both the Julian and Gregorian calendar
systems. Gregorian years are identified by consecutive year numbers. It is a
solar calendar and counts days as the basic unit of time, grouping them into
years of 365 or 366 days; and repeats completely every 146,097 days, which fill
400 years, and which also happens to be 20,871 seven-day weeks. Of these 400
years, 303 common years have 365 days and 97 leap years have 366 days. This
yields a calendar mean year of exactly 365+97/400 days = 365.2425 days = 365
days, 5 hours, 49 minutes and 12 seconds. The same result is obtained by
summing the fractional parts implied by the rule: Although the month length
pattern is irregular, it can be represented by the arithmetic expression L = 30
+ { [ M + floor(M/8) ] MOD 2 }, where L is the month length in days and M is
the month number 1 to 12. The expression is valid for eleven of the twelve
months, but for M = 2 (February) must be adjusted by subtracting two, and then
if it is a leap year adding one. For a better representation, consider Zeller's
Congruence. formula_2 codice_1+ ROUNDUP(MOD(Y,100)/100,0) - ROUNDUP(MOD(Y,400)/
400,0) - ROUNDUP(MOD(Y,4)/4,0) + 1
 A calendar date is fully specified by the year (numbered by some scheme beyond
the scope of the calendar itself), the month (identified by name or number),
and the day of the month (numbered sequentially starting at 1). Although the
calendar year runs from 1 January to 31 December, sometimes year numbers were
based on a different starting point within the calendar. Confusingly, the term
"Anno Domini" is not specific on this point, and actually refers to a family of
year numbering systems with different starting points for the years. (See the
section below for more on this issue.) Lunar calendar. The Catholic Church
maintained a tabular lunar calendar, which was primarily to calculate the date
of Easter, and the lunar calendar required reform as well. A perpetual lunar
calendar was created, in the sense that 30 different arrangements (lines in the
expanded table of epacts) for lunar months were created. One of the 30
arrangements applies to a century (for this purpose, the century begins with a
year divisible by 100). When the arrangement to be used for a given century is
communicated, anyone in possession of the tables can find the age of the moon
on any date, and calculate the date of Easter. History. Gregorian reform. The
motivation of the Catholic Church in adjusting the calendar was to celebrate
Easter at the time it thought the First Council of Nicaea had agreed upon in
325. Although a canon of the council implies that all churches used the same
Easter, they did not. The Church of Alexandria celebrated Easter on the Sunday
after the 14th day of the moon (computed using the Metonic cycle) that falls on
or after the vernal equinox, which they placed on 21 March. However, the Church
of Rome still regarded 25 March as the equinox (until 342) and used a different
cycle to compute the day of the moon. In the Alexandrian system, since the 14th
day of the Easter moon could fall at earliest on 21 March its first day could
fall no earlier than 8 March and no later than 5 April. This meant that Easter
varied between 22 March and 25 April. In Rome, Easter was not allowed to fall
later than 21 April, that being the day of the "Parilia" or birthday of Rome
and a pagan festival.The first day of the Easter moon could fall no earlier
than 5 March and no later than 2 April. Easter was the Sunday after the 15th
day of this moon, whose 14th day was allowed to precede the equinox. Where the
two systems produced different dates there was generally a compromise so that
both churches were able to celebrate on the same day. By the 10th century all
churches (except some on the eastern border of the Byzantine Empire) had
adopted the Alexandrian Easter, which still placed the vernal equinox on 21
March, although Bede had already noted its drift in 725â€”it had drifted even
further by the 16th century. Worse, the reckoned Moon that was used to compute
Easter was fixed to the Julian year by a 19 year cycle. However, that
approximation built up an error of one day every 310 years, so by the 16th
century the lunar calendar was out of phase with the real Moon by four days.
The Council of Trent approved a plan in 1563 for correcting the calendrical
errors, requiring that the date of the vernal equinox be restored to that which
it held at the time of the First Council of Nicaea in 325 and that an
alteration to the calendar be designed to prevent future drift. This would
allow for a more consistent and accurate scheduling of the feast of Easter. The
fix was to come in two stages. First, it was necessary to approximate the
correct length of a solar year. The value chosen was 365.2425 days in decimal
notation. Although close to the mean tropical year of 365.24219 days, it is
even closer to the mean vernal equinox year of 365.2424 days; this fact made
the choice of approximation particularly appropriate, as the purpose of
creating the calendar was to ensure that the vernal equinox would be near a
specific date (21 March). (See Accuracy). The second stage was to devise a
model based on the approximation which would provide an accurate yet simple,
rule-based calendar. The formula designed by Aloysius Lilius was ultimately
successful. It proposed a 10-day correction to revert the drift since Nicaea,
and the imposition of a leap day in only 97 years in 400 rather than in 1 year
in 4. To implement the model, it was provided that "years divisible by 100
would be leap years only if they were divisible by 400 as well". So, in the
last millennium, 1600 and 2000 were leap years, but 1700, 1800 and 1900 were
not. In this millennium, 2100, 2200, 2300, 2500, 2600, 2700, 2900, and 3000,
will not be leap years, but 2400, and 2800 will be. This theory was expanded
upon by Christopher Clavius in a closely argued, 800 page volume. He would
later defend his and Lilius's work against detractors. The 19-year cycle used
for the lunar calendar was also to be corrected by one day every 300 or 400
years (8 times in 2500 years) along with corrections for the years (1700, 1800,
1900, 2100 et cetera) that are no longer leap years. In fact, a new method for
computing the date of Easter was introduced. In 1577 a "Compendium" was sent to
expert mathematicians outside the reform commission for comments. Some of these
experts, including Giambattista Benedetti and Giuseppe Moleto, believed Easter
should be computed from the true motions of the sun and moon, rather than using
a tabular method, but these recommendations were not adopted. Gregory dropped
10 days to bring the calendar back into synchronization with the seasons.
Lilius originally proposed that the 10-day correction should be implemented by
deleting the Julian leap day on each of its ten occurrences during a period of
40 years, thereby providing for a gradual return of the equinox to 21 March.
However, Clavius's opinion was that the correction should take place in one
move, and it was this advice which prevailed with Gregory. Accordingly, when
the new calendar was put in use, the error accumulated in the 13 centuries
since the Council of Nicaea was corrected by a deletion of ten days. The last
day of the Julian calendar was Thursday, 4 October 1582 and this was followed
by the first day of the Gregorian calendar, Friday, 15 October 1582 (the cycle
of weekdays was not affected). Adoption. Although Gregory's reform was enacted
in the most solemn of forms available to the Church, the bull had no authority
beyond the Catholic Church and the Papal States. The changes that he was
proposing were changes to the civil calendar, over which he had no authority.
They required adoption by the civil authorities in each country to have legal
effect. The Nicene Council of 325 specified that all Christians should
celebrate Easter on the same day. It took almost five centuries before
virtually all Christians achieved that objective by adopting the rules of the
Church of Alexandria (see Easter for the issues which arose). The bull "Inter
gravissimas" became the law of the Catholic Church in 1582, but it was not
recognised by Protestant Churches, Orthodox Churches, and a few others.
Consequently, the days on which Easter and related holidays were celebrated by
different Christian Churches again diverged. Today, a vast majority of
countries use the Gregorian calendar as their sole civil calendar. Countries
which haven't adopted the Gregorian calendar are Saudi Arabia, Ethiopia, Nepal,
Iran and Afghanistan. Some countries use other calendars alongside the
Gregorian calendar: India, Bangladesh, Israel and Myanmar; other countries use
a modified version of the Gregorian calendar: Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Thailand,
Japan, North Korea and Taiwan. The nearly universal civil adoption of the
Gregorian calendar hasn't been followed by most religious organizations, which
have often retained their own calendars. These alternate calendars are used in
many regions of the world today to mark cycles of religious and astrological
events. Adoption in Europe. Four Catholic countries adopted the new calendar on
the date specified by the bull. Other Catholic countries experienced some delay
before adopting the reform; and non-Catholic countries, not being subject to
the decrees of the Pope, initially rejected or simply ignored the reform
altogether, although they all eventually adopted it. Hence, the dates 5 October
1582 to 14 October 1582 (inclusive) are valid dates in many countries, but
invalid in others. Spain, Portugal, the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, and
most of Italy implemented the new calendar on Friday, 15 October 1582,
immediately following Julian Thursday, 4 October 1582. The Spanish and
Portuguese colonies adopted the calendar later because of the slowness of
communication. France adopted the new calendar on Monday, 20 December 1582,
immediately following Sunday, 9 December 1582. The Dutch provinces of Brabant,
Zeeland and the Staten-Generaal also adopted it on 25 December of that year,
the provinces forming the Southern Netherlands (modern Belgium) on 1 January
1583, and the province of Holland followed suit on 12 January 1583. Many
Protestant countries initially objected to adopting a Catholic invention; some
Protestants feared the new calendar was part of a plot to return them to the
Catholic fold. In the , Protestants resisted the calendar imposed by the
Habsburg Monarchy. In parts of Ireland, Catholic rebels until their defeat in
the Nine Years' War kept the "new" Easter in defiance of the English-loyal
authorities; later, Catholics practising in secret petitioned the Propaganda
Fide for dispensation from observing the new calendar, as it signalled their
disloyalty. In the 1690s, Ole RÃ¸mer used his influence to bring about a
uniform adoption of the Gregorian calendar in Protestant countries, though that
could not be achieved in practice. Denmark, which then included Norway and some
Protestant states of Germany, adopted the solar portion of the new calendar on
Monday, 1 March 1700, following Sunday, 18 February 1700. Prussia adopted the
Gregorian calendar on the same day. However, Denmark did not adopt the lunar
portion, but decided to calculate the date of Easter astronomically using the
instant of the vernal equinox and the full moon according to Kepler's
"Rudolphine Tables" of 1627. They finally adopted the lunar portion of the
Gregorian calendar in 1776. The remaining provinces of the Dutch Republic also
adopted the Gregorian calendar in July 1700 (Gelderland), December 1700
(Utrecht and Overijssel) and January 1701 (Friesland and Groningen). Sweden's
relationship with the Gregorian Calendar was a difficult one. Sweden started to
make the change from the Julian calendar and towards the Gregorian calendar in
1700, but it was decided to make the (then 11-day) adjustment gradually, by
excluding the leap days (29 February) from each of 11 successive leap years,
1700 to 1740. In the meantime, the Swedish calendar would be out of step with
both the Julian calendar "and" the Gregorian calendar for 40 years; also, the
difference would not be constant but would change every 4 years. This system
had potential for confusion when working out the dates of Swedish events in
this 40-year period. To add to the confusion, the system was poorly
administered and the leap days that should have been excluded from 1704 and
1708 were not excluded. The Swedish calendar (according to the transition plan)
should now have been 8 days behind the Gregorian, but was still in fact 10 days
behind. King Charles XII recognised that the gradual change to the new system
was not working, and he abandoned it. However, rather than proceeding directly
to the Gregorian calendar, it was decided to revert to the Julian calendar.
This was achieved by introducing the unique date 30 February in the year 1712,
adjusting the discrepancy in the calendars from 10 back to 11 days. Sweden
finally adopted the Gregorian calendar in 1753, when Wednesday, 17 February was
followed by Thursday, 1 March. Since Finland was under Swedish rule at that
time, it did the same. Finland's annexation to the Russian Empire did not
revert this, since autonomy was granted, but government documents in Finland
were dated in both the Julian and Gregorian styles. This practice ended when
independence was gained in 1917. Britain and the British Empire (including the
eastern part of what is now the United States) adopted the Gregorian calendar
in 1752, by which time it was necessary to correct by 11 days. Wednesday, 2
September 1752 was followed by Thursday, 14 September 1752. Claims that rioters
demanded "Give us our eleven days" grew out of a misinterpretation of a
painting by William Hogarth. After 1753, the British tax year in Britain
continued to operate on the Julian calendar and began on 5 April, which was the
"Old Style" new tax year of 25 March. A 12th skipped Julian leap day in 1800
changed its start to 6 April. It was not changed when a 13th Julian leap day
was skipped in 1900, so the tax year in the United Kingdom still begins on 6
April. In Alaska, the change took place when Friday, 6 October 1867 was
followed again by Friday, 18 October after the US purchase of Alaska from
Russia, which was still on the Julian calendar. Instead of 12 days, only 11
were skipped, and the day of the week was repeated on successive days, because
the International Date Line was shifted from Alaska's eastern to western
boundary along with the change to the Gregorian calendar. In Russia the
Gregorian calendar was accepted after the October Revolution (so named because
it took place in October 1917 in the Julian calendar). On 24 January 1918 the
Council of People's Commissars issued a Decree that Wednesday, 31 January 1918
was to be followed by Thursday, 14 February 1918, thus dropping 13 days from
the calendar. The other countries of Eastern Europe, most notably Orthodox
countries, adopted the Gregorian calendar in the 1910s or early 1920s. The last
country of Eastern Orthodox Europe to adopt the Gregorian calendar was Greece
on Thursday, 1 March 1923, which followed Wednesday, 15 February 1923 (a change
that also dropped 13 days). As European powers colonized or otherwise took
control of various parts of the world, they generally applied their calendars
in those countries. Those countries have generally retained the Gregorian
calendars after achieving independence. Adoption in Eastern Asia. Japan decided
to officially replace its traditional lunisolar calendar with the Gregorian
calendar in 1872, so the day following the second day of the twelfth month of
the fifth year of the Meiji emperor's rule, became , thus bringing Japan's
calendar in alignment with that of the major Western powers (excluding Russia).
Still, it is common to use Nengo, reign names instead of the Common Era or Anno
Domini system, especially for official documents; for instance, "Meiji" 1=1868,
"Taisho" 1=1912, "Showa" 1=1926, "Heisei" 1=1989, and so on. Still, this system
has increasingly been replaced in popular usage by the "Western calendar"
(è¥¿æš¦, "seireki") over the course of the twentieth century. Korea adopted the
Gregorian calendar on 1 January 1895 with the active participation of Yu Kil-
chun. Although the new calendar continued to number its months, for its years
during the Joseon Dynasty, 1895â€“97, these years were numbered from the
founding of that dynasty, regarding year one as 1392. Between 1897 and 1910,
and again from 1948 to 1962 Korean era names were used for its years. Between
1910 and 1945, when Korea was under Japanese rule, Japanese era names were used
to count the years of the Gregorian calendar used in Korea. From 1945 until
1961 in South Korea, Gregorian calendar years were also counted from the
foundation of Gojoseon in 2333 BCE (regarded as year one), the date of the
legendary founding of Korea by Dangun, hence these Dangi (ë‹¨ê¸°) years were
4278 to 4294. This numbering was informally used with the Korean lunar calendar
before 1945 but is only occasionally used today. In North Korea, the Juche
calendar has been used since 1997 to number its years, regarding year one as
the birth of Kim Il Sung in 1912. The Republic of China (ROC) formally adopted
the Gregorian calendar at its founding on , but China soon descended into a
period of warlordism with different warlords using different calendars. With
the unification of China under the Kuomintang in October 1928, the Nationalist
Government decreed that effective the Gregorian calendar would be used.
However, China retained the Chinese traditions of numbering the months and a
modified Era System, backdating the first year of the ROC to 1912; this system
is still in use in Taiwan where the ROC government retains control. Upon its
foundation in 1949, the People's Republic of China continued to use the
Gregorian calendar with numbered months, but abolished the ROC Era System and
adopted Western numbered years. Adoption by Orthodox Churches. Greece was the
last Orthodox country to adopt the Gregorian calendar in March 1923. However,
these adoptions are only for civil or state purposes, and none of the national
Orthodox Churches have recognised the Gregorian calendar for church or
religious purposes. Instead, a Revised Julian calendar was proposed in May 1923
which dropped 13 days in 1923 and adopted a different leap year rule. There
will be no difference between the two calendars until 2800. The Orthodox
churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Greece, Cyprus, Romania, and
Bulgaria adopted the Revised Julian calendar, so until 2800 these New
calendarists would celebrate Christmas on 25 December in the Gregorian
calendar, the same day as the Western churches. The Armenian Apostolic Church
adopted the Gregorian calendar in 1923, except in the Armenian Patriarchate of
Jerusalem, where the old Julian calendar is still in use. The Orthodox churches
of Jerusalem, Russia, Serbia, the Republic of Macedonia, Georgia, Poland and
the Greek Old Calendarists did not accept the Revised Julian calendar, and
continue to celebrate Christmas on 25 December in the Julian calendar, which is
7 January in the Gregorian calendar until 2100. The refusal to accept the
Gregorian reforms also has an impact on the date of Easter. This is because the
date of Easter is determined with reference to 21 March as the functional
equinox, which continues to apply in the Julian calendar, even though the civil
calendar in the native countries now use the Gregorian calendar. All of the
other Eastern churches, the Oriental Orthodox churches (Coptic, Ethiopian,
Eritrean, and Syrian) continue to use their own calendars, which usually result
in fixed dates being celebrated in accordance with the Julian calendar. The
Indian Orthodox Church uses the Gregorian Calendar. The Assyrian Church uses
the Gregorian Calendar as enacted by Mar Dinkha, causing a schism; the Ancient
Assyrian Church of the East continues to use the Julian Calendar. All Eastern
churches continue to use the Julian Easter with the sole exception of the
Finnish Orthodox Church, which has adopted the Gregorian Easter. Timeline. The
date when each country adopted the Gregorian calendar, or an equivalent, is
marked against a horizontal time line. The vertical axis is used for expansion
to show separate national names for ease in charting, but otherwise has no
significance. Difference between Gregorian and Julian calendar dates. A more
extensive list is available at Conversion between Julian and Gregorian
calendars. This section always places the intercalary day on even though it was
always obtained by doubling (the "bissextum" (twice sixth) or bissextile day)
until the late Middle Ages. The Gregorian calendar is proleptic before 1582
(assumed to exist before 1582) while the Julian calendar is proleptic before
year AD 1 (because non-quadrennial leap days were used between 45 BC and AD 1).
The following equation gives the number of days (actually, dates) that the
Gregorian calendar is ahead of the Julian calendar, called the "secular
difference" between the two calendars. A negative difference means the Julian
calendar is ahead of the Gregorian calendar. where formula_4 is the secular
difference; formula_5 is the hundreds digits of the year using astronomical
year numbering, that is, use for BC years; and formula_6 is integer division of
H by 4. This truncates (removes) any decimal fraction (remainder) of the
division, for both positive and negative numbers. Thus during the 1900s, 19/4 =
4, while during the âˆ’500s, âˆ’5/4 = âˆ’1. The calculated difference increases
by one in a centurial year (a year ending in '00) at either Julian or
Gregorian, whichever is later. For positive differences, Julian is later,
whereas for negative differences, Gregorian is later. Beginning of the year.
The year used in dates during the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire was the
consular year, which began on the day when consuls first entered
officeâ€”probably 1 May before 222 BC, 15 March from 222 BC and 1 January from
153 BC. The Julian calendar, which began in 45 BC, continued to use 1 January
as the first day of the new year. Even though the year used for dates changed,
the civil year always displayed its months in the order January through
December from the Roman Republican period until the present. During the Middle
Ages, under the influence of the Christian Church, many Western European
countries moved the start of the year to one of several important Christian
festivalsâ€”25 December (the Nativity of Jesus), 25 March (Annunciation), or
Easter (France), while the Byzantine Empire began its year on 1 September and
Russia did so on 1 March until 1492 when the year was moved to 1 September. In
common usage, 1 January was regarded as New Year's Day and celebrated as such,
but from the 12th century until 1751 the "legal" year in England began on 25
March (Lady Day). So, for example, the Parliamentary record lists the execution
of Charles I on 30 January as occurring in 1648 (as the year did not end until
24 March), although modern histories adjust the start of the year to 1 January
and record the execution as occurring in 1649. Most Western European countries
changed the start of the year to 1 January before they adopted the Gregorian
calendar. For example, Scotland changed the start of the Scottish New Year to 1
January in 1600 (this means that 1599 was a short year). England, Ireland and
the British colonies changed the start of the year to 1 January in 1752 (so
1751 was a short year with only 282 days) though the tax year has stayed as 25
March to this day (being 6 April in the new calendar). Later that year in
September the Gregorian calendar was introduced throughout Britain and the
British colonies (see the section Adoption). These two reforms were implemented
by the Calendar (New Style) Act 1750. In some countries, an official decree or
law specified that the start of the year should be 1 January. For such
countries we can identify a specific year when a 1 January-year became the
norm. But in other countries the customs varied, and the start of the year
moved back and forth as fashion and influence from other countries dictated
various customs. Neither the papal bull nor its attached canons explicitly fix
such a date, though it is implied by two tables of saint's days, one labelled
1582 which ends on 31 December, and another for any full year that begins on 1
January. It also specifies its epact relative to 1 January, in contrast with
the Julian calendar, which specified it relative to 22 March. These would have
been the inevitable result of the above shift in the beginning of the Julian
year. Dual dating. During the period between 1582, when the first countries
adopted the Gregorian calendar, and 1923, when the last European country
adopted it, it was often necessary to indicate the date of some event in both
the Julian calendar and in the Gregorian calendar, for example, "10/
21Â February 1750/51", where the dual year accounts for some countries already
beginning their numbered year on 1 January while others were still using some
other date. Even before 1582, the year sometimes had to be double dated because
of the different beginnings of the year in various countries. Woolley, writing
in his biography of John Dee (1527â€“1608/9), notes that immediately after 1582
English letter writers "customarily" used "two dates" on their letters, one OS
and one NS. Old Style and New Style dates. "Old Style" (OS) and "New Style"
(NS) are sometimes added to dates to identify which system is used in the
British Empire and other countries that did not immediately change. Because the
Calendar Act of 1750 altered the start of the year, and also aligned the
British calendar with the Gregorian calendar, there is some confusion as to
what these terms mean. They can indicate that the start of the Julian year has
been adjusted to start on 1 January (NS) even though contemporary documents use
a different start of year (OS); or to indicate that a date conforms to the
Julian calendar (OS), formerly in use in many countries, rather than the
Gregorian calendar (NS). Proleptic Gregorian calendar. The Gregorian calendar
can, for certain purposes, be extended backwards to dates preceding its
official introduction, producing the proleptic Gregorian calendar, but this
proleptic calendar should be used with great caution. For ordinary purposes,
the dates of events occurring prior to 15 October 1582 are generally shown as
they appeared in the Julian calendar, with the year starting on 1 January, and
no conversion to their Gregorian equivalents. The Battle of Agincourt is
universally known to have been fought on 25 October 1415 which is Saint
Crispin's Day. Usually, the mapping of new dates onto old dates with a start of
year adjustment works well with little confusion for events that happened
before the introduction of the Gregorian Calendar. But for the period between
the first introduction of the Gregorian calendar on 15 October 1582 and its
introduction in Britain on 14 September 1752, there can be considerable
confusion between events in continental western Europe and in British domains
in English language histories. Events in continental western Europe are usually
reported in English language histories as happening under the Gregorian
calendar. For example the Battle of Blenheim is always given as 13 August 1704.
Confusion occurs when an event affects both. For example William III of England
arrived at Brixham in England on 5 November 1688 (Julian calendar), after
setting sail from the Netherlands on 11 November 1688 (Gregorian calendar).
Shakespeare and Cervantes apparently died on exactly the same date (23 April
1616), but Cervantes predeceased Shakespeare by ten days in real time (as Spain
used the Gregorian calendar, but Britain used the Julian calendar). This
coincidence encouraged UNESCO to make 23 April the World Book and Copyright
Day. Astronomers avoid this ambiguity by the use of the Julian day number. For
dates before the year 1, unlike the proleptic Gregorian calendar used in the
international standard ISO 8601, the traditional proleptic Gregorian calendar
(like the Julian calendar) does not have a year 0 and instead uses the ordinal
numbers 1, 2, â€¦ both for years AD and BC. Thus the traditional time line is 2
BC, 1 BC, AD 1, and AD 2. ISO 8601 uses astronomical year numbering which
includes a year 0 and negative numbers before it. Thus the ISO 8601 time line
is , 0000, 0001, and 0002. Months of the year. For variations and alternate
endings, see Thirty days hath September. A language-independent alternative
used in many countries is to hold up one's two fists with the index knuckle of
the left hand against the index knuckle of the right hand. Then, starting with
January from the little knuckle of the left hand, count knuckle, space,
knuckle, space through the months. A knuckle represents a month of 31 days, and
a space represents a short month (a 28- or 29-day February or any 30-day
month). The junction between the hands is not counted, so the two index
knuckles represent July and August. This method also works by starting the
sequence on the right hand's little knuckle, then continuing towards the left.
It can also be done using just one hand: after counting the fourth knuckle as
July, start again counting the first knuckle as August. A similar mnemonic can
be found on a piano keyboard: starting on the key F for January, moving up the
keyboard in semitones, the black notes give the short months, the white notes
the long ones. Week. In conjunction with the system of months there is a system
of weeks. A physical or electronic calendar provides conversion from a given
date to the weekday, and shows multiple dates for a given weekday and month.
Calculating the day of the week is not very simple, because of the
irregularities in the Gregorian system. When the Gregorian calendar was adopted
by each country (but not Alaska), the weekly cycle continued uninterrupted. For
example, in the case of the few countries that adopted the reformed calendar on
the date proposed by Gregory XIII for the calendar's adoption, Friday, 15
October 1582, the preceding date was Thursday, 4 October 1582 (Julian
calendar). Opinions vary about the numbering of the days of the week. ISO 8601,
in common use worldwide, starts with Monday=1; printed monthly calendar grids
list Mondays in the first (left) column of dates and Sundays in the last.
Software often starts with Sunday=0. In the United States, it's generally the
case that Sunday=1, with Sundays shown in the left column of a monthly calendar
page. Accuracy. The Gregorian calendar improves the approximation made by the
Julian calendar by skipping three Julian leap days in every 400 years, giving
an average year of 365.2425 mean solar days long. This approximation has an
error of about one day per 3,300 years with respect to the mean tropical year.
However, because of the precession of the equinoxes, the error with respect to
the "vernal equinox" (which occurs, on average, 365.24237 days apart near 2000)
is 1 day every 7,700 years. By any criterion, the Gregorian calendar is
substantially more accurate than the 1 day in 128 years error of the Julian
calendar (average year 365.25 days). In the 19th century, Sir John Herschel
proposed a modification to the Gregorian calendar with 969 leap days every 4000
years, instead of 970 leap days that the Gregorian calendar would insert over
the same period. This would reduce the average year to 365.24225 days.
Herschel's proposal would make the year 4000, and multiples thereof, common
instead of leap. While this modification has often been proposed since, it has
never been officially adopted. On time scales of thousands of years, the
Gregorian calendar falls behind the astronomical seasons because the slowing
down of the Earth's rotation makes each day slightly longer over time (see
tidal acceleration and leap second) while the year maintains a more uniform
duration. Borkowski reviewed mathematical models in the literature, and found
that the results generally fall between a model by McCarthy and Babcock, and
another by Stephenson and Morrison. If so, in the year 4000, the calendar will
fall behind by at least 0.8 but less than 1.1 days. In the year 12,000 the
calendar would fall behind by at least 8 but less than 12 days. Calendar
seasonal error. This image shows the difference between the Gregorian calendar
and the astronomical seasons. The "y"-axis is the date in June and the "x"-axis
is Gregorian calendar years. Each point is the date and time of the June
Solstice (or Winter solstice in the Southern Hemisphere) on that particular
year. The error shifts by about a quarter of a day per year. Centurial years
are ordinary years, unless they are divisible by 400, in which case they are
leap years. This causes a correction on years 1700, 1800, 1900, 2100, 2200, and
2300. For instance, these corrections cause 23 December 1903 to be the latest
December solstice, and 20 December 2096 to be the earliest solsticeâ€”2.25 days
of variation compared with the seasonal event. Other aspects. The day of the
year is somewhat inconvenient to compute, partly because the leap day does not
fall at the end of the year. But the calendar exhibits a repeating pattern for
the number of days in the months March through July and August through
December: 31, 30, 31, 30, 31, for a total of 153 days each. In fact, any five
consecutive months not containing February contain exactly 153 days. See also
common year starting on Sunday and dominical letter. The 400-year cycle of the
Gregorian calendar has 146,097 days and hence exactly 20,871 weeks. So, for
example, the days of the week in Gregorian 1612 were exactly the same as for
2012. The years that are divisible by 400 begin on a Saturday. In the 400-year
cycle, more months begin on a Sunday (and hence have Friday the 13th) than any
other day of the week (see above under Week for a more detailed explanation of
how this happens). 688 out of every 4800 months (or 172/1200) begin on a
Sunday, while only 684 out of every 4800 months (171/1200) begin on each of
Saturday and Monday, the least common cases. However, a dropped leap year (such
as 1900) temporarily disrupts the 28-year cycle and the repetitions within it.
The Doomsday algorithm is a method to discern which of the 14 calendar
variations should be used in any given year (after the Gregorian reformation).
It is based on the last day in February, referred to as the Doomsday. Day of
the week for a date in different years. Common years always begin and end on
the same day of the week, since 365 is one more than a multiple of 7 (52 of
weeks in a year Ã— 7 of days in a week = 364). For example, 2007 began on a
Monday and ended on a Monday. Leap years end on the next day of the week from
which they begin. For example, 2008 began on a Tuesday and ended on a
Wednesday. Not counting leap years, any calendar date will move to the next day
of the week the following year. For example, if a birthday fell on a Wednesday
in 2006, it fell on a Thursday in 2007. Leap years make things a little more
complicated, and move any given date occurring after March two days in the week
on the following year, "leaping over" an extra day, hence the term leap year.
For example, 2008 was a leap year, so calendar days of 1 March or later in the
year, moved two days of the week from 2007. Calendar days occurring before 1
March do not make the extra day of the week jump until the year following a
leap year. So, if a birthday is 15 June, then it must have fallen on a Friday
in 2007 and a Sunday in 2008. If, however, a birthday is 15 February, then it
must have fallen on a Thursday in 2007, a Friday in 2008 and a Sunday in 2009.
Calendar matches between months. In any year (even a leap year), July always
begins on the same day of the week that April does; therefore, the only
difference between a July calendar page and an April calendar page in the same
year is the extra day July has. The same relationship exists between September
and December, as well as between March and November. If an extra day is added
to the September calendar, the calendar for December is obtained; remove a day
from the March calendar, and that for November is obtained. In common years
(non-leap years), there are additional matches: October duplicates January, and
March and November duplicate February in their first 28 days. In leap years
only, there is a different set of additional matches: July is a duplicate of
January, while February is duplicated in the first 29 days of August. English
names for year numbering system. The "Anno Domini" (Latin for "in the year of
the/our Lord") system of numbering years, in which the leap year rules are
written, and which is generally used together with the Gregorian calendar, is
also known in English as the Common Era or Christian Era. Years before the
beginning of the era are known in English as Before Christ, Before the Common
Era, or Before the Christian Era. The corresponding abbreviations AD, CE, BC,
and BCE are used. There is no year 0; AD 1 immediately follows 1 BC. Naturally,
since "Inter gravissimas" was written in Latin, it does not mandate any English
language nomenclature. Two era names occur within the bull, ""anno
Incarnationis dominicÃ¦"" ("in the year of the Incarnation of the Lord") for
the year it was signed, and ""anno Ã  Nativitate Domini nostri Jesu Christi""
("in the year from the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ") for the year it was
printed. Nevertheless, "anno Domini" and its inflections "anni Domini" and
"annus Domini" are used many times in the canons attached to the bull.
