High Sabbaths The term High Sabbaths is used by some Christians to refer to the
Jewish High Holy Days. There are seven annual Biblical festivals specified in
the books of Exodus and Deuteronomy. Biblical rest days. The seven festivals do
not necessarily occur on the weekly "Shabbat" (seventh-day Sabbath) and are
called by the name "miqra" ("called assembly") in Hebrew. They are observed by
Jews and a minority of Christians. Three of them occur in spring: the first and
seventh days of Pesach (Passover), and Shavuot (Pentecost). Four occur in fall,
in the seventh month, and are also called "shabbaton": Rosh Hashanah
(Trumpets); Yom Kippur, the "Sabbath of Sabbaths" (Atonement); and the first
and eighth days of Sukkoth. The Gospel of John says of the night immediately
following Christ's burial that "that sabbath day was a high day" (). That night
was Nisan 15, the first day of Passover week (Unleavened Bread) and an annual
"miqra" and rest day, in most chronologies. (In other systems, it was Nisan 14,
i.e., weekly but not annual Sabbath.) The King James Version may thus be the
origin of naming the annual rest days "High Sabbaths". Shabbat Hagadol. The
phrase "high Sabbath" has been defined by Danny ben Gigi, former professor of
Hebrew Language at Arizona State University, as synonymous with ""Shabbat
Hagadol"", whichever "Shabbat" precedes Passover in any year. This viewpoint is
based on the absence of references in Torah that refer to feast days as "high",
although it is harder to reconcile strictly with New Testament chronology. High
Holidays. The ten-day period between the High Sabbaths of Rosh Hashanah and Yom
Kippur is commonly referred to as the related High Holy Days or High Holidays.
