Holy Prepuce The Holy Prepuce, or Holy Foreskin (Latin "prÃ¦putium" or
"prepucium") is one of several relics attributed to Jesus, a product of the
circumcision of Jesus. At various points in history, a number of churches in
Europe have claimed to possess Jesus' foreskin, sometimes at the same time.
Various miraculous powers have been ascribed to it. History and rival claims.
Foreskin relics began appearing in Europe during the Middle Ages. The earliest
recorded sighting came on December 25, 800, when Charlemagne gave it to Pope
Leo III when the latter crowned the former Emperor. Charlemagne claimed that it
had been brought to him by an angel while he prayed at the Holy Sepulchre,
although a more prosaic report says it was a wedding gift from the Byzantine
Empress Irene. The Pope placed it into the Sancta Sanctorum in the Lateran
basilica in Rome with other relics. Its authenticity was later considered to be
confirmed by a vision of Saint Bridget of Sweden. The foreskin was then looted
during the Sack of Rome in 1527. The German soldier who stole it was captured
in the village of Calcata, 47Â km north of Rome, later the same year. Thrown
into prison, he hid the jeweled reliquary in his cell, where it remained until
its rediscovery in 1557. Many miracles (freak storms and perfumed fog
overwhelming the village) are claimed to have followed. Housed in Calcata, it
was venerated from that time onwards, with the Church approving the
authenticity by offering a ten-year indulgence to pilgrims. Pilgrims, nuns and
monks flocked to the church. "Calcata was a must-see destination on the
pilgrimage map." The foreskin was reported stolen by a local priest in 1983.
According to the author David Farley, ""Depending on what you read, there were
eight, twelve, fourteen, or even 18 different holy foreskins in various
European towns during the Middle Ages."" In addition to the Holy Foreskin of
Rome (later Calcata), other claimants included the Cathedral of Le Puy-en-
Velay, Santiago de Compostela, the city of Antwerp, Coulombs in the diocese of
Chartres, France as well as Chartres itself, and churches in BesanÃ§on,
Newport, Metz, Hildesheim, Charroux, Conques, Langres, FÃ©camp, Stoke-on-Trent,
Calcata, and two in Auvergne. One of the most famous prepuces arrived in
Antwerp in the Brabant in 1100 as a gift from king Baldwin I of Jerusalem, who
purchased it in Palestine in the course of the first crusade. This prepuce
became famous when the bishop of Cambray, during the celebration of the Mass,
saw three drops of blood blotting the linens of the altar. A special chapel was
constructed and processions organised in honour of the miraculous relic, which
became the goal of pilgrimages. In 1426 a brotherhood was founded in the
cathedral ""van der heiliger Besnidenissen ons liefs Heeren Jhesu Cristi in
onser liever Vrouwen Kercke t' Antwerpen""; its 24 members were all abbots and
prominent laymen. The relic disappeared in 1566, but the chapel still exists,
decorated by two stained glass windows donated by king Henry VII of England and
his wife Elizabeth of York in 1503. The abbey of Charroux claimed the Holy
Foreskin was presented to the monks by Charlemagne. In the early 12th century,
it was taken in procession to Rome where it was presented before Pope Innocent
III, who was asked to rule on its authenticity. The Pope declined the
opportunity. At some point, however, the relic went missing, and remained lost
until 1856 when a workman repairing the abbey claimed to have found a reliquary
hidden inside a wall, containing the missing foreskin. The rediscovery,
however, led to a theological clash with the established Holy Prepuce of
Calcata, which had been officially venerated by the Church for hundreds of
years; in 1900, the Roman Catholic Church resolved the dilemma by ruling that
anyone thenceforward writing or speaking of the Holy Prepuce would be
excommunicated. In 1954, after much debate, the punishment was changed to the
harsher degree of excommunication, "vitandi" (shunned); and the Second Vatican
Council later removed the Day of the Holy Circumcision from the Latin church
calendar, although Eastern Catholics and Traditional Roman Catholics still
celebrate the Feast of the Circumcision of Our Lord on January 1. Modern
practices. Most of the Holy Prepuces were lost or destroyed during the
Reformation and the French Revolution. The Holy Prepuce of Calcata is worthy of
special mention, as the reliquary containing the Holy Foreskin was paraded
through the streets of this Italian village as recently as 1983 on the Feast of
the Circumcision, which was formerly marked by the Roman Catholic Church around
the world on January 1 each year. The practice ended, however, when thieves
stole the jewel-encrusted case, contents and all. Following this theft, it is
unclear whether any of the purported Holy Prepuces still exist. In a 1997
television documentary for Channel 4, British journalist Miles Kington
travelled to Italy in search of the Holy Foreskin, but was unable to find any
remaining example. Historical allusions and references to the Holy Prepuce.
Voltaire, in "A Treatise of Toleration" (1763), ironically referred to
veneration of the Holy Foreskin as being one of a number of superstitions that
were "much more reasonable... than to detest and persecute your brother".
Umberto Eco, in his book "Baudolino", has the young Baudolino invent a story
about seeing the holy foreskin and navel in Rome to the company of Frederick
Barbarossa. In July 2009, Penguin/Gotham Books published "An Irreverent
Curiosity: In Search of the Church's Strangest Relic in Italy's Oddest Town",
American writer David Farley's account of trying to locate the Holy Foreskin of
Calcata. In Chuck Palahniuk's book "Choke", the main character is told that he
was cloned from Jesus' foreskin.
