Imam An imam (, plural: "A'immah"; ) is an Islamic leadership position, often
the worship leader of a mosque and the Muslim community. Imams may lead Islamic
worship services, serve as community leaders, and provide religious guidance.
It may also be used in the form of a prefix title with scholars of renown.
Sunni Imams. The Sunni branch of Islam does not have imams in the same sense as
the Shi'a, an important distinction often overlooked by those outside of the
Islamic faith. In every day terms, the imam for Sunni Muslims is the one who
leads Islamic formal (Fard) prayers, even in locations besides the mosque,
whenever prayers are done in a group of two or more with one person leading
(imam) and the others follow by copying his ritual actions of worship. Friday
sermon is most often given by an appointed imam. All mosques have an imam to
lead the (congregational) prayers, even though it may sometimes just be a
member from the gathered congregation rather than officially appointed salaried
person. Women may not lead prayers other than if it is an all female group
(among native Muslims in China, Hui, women have traditionally been trained as,
and practice, the role of imam among female-only congregations; these are often
the wives of imams (see "Nusi")). The person that should be chosen according to
Hadith is one who has most knowledge of the Qu'ran and of good character, the
age is immaterial. The term is also used for a recognized religious scholar or
authority in Islam, often for the founding scholars of the four Sunni madhhabs,
or schools of jurisprudence "(fiqh)". It may also refer to the Muslim scholars
who created the analytical sciences related to Hadith or it may refer to the
heads of the Prophet Muhammad's family in their generational times. Those who
are considered imams in the context of scholarly authority by Sunni Muslims.
Shi'a imams. In the Shi'a context, imam has a meaning more central to belief,
referring to leaders of the community. Twelver and Ismaili Shi'a believe that
these imams are chosen by God to be perfect examples for the faithful and to
lead all humanity in all aspects of life. They also believe that all the imams
chosen are free from committing any sin, impeccability which is called "ismah".
These leaders must be followed since they are appointed by God. Twelver.
Fatimah, also Fatimah al-Zahraa, daughter of Muhammed (615â€“632), is also
considered infallible but not an imam. Shi'a believe that the last imam will
one day return. Ismaili. See Imamah (Ismaili doctrine) and List of Ismaili
imams for Ismaili imams. Zaidi imams as rulers of Yemen. In the Zaidi Shiite
sect, imams were temporal as well as spiritual leaders who held power in Yemen
for more than a thousand years. In 897, a Zaidi ruler, al-Hadi ila'l-Haqq
Yahya, founded a line of such imams, a theocratic form of government which
survived until the second half of the 20th century. (See details under
Zaidiyyah, History of Yemen, Imams of Yemen.)
