Imperial cult An imperial cult is a form of state religion in which an emperor,
or a dynasty of emperors (or rulers of another title), are worshipped as
messiahs, demigods or deities. "Cult" here is used to mean "worship", not in
the modern pejorative sense. The cult may be one of personality in the case of
a newly arisen Euhemerus figure or one of national identity (e.g., Egyptian
Pharaoh, Ethiopian Empire or Empire of Japan) or supranational identity in the
case of a multi-ethnic state (e.g., Imperial Era China, Roman Empire). A divine
king is a monarch who is held in a special religious significance by his
subjects, and serves as both head of state and a deity or head religious
figure. This system of government combines theocracy with an absolute monarchy.
Historical. Ancient Egypt. The Ancient Egyptian Pharaohs were believed
(throughout ancient Egyptian history) to be incarnations of the god Horus,
derived by being the son of the sun deity, Hathor (or later, Isis), or the sky
deity, Nut. Ancient China. In Imperial China, an emperor was considered the Son
of Heaven. The scion and representative of heaven on earth, he was the ruler of
all under heaven, the bearer of the Mandate of Heaven, his commands considered
sacred edicts. A number of legendary figures preceding the proper imperial era
of China also hold the honorific title of emperor, such as the Yellow Emperor
and the Jade Emperor. Ancient Rome. Even before the rise of the Caesars, there
are traces of a "regal spirituality" in Roman society. In earliest Roman times
the king was a spiritual and patrician figure and ranked higher than the
"flamines" (priestly order), while later on in history only a shadow of the
primordial condition was left with the sacrificial "rex sacrorum" linked
closely to the plebeian orders. King Numitor corresponds to the regal-sacred
principle in early Roman history. The "founder of Rome" Romulus was heroized
into "Quirinus", the "undefeated god", of whom the later Caesars identified
with and considered themselves incarnations. Varro spoke of the initiatory
mystery and power of Roman regality ("adytum et initia regis"), inaccessible to
the exoteric communality. In Plutarch's "Phyrro", 19.5, the Greek ambassador
declared amid the Roman Senate he felt instead like being in the midst of "a
whole assembly of Kings". As the Roman Empire developed as the dictator-prince
Julius Caesar left his crucial mark on Roman history, the "Imperial cult"
gradually developed more formally and constituted the worship of the Roman
emperor as a god. This practice began at the start of the Empire under
Augustus, and became a prominent element of Roman religion. The cult spread
over the whole Empire within a few decades, more strongly in the east than in
the west. Emperor Diocletian further reinforced it when he demanded the
"proskynesis" and adopted the adjective "sacrum" for all things pertaining to
the imperial person. The deification of emperors was gradually abandoned after
the emperor Constantine I started supporting Christianity. However, the concept
of the imperial person as "sacred" carried over, in a Christianized form, into
the Byzantine Empire. Ancient Japan. In ancient Japan, it was customary for
every clan to claim descendancy from gods ("ujigami"), and the royal family or
clan tended to define their ancestor as the dominant, or most important "kami"
of the time. Later in history, this was considered common practice by noble
families, and the head members of the family, including that of the imperial
family, were not seen to be divine. It was not until the Meiji period, that the
Japanese Emperor began to be venerated under a system of State Shinto, along
with a growing sense of nationalism. up until the end of World War II. Even
though the Sh≈çwa Emperor declined his own divinity, it did not change the way
people of Japan see their emperor as Tenno, the divine emperor. Ancient
Southeast Asia. Devaraja is the Hindu-Buddhist cult of deified royalty in
Southeast Asia. It is simply described as Southeast Asian concept of divine
king. The concept viewed the monarch (king) as the living god, the incarnation
of the supreme god, often attributed to Shiva or Vishnu, on earth. The concept
is closely related to Indian concept of Chakravartin (universal monarch). In
politics, it is viewed as the divine justification of a king's rule. The
concept gain its elaborate manifestations in ancient Java and Cambodia, where
monuments such as Prambanan and Angkor Wat were erected to celebrate the king's
divine rule on earth. In the Medang kingdom, it was customary to erect a
"candi" (temple) to honor the soul of a deceased king. The image inside the
garbhagriha (inner sanctum) of the temple often portrayed the king as a god,
since the soul was thought to be united with the god referred to, in
svargaloka. It is suggested that the cult was the fusion of Hinduism with
native Austronesian ancestor worship. In Java, the tradition of the divine king
extended to the Kediri, Singhasari and Majapahit kingdoms in the 15th century.
The tradition of public reverence to the King of Cambodia and King of Thailand
is the continuation of this ancient devaraja cult. The Susuhunan of Surakarta
and Sultan of Yogyakarta are the direct descendants of the Mataram Sultanate
founded in the late 17th century, and was said to be the continuation of the
Ancient 8th century Mataram kingdom. Tibet. Tibetan Buddhism use the tulku
system, an ancient way of finding the reincarnation of a previous deceased
lama: they are usually young boys, sometimes of wealthy and influential
families and sometimes of peasant families like the current 14th Dalai Lama,
that are found and enthroned as the reincarnation of an enlightened person that
has already deceased. Every tulku are still called on the title of Rinpoche and
is given as much respect as his previous reincarnation. Complying with each and
every wish of a child- or adult tulku is not unusual. Tulkus lead responsible
lives because of their status as a bodhisattva. While many tulkus are monks,
some tulkus choose to lead lay lives with families of their own.
