Inquisition The Inquisition ("Inquisitio Haereticae Pravitatis"; Inquiry on
Heretical Perversity), was a group of decentralized institutions within the
justice system of the Roman Catholic Church whose aim was to "fight against
heretics". It started in 12th-century France to persecute heresy, and was later
expanded to other European countries. Inquisition practices were used also on
offences against canon law other than heresy. Definition. Generally, the
Inquisition movement was concerned only with the heretical behaviour of
Catholic adherents or converts, and did not concern itself with those outside
its jurisdiction, such as Jews or Muslims. Tribunals and institutions. Before
1100, the Catholic Church had already suppressed heresy, usually through a
system of ecclesiastical proscription or imprisonment, but without using
torture and seldom resorting to executions. Such punishments had a number of
ecclesiastical opponents, although some countries punished heresy with the
death penalty. In the 12th century, to counter the spread of Catharism,
prosecution of heretics by some secular governments became more frequent. The
Church charged councils composed of bishops and archbishops with establishing
inquisitions (see Episcopal Inquisition). The first Inquisition was temporarily
established in Languedoc (south of France) in 1184. In 1229 it was permanently
established. It was centered under the Dominicans in Rome and later at
Carcasonne in Provence. Having full ownership of their property in the
countries where it was set up. an international network was set up in these
countries to check on any newcomers to a place and to track down any escapees.
Its decentralised autonomous proceedings became difficult to control above all
civil and other ecclesiastical laws even against the intercession of senior
Bishops and even a few Popes. Arrests could be made without any evidence,
merely on suspicion. According to Henry Charles Lea one of the worst cases of
this being that of an old woman who found pork disagreeable and on refusing to
eat it on an unfortunate Saturday was arrested for being a crypto-Jew rather
than being actually Catholic. Use of torture. Torture was previously forbidden
by canon law but in 1252 Pope Innocent IV sanctioned the use of torture and
also granted dispensation for the inquisitors to be present during its
application. Treatment of women. All prisoners were initially kept together and
this led to violations of women by other prisoners and their guards. Later
orders were given that the sexes be separated. Pregnant women as a vulnerable
group became frequent prisoners especially in Spain,with special accommodation
but without the help of midwives or other women, consequently many endured
extreme suffering and did not survive childbirth. Many babies were confiscated
before their mothers were subjected to torture. Grand Inquisitor. In the 13th
century, Pope Gregory IX (reigned 1227–1241) assigned the duty of carrying
out inquisitions to the Dominican Order. They used inquisitorial procedures, a
legal practice common at that time. They judged heresy alone, using the local
authorities to establish a tribunal and to prosecute heretics. After 1200, a
Grand Inquisitor headed each Inquisition. The most notorious at the start of
the sixteenth century being the first of the Spanish Inquisition Tomas
Torquemada. Grand Inquisitions persisted until the mid 19th century. Modern
times. By 1500, the Catholic Church had reached an apparently dominant position
as the established religious authority in western and central Europe dominating
a faith-landscape in which Judaism, Waldensianism, Hussitism, Lollardry and the
finally conquered Muslims al-Andalus (the Muslim-dominated Spain) hardly
figured in terms of numbers or influence. When the institutions of the Church
felt themselves threatened by what they perceived as the heresy, and then
schism of the Protestant Reformation, they reacted. Paul III (Pope from 1534 to
1549) established a system of tribunals, administered by the "Supreme Sacred
Congregation of the Universal Inquisition", and staffed by cardinals and other
Church officials. This system would later become known as the Roman
Inquisition. In 1908 Pope Saint Pius X renamed the organisation: it became the
"Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office". This in its turn became the
"Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" in 1965, which name continues .
Functional role. In practice, the Inquisition would not itself pronounce
sentence, but handed over convicted heretics to secular authorities for the
punishment deemed fitting by the Church. The laws were inclusive of
proscriptions against certain religious crimes (heresy, etc.), and the
punishments included death by burning, although imprisonment often for life or
banishment could be used. Thus the inquisitors generally knew what would be the
fate of anyone so remanded, and cannot be considered to have divorced the means
of determining guilt from its effects. Purpose. The 1578 handbook for
inquisitors spelled out the purpose of inquisitorial penalties: "... quoniam
punitio non refertur primo & per se in correctionem & bonum eius qui punitur,
sed in bonum publicum ut alij terreantur, & a malis committendis avocentur."
Translation from the Latin: "... for punishment does not take place primarily
and per se for the correction and good of the person punished, but for the
public good in order that others may become terrified and weaned away from the
evils they would commit."" Movements. Most of Medieval Western and Central
Europe had a long-standing veneer of Catholic standardisation over traditional
non-Christian practices, with intermittent localized occurrences of different
ideas (such as Catharism or Platonism) and constantly recurring anti-Semitic or
anti-Judaic activity and conspiration. Exceptionally, Portugal and Spain in the
late Middle Ages consisted largely of multicultural territories of Muslim and
Jewish influence, conquered from the Islamic states of Al-Andalus control, and
the new Christian authorities could not assume that all their subjects would
suddenly become and remain orthodox Catholics. So the Inquisition in Iberia, in
the lands of the Reconquista counties and kingdoms like Leon, Castile and
Aragon, had a special socio-political basis as well as more fundamentalistic
religious motives. Later followed Portugal in this fundamentalistic
christianisation. With the Protestant Reformation, Catholic authorities became
much more ready to suspect heresy in any new ideas, including those of
Renaissance humanism, previously strongly supported by many at the top of the
Church hierarchy. The extirpation of heretics became a much broader and more
complex enterprise, complicated by the politics of territorial Protestant
powers, especially in northern Europe. The Catholic Church could no longer
exercise direct influence in the politics and justice-systems of lands which
officially adopted Protestantism. Thus war (the French Wars of Religion, the
Thirty Years War), massacre (the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre) and the
missional and propaganda work (by the Sacra congregatio de propaganda fide) of
the Counter-Reformation came to play larger roles in these circumstances, and
the roman law type of a "judicial" approach to heresy represented by the
Inquisition became less important overall. Medieval Inquisition. Historians use
the term "Medieval Inquisition" to describe the various inquisitions that
started around 1184, including the "Episcopal Inquisition" (1184–1230s) and
later the "Papal Inquisition" (1230s). These inquisitions responded to large
popular movements throughout Europe considered apostate or heretical to
Christianity, in particular the Cathars in southern France and the Waldensians
in both southern France and northern Italy. Other Inquisitions followed after
these first inquisition movements. Legal basis for some inquisitorial activity
came from Pope Innocent IV's papal bull "Ad extirpanda" of 1252, which
authorized and regulated the use of torture in investigating heresy. Spanish
Inquisition. [[File:Pedro Berruguete - Saint Dominic Presiding over an Auto-da-
fe (1475).jpg|right|thumb| Pedro Berruguete, "Saint Dominic Presides over an
Auto da Fe" (c. 1495). Many artistic representations depict torture and burning
at the stake as occurring during the "auto-da-fé" (Spanish for "Act of
Faith").]] King Ferdinand II of Aragon and Queen Isabella I of Castile
established the Spanish Inquisition in 1478. In contrast to the previous
inquisitions, it operated completely under royal Christian authority, though
staffed by clergy and orders, and independently of the Holy See. It operated in
Spain and in all Spanish colonies and territories, which included the Canary
Islands, the Spanish Netherlands, the Kingdom of Naples, and all Spanish
possessions in North, Central, and South America. It primarily targeted forced
converts from Islam (Moriscos, Conversos and "secret Moors") and from Judaism
(Conversos, Crypto-Jews and Marranos) — both groups still resided in Spain
after the end of the Islamic control of Spain — who came under suspicion of
either continuing to adhere to their old religion or of having fallen back into
it. Somewhat later the Spanish Inquisition took an interest in Protestants of
virtually any sect, notably in the Spanish Netherlands, in heresy, and in
witchcraft. In the Spanish possessions of the Kingdom of Sicily and the Kingdom
of Naples in southern Italy, which formed part of the Spanish Crown's
hereditary possessions, it also targeted Greek Orthodox Christians. In the
Americas, King Philip II set up two tribunals (each formally titled "Tribunal
del Santo Oficio de la Inquisición") in 1569, one in Mexico and the other in
Peru. The Mexican office administered Mexico (central and southeastern Mexico),
Nueva Galicia (northern and western Mexico), the Audiencias of Guatemala
(Guatemala, Chiapas, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica), and the
Spanish East Indies. The Peruvian Inquisition, based in Lima, administered all
the Spanish territories in South America and Panama. In Spain the institution
survived until 1834. Portuguese Inquisition. The Portuguese Inquisition
formally started in Portugal in 1536 at the request of the King of Portugal,
João III. Manuel I had asked Pope Leo X for the installation of the
Inquisition in 1515, but only after his death (1521) did Pope Paul III
acquiesce. The Portuguese Inquisition principally targeted the Sephardic Jews,
whom the state forced to convert to Christianity. Spain had expelled its
Sephardic population in 1492 (see Alhambra decree); after 1492 many of these
Spanish Jews left Spain for Portugal, but eventually were targeted there as
well. The Portuguese Inquisition came under the authority of the King. At its
head stood a Grande Inquisidor, or General Inquisitor, named by the Pope but
selected by the Crown, and always from within the royal family. The Portuguese
Inquisition held its first "auto-da-fé" in 1540. It concentrated its efforts
on rooting out converts from other faiths (overwhelmingly Judaism) who did not
adhere to the observances of Catholic orthodoxy; the Portuguese inquisitors
mostly targeted the Jewish "New Christians" (i.e. conversos or marranos). The
Portuguese Inquisition expanded its scope of operations from Portugal to
Portugal's colonial possessions, including Brazil, Cape Verde, and Goa, where
it continued as a religious court, investigating and trying cases of breaches
of the tenets of orthodox Roman Catholicism until 1821. King João III (reigned
1521–57) extended the activity of the courts to cover censorship, divination,
witchcraft and bigamy. Originally oriented for a religious action, the
Inquisition had an influence in almost every aspect of Portuguese society:
politically, culturally and socially. The Goa Inquisition, an inquisition
largely aimed at Catholic converts from Hinduism or Islam who were thought to
have returned to their original ways, started in Goa in 1560. In addition, the
Inquisition prosecuted non-converts who broke prohibitions against the
observance of Hindu or Muslim rites or interfered with Portuguese attempts to
convert non-Christians to Catholicism. Aleixo Dias Falcão and Francisco
Marques set it up in the palace of the Sabaio Adil Khan. According to Henry
Charles Lea between 1540 and 1794 tribunals in Lisbon, Porto, Coimbra and
Évora resulted in the burning of 1,175 persons, the burning of another 633 in
effigy, and the penancing of 29,590. But documentation of 15 out of 689 autos-
da-fé has disappeared, so these numbers may slightly understate the activity.
In the wake of the Liberal Revolution of 1820, the "General Extraordinary and
Constituent Courts of the Portuguese Nation" abolished the Portuguese
inquisition in 1821. Roman Inquisition. In 1542 Pope Paul III established the
Congregation of the Holy Office of the Inquisition as a permanent congregation
staffed with cardinals and other officials. It had the tasks of maintaining and
defending the integrity of the faith and of examining and proscribing errors
and false doctrines; it thus became the supervisory body of local Inquisitions.
Arguably the most famous case tried by the Roman Inquisition involved Galileo
Galilei in 1633. The penances and sentences for those who confessed or were
found guilty were pronounced together in a public ceremony at the end of all
the processes. This was the "sermo generalis" or "auto-da-fé". Penances (not
matters for the Civil Authorities) might consist of a pilgrimage, a public
scourging, a fine, or the wearing of a cross. The wearing of two tongues of red
or other brightly colored cloth, sewn onto an outer garment in an "X" pattern,
marked those who were under investigation. The penalties in serious cases were
confiscation of property to the inquisition or imprisonment. This lead to the
possibility of false charges over confiscation with those over a certain
income, particularly rich maranos Following the French invasion of 1798, the
new authorities sent 3,000 chests containing over 100,000 Inquisition documents
to France from Rome. After the restoration of the Pope as the ruler of the
Papal States after 1814, Roman Inquisition activity continued until the mid-
19th century, notably in the well-publicised Mortara Affair (1858–1870). In
1908 the name of the Congregation became "The Sacred Congregation of the Holy
Office", which in 1965 further changed to "Congregation for the Doctrine of the
Faith", as retained to . The Pope appoints a cardinal to preside over the
Congregation, which usually includes ten other cardinals, as well as a prelate
and two assistants, all chosen from the Dominican Order. The "Holy Office" also
has an international group of consultants, experienced scholars in theology and
canon law, who advise it on specific questions. Reputation(s). With the
sharpening of debate and of conflict between the Protestant Reformation and the
Catholic Counter-Reformation, Protestant societies came to see/use the
Inquisition as a terrifying "Other" trope, while staunch Catholics regarded the
Holy Office as a necessary bulwark against the spread of reprehensible
heresies. So it is necessary to realise evidence shows that those involved with
the inquisition sincerely thought that they were doing God's work in
extirpating what they considered heresy and opposition to the Roman Church. The
very title of the humiliating spectacles of the 'auto-da-fe' which means 'act
of faith' shows this. Their acts were a consequence of their beliefs rather
than any initial pathology: as for example in the Decretal of Pope Gregory IX,
BkV tit9. "Crucesignati ad exterminationem heriticorum gaudent" 'make the sign
of the cross to the destruction of heretics rejoicing'. Derivative works. Some
of the fictional works mentioned below reflect the popular reputation of the
Inquisition as much as its historicity.
