Isaac Isaac (; , ISO 259-3 "YiÃ§á¸¥aq", "he will laugh"; , ; , ; ; or "") as
described in the Hebrew Bible, was the only son Abraham had with his wife
Sarah, and was the father of Jacob and Esau. Isaac was one of the three
patriarchs of the Israelites. According to the Book of Genesis, Abraham was
100Â years old when Isaac was born, and Sarah was beyond childbearing years.
Isaac was the only biblical patriarch whose name was not changed, and the only
one who did not leave Canaan. Compared to those of Abraham and Jacob, Isaac's
story relates fewer incidents of his life. He died when he was 180Â years old,
making him the longest-lived patriarch. Etymology. The anglicized name Isaac is
a transliteration of the Hebrew term "" which literally means "He laughs/will
laugh." Ugaritic texts dating from the 13th century BCE refer to the benevolent
smile of the Canaanite deity El. Genesis, however, ascribes the laughter to
Isaac's parents, Abraham and Sarah, rather than El. According to the biblical
narrative, Abraham fell on his face and laughed when Elohim imparted the news
of their son's eventual birth. He laughed because Sarah was past the age of
childbearing; both she and Abraham were advanced in age. Later, when Sarah
overheard three messengers of the Lord renew the promise, she laughed inwardly
for the same reason. Sarah denied laughing when Elohim questioned Abraham about
it. Isaac in Genesis. "The account of Isaac from the Book of Genesis" Birth of
Isaac. It was prophesied to the patriarch Abraham that he would have a son and
that his name should be called Isaac. When Abraham became one hundred years
old, this son was born to him by his first wife Sarah. Though this was
Abraham's second son it was Sarahâ€™s first and only child. On the eighth day
from his birth, Isaac was circumcised, as was necessary for all males of
Abraham's household, in order to be in compliance with Yahweh's covenant. After
Isaac had been weaned, Sarah saw Ishmael mocking, and urged her husband to cast
out Hagar the bondservant and her son, so that Isaac would be Abraham's sole
heir. Abraham was hesitant, but at God's order he listened to his wife's
request. Binding of Isaac. At some point in Isaac's youth, his father Abraham
brought him to Mount Moriah. At God's command, Abraham was to build a
sacrificial altar and sacrifice his son Isaac upon it. After he had bound his
son to the altar and drawn his knife to kill him, at the very last moment an
angel of God prevented Abraham from proceeding. Rather, he was directed to
sacrifice a nearby ram instead. This event served as a test of Abraham's faith
in God, not as an actual human sacrifice. Family life. When Isaac was 40,
Abraham sent Eliezer, his steward, into Mesopotamia to find a wife for Isaac,
from his nephew Bethuel's family. Eliezer chose Rebekah for Isaac. After many
years of marriage to Isaac, Rebekah had still not given birth to a child and
was believed to be barren. Isaac prayed for her and she conceived. Rebekah gave
birth to twin boys, Esau and Jacob. Isaac was 60 years old when his two sons
were born. Isaac favored Esau, and Rebekah favored Jacob. Occupation. At the
age of 75, Isaac moved to "Beer-lahai-roi" after his father died. When the land
experienced famine, he removed to the Philistine land of Gerar where his father
once lived. This land was still under the control of King Abimelech as it was
in the days of Abraham. Like his father, Isaac also deceived Abimelech about
his wife and also got into the well business. He had gone back to all of the
wells that his father dug and saw that they were all stopped up with earth. The
Philistines did this after Abraham died. So, Isaac unearthed them and began to
dig for more wells all the way to Beersheba, where he made a pact with
Abimelech, just like in the day of his father. Birthright. Isaac grew old and
became blind. He called his son Esau and directed him to procure some venison
for him, in order to receive Isaac's blessing. While Esau was hunting, Jacob,
after listening to his mother's advice, deceived his blind father by
misrepresenting himself as Esau and thereby obtained his father's blessing,
such that Jacob became Isaac's primary heir and Esau was left in an inferior
position. According to Genesis 25:29-34, Esau had subsequently sold his
birthright to Jacob for "bread and "a" stew of lentils." Thereafter, Isaac sent
Jacob into Mesopotamia to take a wife of his own family. After 20 years working
for his uncle Laban, Jacob returned home. He reconciled with his twin brother
Esau, then he and Esau buried their father, Isaac, in Hebron at the age of 180.
Other references. New Testament. The New Testament states Isaac was "offered
up" by Abraham his father, and that Isaac blessed his sons. Paul contrasted
Isaac, symbolizing Christian liberty, with the rejected older son Ishmael,
symbolizing slavery; Hagar is associated with the Sinai covenant, while Sarah
is associated with the covenant of grace, into which her son Isaac enters.The
Epistle of James chapter 2, verses 21-24 states that the sacrifice of Isaac
shows that justification (in the Johannine sense) requires both faith and
works. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, Abraham's willingness to follow God's
command to sacrifice Isaac is used as an example of faith as is Isaac's action
in blessing Jacob and Esau with reference to the future promised by God to
Abraham In verse 19, the author views the release of Isaac from sacrifice as
analogous to the resurrection of Jesus, the idea of the sacrifice of Isaac
being a prefigure of the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross. Testament of Isaac.
The Testament of Isaac is a pseudonymous text which was most likely composed in
Greek in Egypt after 100Â CE. It is also dependent on the Testament of Abraham.
In this testament, God sends the archangel Michael to Isaac in order to inform
him of his impending death. Isaac accepts God's decree but Jacob resists. Isaac
in his bed-chamber tells Jacob of the inevitability of death. Isaac has a tour
of heaven and hell shortly before his death in which God's compassion to
repentant sinners is emphasized. In this testament, Isaac also talks with the
crowds on the subjects of priesthood, asceticism, and the moral life. World
views. Jewish views. In rabbinical tradition the age of Isaac at the time of
binding is taken to be 37 which contrasts with common portrayals of Isaac as a
child. The rabbis also thought that the reason for the death of Sarah was the
news of the intended sacrifice of Isaac. The sacrifice of Isaac is cited in
appeals for the mercy of God in later Jewish traditions. The post-biblical
Jewish interpretations often elaborate the role of Isaac beyond the biblical
description and largely focus on Abraham's intended sacrifice of Isaac, called
the "aqedah" ("binding"). According to a version of these interpretations,
Isaac died in the sacrifice and was revived. According to many accounts of
Aggadah, unlike the Bible, it is Satan who is testing Isaac and not God.
Isaac's willingness to follow God's command at the cost of his death has been a
model for many Jews who preferred martyrdom to violation of the Jewish law.
According to the Jewish tradition Isaac instituted the afternoon prayer. This
tradition is based on Genesis chapter 24, verse 63 ("Isaac went out to meditate
in the field at the eventide"). Isaac was the only patriarch who stayed in
Canaan during his whole life and though once he tried to leave, God told him
not to do so. Rabbinic tradition gave the explanation that Isaac was almost
sacrificed and anything dedicated as a sacrifice may not leave the Land of
Israel. Isaac was the oldest of the biblical patriarchs at the time of his
death, and the only patriarch whose name was not changed. Rabbinic literature
also linked Isaac's blindness in old age, as stated in the Bible, to the
sacrificial binding: Isaac's eyes went blind because the tears of angels
present at the time of his sacrifice fell on Isaac's eyes. Christian views. The
early Christian church continued and developed the New Testament theme of Isaac
as a type of Christ and the Church being both "the son of the promise" and the
"father of the faithful". Tertullian draws a parallel between Isaac's bearing
the wood for the sacrificial fire with Christ's carrying his cross. and there
was a general agreement that, while all the sacrifices of the Old Law were
anticipations of that on Calvary, the sacrifice of Isaac was so "in a pre-
eminent way". Islamic views. Isaac (â€Ž "") is revered by Muslims to be a
prophet and the patriarch of Islam. Islam considers Isaac as a prophet of
Islam, and describes him as the father of the Israelites and a righteous
servant of God. Isaac, along with Ishmael, is highly important for Muslims for
continuing to preach the message of monotheism after his father Abraham. Among
Isaac's children was the follow-up Israelite patriarch Jacob, who too is
venerated an Islamic prophet. Isaac is mentioned fifteen times by name in the
Qur'an, often with his father and his son, Jacob. The Qur'an states that
Abraham received "good tidings of Isaac, a prophet, of the righteous", and that
God blessed them both (XXXVII: 12). In a fuller description, when angels came
to Abraham to tell him of the future punishment to be imposed on Sodom and
Gomorrah, his wife, Sarah, "laughed, and We gave her good tidings of Isaac, and
after Isaac of (a grandson) Jacob" (XI: 71-74); and it is further explained
that this event will take place despite Abraham and Sarah's old age. Several
verses speak of Isaac as a "gift" to Abraham (VI: 84; XIX: 49-50), and XXIX:
26-27 adds that God made "prophethood and the Book to be among his offspring",
which has been interpreted to refer to Abraham's two prophetic sons, his
prophetic grandson Jacob, and his prophetic great-grandson Joseph. In the
Qur'an, it later narrates that Abraham also praised God for giving him Ishmael
and Isaac in his old age (XIV: 39-41). Elsewhere in the Qur'an, Isaac is
mentioned in lists: Joseph follows the religion of his forefathers Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob (XII: 38) and speaks of God's favor to them (XII: 6); Jacob's
sons all testify their faith and promise to worship the God that their
forefathers, "Abraham, Ishmael and Isaac", worshiped (II: 127); and the Qur'an
commands Muslims to believe in the revelations that were given to "Abraham,
Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob and the Patriarchs" (II: 136; III: 84). In the Qur'an's
narrative of Abraham's near-sacrifice of his son (XXXVII: 102), the name of the
son is not mentioned and debate has continued over the son's identity, though
many feel that the identity is the least important element in a story which is
given to show the courage that one develops through faith. Western scholarly
views. Historicity. Some scholars have described Isaac as "a legendary figure"
while others view him "as a figure representing tribal history, though as a
historical individual" or "as a seminomadic leader." According to Martin Noth,
a scholar of the Hebrew Bible, the narratives of Isaac date back to an older
cultural stage than that of the West-Jordanian Jacob. At that era, the
Israelite tribes were not yet sedentary. In the course of looking for grazing
areas, they had come in contact in southern Palestine with the inhabitants of
the settled countryside. The biblical historian, A. Jopsen, believes in the
connection between the Isaac traditions and the north, and in support of this
theory adduces Amos 7:9 ("the high places of Isaac"). Albrecht Alt and Martin
Noth hold that, "The figure of Isaac was enhanced when the theme of promise,
previously bound to the cults of the 'God the Fathers' was incorporated into
the Israelite creed during the southern-Palestinian stage of the growth of the
Pentateuch tradition." According to Martin Noth, at the Southern Palestinian
stage of the growth of the Pentateuch tradition, Isaac became established as
one of the biblical patriarchs, but his traditions were receded in the favor of
Abraham. Documentary hypothesis. The name Isaac occurs 32 times in the Hebrew
Bible. Variations of the formula "Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob" occur 23 times in
the Hebrew Bible. According to the documentary hypothesis, use of names of God
indicates authorship, and form critics variously assign passages like Genesis
chapter 26, verses 6-11 to the Yahwist source, and Genesis chapter 20 verses 1-
7, chapter 21, verse 1 to chapter 22, verse 14 and chapter 22, verse 19 to the
Elohist source; this source-critical approach has admitted problems, in that
the name "Yahweh" appears in Elohist material. According to the compilation
hypothesis, the formulaic use of the word "toledoth" (generations) indicates
that Genesis chapter 11, verse 27 to chapter 25, verse 19 is Isaac's record
through Abraham's death (with Ishmael's record appended), and Genesis chapter
25, verse 19 to chapter 37, verse 2 is Jacob's record through Isaac's death
(with Esau's records appended).
