Iṣṭa-devatā Within Hinduism, an Ishta-deva or Ishta devata (Sanskrit "",
literally "cherished divinity" from "iṣṭa" "desired, liked, cherished" and
"devatā" "godhead, divinity, tutelary deity" or "deva" "deity") is a term
denoting a worshipper's favourite deity. It is especially significant to both
the Smarta and Bhakti schools wherein practitioners choose to worship the form
of God which inspires them the most. Within Smartism, one of five chief deities
are selected. Even in denominations that focus on a singular concept of God,
such as Vaishnavism, the ishta deva concept exists. For example, in
Vaishnavism, special focus is given to a particular form of Vishnu or one of
his Avatars (i.e. Krishna or Rama), and similarly within Shaktism, focus is
given to a particular form of the Goddess such as Parvati or Lakshmi. The
Swaminarayan sect of Vaishnavism has a similar concept, but notably differ from
practically all Vaishnavite schools in holding that Vishnu and Shiva are
different aspects of the same God. Variations in practices. There is no
universally accepted perspective of God throughout the branches of Hinduism,
and thus the specific nature of belief and worship regarding a practitioner's
Ishta-deva depends largely on which tradition they are following. However, no
matter which tradition attracts the devotee's mind and heart, Hinduism teaches
"Ekam Sadvipraha Bahudha Vadanti", i.e., "While Truth is One, the Names are
Many." Adherents of the monistic schools (such as Advaita Vedanta) worship
multiple forms of God as emanations from the ultimately formless Brahman,
whereas followers of the bhakti traditions may worship a particular form or
Avatar of Vishnu, Shiva or Ganesha as the Supreme God (Ishvara) in the
dualistic sense. Even in Vaishnavite traditions, a particular form of Vishnu is
favored by the devotee. For example, Hanuman's Ishta-deva was Lord Ramachandra.
Other notable examples would be that of Tulsidas who was another devotee of
Rama and Mirabai a devotee of Krishna. Formal Smarta worship. The "worship of
the five forms" () system, which was popularized by the ninth-century
philosopher Adi Shankara among orthodox Brahmins of the Smārta tradition,
invokes the five deities Ganesha, Vishnu, Shiva, Devī, and Sūrya. This system
was instituted by primarily to unite the principal deities of the five major
sects () on an equal status. The monistic philosophy preached by made it
possible to choose one of these as a preferred principal deity and at the same
time worship the other four deities as different forms of the same all-
pervading Brahman. Forms of worship. Typically a practitioner worships their
Ishta-deva through the form of a murti. This worship may involve offering items
to their chosen divinity such as incense or flowers, reciting mantras, singing
their names and offering prayers. Remembering the deity and internally building
a relationship with (or through) them is considered essential to the practice.
Within the Advaita schools it is believed that the human mind needs a concrete
form to understand the divine that ultimately can never be defined. Just as one
can understand the abstract concept of a color only after one has seen a
concrete form, one can only realize the deity through a form of murti. In
contrast, the Dvaita associated schools believe the Supreme Being to possess a
divine form, and offer worship to their Ishta-deva as either a representation
or direct expansion of the Supreme Person. For example Vaishnava schools offer
worship exclusively to murtis of Vishnu, or his associated avatars such as
Krishna or Rama. Shaivites worship Shiva, either figuratively, or through his
Lingam murti. As Shaivism contains both monistic and dualistic traditions
either (or both) of the above approaches may be applicable. Human Ishta-devas?
Within a number of Hindu traditions, both presently and in the past, living
people have claimed (or are claimed by followers) to be Avatars of a divine or
Supreme being. In these cases followers have then in some instances worshipped
these individuals as Ishta-devas. Although these tend to be minority groups
within Hindism, it has been a growing tendency in modern times (the followers
of Sai Baba being one such example). This often attracts criticism from other
Hindu traditions who do not share the same belief. Thus, if followers respect
and revere the guru, it is only proper if they are using him as a conduit to
God, and respect him as a teacher. However, Swami Sivananda has said that a
guru can be likened to God if he himself has attained realization and is a link
between the individual and the Absolute. Such a guru, according to his
definition and interpretation, should have actually attained union with God,
inspire devotion in others, and have a presence that purifies all. Such a case
is limited in contemporary times.
