John Wesley John Wesley (; â€“ 2 March 1791) was an Anglican cleric and
Christian theologian. Wesley is largely credited, along with his brother
Charles Wesley, as founding the Methodist movement which began when he took to
open-air preaching in a similar manner to George Whitefield. In contrast to
George Whitefield's Calvinism, Wesley embraced the Arminian doctrines that were
dominant in the 18th-century Church of England. Methodism in both forms was a
highly successful evangelical movement in the United Kingdom, which encouraged
people to experience Jesus Christ personally. Wesley's teachings, known as
Wesleyanism, provided the seeds for the modern Methodist movement, the Holiness
movement, Pentecostalism, the Charismatic Movement, and Neo-charismatic
churches, which encompass numerous denominations across the world. In addition,
he refined Arminianism with a strong evangelical emphasis on the Reformed
doctrine of justification by faith. In brief. Wesley helped to organize and
form societies of Christians throughout England, Scotland, Wales, North America
and Ireland as small groups that developed intensive, personal accountability,
discipleship and religious instruction among members. His great contribution
was to appoint itinerant, unordained preachers who travelled widely to
evangelise and care for people in the societies. Under Wesley's direction,
Methodists became leaders in many social issues of the day, including the
prison reform and abolitionism movements. Wesley's contribution as a theologian
was to propose a system of opposing theological stances. His greatest
theological achievement was his promotion of what he termed "Christian
Perfection", or holiness of heart and life. Wesley held that, in this life,
Christians could come to a state in which the love of God, or perfect love,
reigned supreme in their hearts. His evangelical theology, especially his
understanding of Christian perfection, was firmly grounded in his sacramental
theology. He continually insisted on the general use of the means of grace
(prayer, scripture, meditation, Eucharist, etc.) as the means by which God
sanctifies and transforms the believer. Later in his career Wesley was a keen
abolitionist. Wesley was a friend of John Newton and William Wilberforce who
were also influential in the abolition of slavery in Britain. Throughout his
life Wesley remained within the Church of England and insisted that his
movement was well within the bounds of the Anglican tradition. His maverick use
of church policy put him at odds with many within the Church of England, though
toward the end of his life he was widely respected and referred to as "the best
loved man in England." Youth. John Wesley was born in 1703 in Epworth, 23 miles
(37Â km) northwest of Lincoln, the fifteenth child of Samuel Wesley and his
wife Susanna Wesley (nÃ©e Annesley). His father was a graduate of the
University of Oxford and a Church of England rector. In 1689 Samuel had married
Susanna, twenty-fifth child of Dr. Samuel Annesley, a Dissenter pastor.
Wesley's parents had both become members of the established Church of England
early in adulthood. Susanna bore Samuel Wesley nineteen children, but only ten
lived. In 1696 Wesley's father was appointed the rector of Epworth. At the age
of five, Wesley was rescued from the burning rectory. This escape made a deep
impression on his mind, and he regarded himself as providentially set apart, as
a "brand plucked from the burning" quoting Zechariah 3:2. As in many families
at the time, Wesley's parents gave their children their early education. Each
child, including the girls, was taught to read as soon as they could walk and
talk. In 1714, at age 11, Wesley was sent to the Charterhouse School in London
(under the mastership of John King from 1715), where he lived the studious,
methodical andâ€”for a whileâ€”religious life in which he had been trained at
home. Oxford and Savannah, Georgia. In June 1720, Wesley entered Christ Church
College, Oxford. He was ordained deacon in 1725 and elected fellow of Lincoln
College in the following year. He received his Master of Arts in 1727. He was
his father's curate for two years, and then returned to Oxford to fulfil his
functions as fellow. In the year of his ordination he read Thomas a Kempis and
Jeremy Taylor, and began to seek the religious truths which underlay the great
revival of the 18th century. The reading of Law's "Christian Perfection" and "A
Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life" gave him, he said, a sublimer view of
the law of God; and he resolved to keep it, inwardly and outwardly, as sacredly
as possible, believing that in obedience he would find salvation. He pursued a
rigidly methodical and abstemious life, studied the Scriptures, and performed
his religious duties diligently, depriving himself so that he would have alms
to give. He began to seek after holiness of heart and life. The year of his
return to Oxford (1729) marks the beginning of the rise of Methodism. The Holy
Club was formed by John's younger brother, Charles Wesley, and some fellow
students, including George Whitefield. The holy club met weekly and they
systematically set about living a holy life. They were branded as "Methodist"
by students at Oxford who derided the methodical way they ordered their lives.
On the 14 of October, 1735, Wesley and his brother Charles sailed on "The
Simmonds" from Gravesend, Kent for Savannah in the Province of Georgia in the
American colonies at the request of James Oglethorpe, who had founded the
colony in 1733 on behalf of the Trustees for the Establishment of the Colony of
Georgia in America. Oglethorpe wanted Wesley to be the minister of the newly
formed Savannah parish, a new town laid out in accordance with the famous
Oglethorpe Plan. It was on the voyage to the colonies that the Wesleys first
came into contact with Moravian settlers. Wesley was influenced by their deep
faith and spirituality rooted in pietism. At one point in the voyage a storm
came up and broke the mast off the ship. While the English panicked, the
Moravians calmly sang hymns and prayed. This experience led Wesley to believe
that the Moravians possessed an inner strength which he lacked. The deeply
personal religion that the Moravian pietists practised heavily influenced
Wesley's theology of Methodism. They reached Savannah on 8 February 1736, where
Wesley saw Oglethorpe's offer as an opportunity to spread Christianity to the
Native Americans in the colony. Wesley's mission, however, was unsuccessful,
and he and his brother Charles were constantly beset by troubles in the
colonies. On top of his struggles with teaching, Wesley found disaster in his
relations with Sophia Hopkey, a woman who had journeyed across the Atlantic on
the same ship as Wesley. Wesley and Hopkey became romantically involved, but
Wesley abruptly broke off the relationship on the advice of a Moravian minister
in whom he confided. Hopkey contended that Wesley had promised to marry her and
therefore had gone back on his word in breaking off the relationship. Wesley's
problems came to a head when he refused Hopkey communion. She and her new
husband, William Williamson, filed suit against Wesley. Wesley stood trial and
faced the accusations made by Hopkey. The proceedings ended in a mistrial, but
Wesley's reputation had already been tarnished too greatly, and he made it
known that he intended to return to England. Williamson again tried to raise
charges against Wesley to prevent him from leaving the colony, but he managed
to escape back to England. He was left exhausted by the whole experience. His
mission to Georgia contributed to a lifelong struggle with self-doubt. He went
back to England to earn money for a church. Conversion; open-air preaching.
Wesley returned to England depressed and beaten. It was at this point that he
turned to the Moravians. Both he and Charles received counsel from the young
Moravian missionary Peter Boehler, who was temporarily in England awaiting
permission to depart for Georgia himself. John's famous "Aldersgate experience"
of 24 May 1738, at a Moravian meeting in Aldersgate Street, London, in which he
heard a reading of Martin Luther's preface to the Epistle to the Romans, and
penned the now famous lines "I felt my heart strangely warmed", revolutionised
the character and method of his ministry. The previous week he had been highly
impressed by the sermon of Dr. John Heylyn, whom he was assisting in the
service at St Mary-le-Strand, an occasion followed immediately by news of the
death of his brother Samuel. A few weeks later, Wesley preached a sermon on the
doctrine of personal salvation by faith, which was followed by another, on
God's grace "free in all, and free for all." Though his understanding of both
justification and the assurance varied throughout his life, Wesley never
stopped preaching the importance of faith for salvation and the witness of
God's Spirit with the belief that one was, indeed, a child of God. Wesley
allied himself with the Moravian society in Fetter Lane. In 1738 he went to
Herrnhut, the Moravian headquarters in Germany, to study. On his return to
England, Wesley drew up rules for the "bands" into which the Fetter Lane
Society was divided and published a collection of hymns for them. He met
frequently with this and other religious societies in London but did not preach
often in 1738, because most of the parish churches were closed to him. Wesley's
Oxford friend, the evangelist George Whitefield, was also excluded from the
churches of Bristol upon his return from America. Going to the neighbouring
village of Kingswood, in February 1739, Whitefield preached in the open air to
a company of miners. Later he preached in Whitefield's Tabernacle. Wesley
hesitated to accept Whitefield's call to copy this bold step. Overcoming his
scruples, he preached the first time at Whitefield's invitation sermon in the
open air, near Bristol, in April 1739. Wesley was unhappy about the idea of
field preaching as he believed the Anglican Church had much to offer in its
practice. Earlier in his life he would have thought that such a method of
saving souls was "almost a sin." Wesley recognised the open-air services were
successful in reaching men and women who would not enter most churches. From
then on he took the opportunities to preach wherever an assembly could be
brought together, more than once using his father's tombstone at Epworth as a
pulpit. Wesley continued for fifty years â€“ entering churches when he was
invited, and taking his stand in the fields, in halls, cottages, and chapels,
when the churches would not receive him. Late in 1739 Wesley broke with the
Moravians in London. Wesley had helped them organise the Fetter Lane Society,
and those converted by his preaching and that of his brother and Whitefield had
become members of their bands. But he believed they fell into heresy by
supporting quietism, so he decided to form his own followers into a separate
society. "Thus," he wrote, "without any previous plan, began the Methodist
Society in England." He soon formed similar societies in Bristol and Kingswood,
and wherever Wesley and his friends made converts. Persecutions; lay preaching.
From 1739 onward, Wesley and the Methodists were persecuted by clergymen and
magistrates for various reasons. Though Wesley had been ordained an Anglican
presbyter, many other Methodist leaders had not received ordination. And for
his own part, Wesley flouted many regulations of the Church of England
concerning parish boundaries and who had authority to preach. This was seen as
a social threat that disregarded institutions. Ministers attacked them in
sermons and in print, and at times mobs attacked them. Wesley and his followers
continued to work among the neglected and needy. They were denounced as
promulgators of strange doctrines, fomenters of religious disturbances; as
blind fanatics, leading people astray, claiming miraculous gifts, attacking the
clergy of the Church of England, and trying to re-establish Catholicism. Wesley
felt that the church failed to call sinners to repentance, that many of the
clergymen were corrupt, and that people were perishing in their sins. He
believed he was commissioned by God to bring about revival in the church, and
no opposition, persecution, or obstacles could prevail against the divine
urgency and authority of this commission. The prejudices of his high-church
training, his strict notions of the methods and proprieties of public worship,
his views of the apostolic succession and the prerogatives of the priest, even
his most cherished convictions, were not allowed to stand in the way. Unwilling
that people should perish in their sins and unable to reach them from church
pulpits, following the example set by George Whitefield, Wesley began field
preaching. Seeing that he and the few clergymen cooperating with him could not
do the work that needed to be done, he was led, as early as 1739, to approve
local preachers. He evaluated and approved men who were not ordained by the
Anglican Church to preach and do pastoral work. This expansion of lay preachers
was one of the keys of the growth of Methodism. Chapels and organisations. As
his societies needed houses to worship in, Wesley began to provide chapels,
first in Bristol at the New Room, then in London and elsewhere. The Bristol
chapel (1739) was at first in the hands of trustees. A large debt was
contracted, and Wesley's friends urged him to keep it under his own control, so
the deed was cancelled, and he became sole trustee. Following this precedent,
all Methodist chapels were committed in trust to him until by a "deed of
declaration", all his interests in them were transferred to a body of preachers
called the "Legal Hundred." When disorder arose among some members of the
societies, Wesley adopted giving tickets to members, with their names written
by his own hand. These were renewed every three months. Those deemed unworthy
did not receive new tickets and dropped out of the society without disturbance.
The tickets were regarded as commendatory letters. When the debt on a chapel
became a burden, it was proposed that one in twelve members should collect
offerings regularly from the eleven allotted to him. Out of this grew the
Methodist class-meeting system in 1742. In order to keep the disorderly out of
the societies, Wesley established a probationary system. He undertook to visit
each society regularly in what became the quarterly visitation, or conference.
As the number of societies increased, Wesley could not keep personal contact,
so in 1743 he drew up a set of "General Rules" for the "United Societies."
These were the nucleus of the Methodist "Discipline", still the basis. General
Rules: "It is therefore expected of all who continue therein that they should
continue to evidence their desire of salvation," "First: By doing no harm, by
avoiding evil of every kind . . . ;" "Second: By . . . doing good of every
possible sort, and, as far as possible, to all . . . ;" "Third: By attending
upon all the ordinances of God" As the number of preachers and preaching-places
increased, doctrinal and administrative matters needed to be discussed; so John
and Charles Wesley, along with four other clergymen and four lay preachers, met
for consultation in London in 1744. This was the first Methodist conference;
subsequently, the conference (with Wesley as its president) became the ruling
body of the Methodist movement. Two years later, to help preachers work more
systematically and societies receive services more regularly, Wesley appointed
"helpers" to definitive circuits. Each circuit included at least thirty
appointments a month. Believing that the preacher's efficiency was promoted by
his being changed from one circuit to another every year or two, Wesley
established the "itinerancy", and insisted that his preachers submit to its
rules. When, in 1788, some objected to the frequent changes, Wesley wrote, "For
fifty years God has been pleased to bless the itinerant plan, the last year
most of all. It must not be altered til I am removed, and I hope it will remain
til our Lord comes to reign on earth." Ordination of ministers. As the
societies multiplied, they adopted the elements of an ecclesiastical system.
The divide between Wesley and the Church of England widened. The question of
division from the Church of England was urged by some of his preachers and
societies, but most strenuously opposed by his brother Charles. Wesley refused
to leave the Church of England, believing that Anglicanism was "with all her
blemishes, [...] nearer the Scriptural plans than any other in Europe". In 1745
Wesley wrote that he would make any concession which his conscience permitted,
in order to live in peace with the clergy. He could not give up the doctrine of
an inward and present salvation by faith itself. He would not stop preaching,
nor dissolve the societies, nor end preaching by lay members. As a clergyman
within the established church he had no plans to go further. "We dare not", he
said, "administer baptism or the Lord's Supper without a commission from a
bishop in the apostolic succession." When in 1746 Wesley read Lord King on the
primitive church, he became convinced that the concept of apostolic succession
in Anglicanism was a "fable". He wrote that he was "a scriptural "episkopos" as
much as many men in England." First visit to Ireland. John Wesley first arrived
in Dublin, Ireland on Sunday, 9th August, 1747. He was welcomed on that day by
Huguenot gentleman, William Lunnel, Cloth Merchant & Banker, and stayed as
guest in his house at number 15, Francis Street, Dublin. (Dublin's Liberties).
Charles Wesley was as also a guest in 1748 and George Whitfield in 1751. Mr.
Lunnels house no longer exists. Many years later Edward Stillingfleet's
"Irenicon" led him to decide that ordination could be valid when performed by a
presbyter rather than a bishop. Nevertheless, many believe that Wesley was
consecrated a bishop in 1763 by Erasmus of Arcadia, and that Wesley could not
openly announce his episcopal consecration without incurring the penalty of the
PrÃ¦munire Act. In 1784, he believed he could not longer wait for the Bishop of
London to ordain a minister for the American Methodists, who were without the
sacraments after the American War of Independence. The Church of England had
been disestablished in the United States, where it had been the state church in
most of the southern colonies. The Church of England had not yet appointed a
United States bishop to what would become the Protestant Episcopal Church in
America. Wesley ordained Thomas Coke by the laying on of hands although Coke
was already a priest in the Church of England. Wesley appointed him to be
superintendent of Methodists in the United States. He also ordained Richard
Whatcoat and Thomas Vasey as presbyters. Whatcoat and Vasey sailed to America
with Coke. Wesley intended that Coke and Asbury (whom Coke ordained) should
ordain others in the newly founded Methodist Episcopal Church in the United
States. His brother Charles grew alarmed and begged Wesley to stop before he
had "quite broken down the bridge" and not embitter his [Charles'] last moments
on earth, nor "leave an indelible blot on our memory." Wesley replied that he
had not separated from the church, nor did he intend to, but he must and would
save as many souls as he could while alive, "without being careful about what
may possibly be when I die." Although Wesley rejoiced that the Methodists in
America were free, he advised his English followers to remain in the
established church, and he himself died within it. Doctrines and theology. The
20th century Wesley scholar Albert Outler argued in his introduction to the
1964 collection "John Wesley" that Wesley developed his theology by using a
method that Outler termed the Wesleyan Quadrilateral. In this method, Wesley
believed that the living core of the Christian faith was revealed in Scripture;
and the Bible was the sole foundational source of theological or doctrinal
development. The centrality of Scripture was so important for Wesley that he
called himself "a man of one book"â€”meaning the Bibleâ€”although he was well-
read for his day. However, he believed that doctrine had to be in keeping with
Christian orthodox tradition. So, tradition was considered the second aspect of
the Quadrilateral. Wesley contended that a part of the theological method would
involve experiential faith. In other words, truth would be vivified in personal
experience of Christians (overall, not individually), if it were really truth.
And every doctrine must be able to be defended rationally. He did not divorce
faith from reason. Tradition, experience and reason, however, were subject
always to Scripture, Wesley argued, because only there is the Word of God
revealed "so far as it is necessary for our salvation." The doctrines which
Wesley emphasised in his sermons and writings are prevenient grace, present
personal salvation by faith, the witness of the Spirit, and sanctification.
Prevenient grace was the theological underpinning of his belief that all
persons were capable of being saved by faith in Christ. Unlike the Calvinists
of his day, Wesley did not believe in predestination, that is, that some
persons had been elected by God for salvation and others for damnation. He
understood that Christian orthodoxy insisted that salvation was only possible
by the sovereign grace of God. He expressed his understanding of humanity's
relationship to God as utter dependence upon God's grace. God was at work to
enable all people to be capable of coming to faith by empowering humans to have
actual existential freedom of response to God. Wesley defined the witness of
the Spirit as: "an inward impression on the soul of believers, whereby the
Spirit of God directly testifies to their spirit that they are the children of
God." He based this doctrine upon certain Biblical passages (see Romans 8:
15â€“16 as an example). This doctrine was closely related to his belief that
salvation had to be "personal." In his view, a person must ultimately believe
the Good News for himself or herself; no one could be in relation to God for
another. Sanctification he described in 1790 as the "grand "depositum" which
God has lodged with the people called `Methodists'." Wesley taught that
sanctification was obtainable after justification by faith, between
justification and death. He did not contend for "sinless perfection"; rather,
he contended that a Christian could be made "perfect in love". (Wesley studied
Eastern Orthodoxy and particularly the doctrine of Theosis). This love would
mean, first of all, that a believer's motives, rather than being self-centred,
would be guided by the deep desire to please God. One would be able to keep
from committing what Wesley called, "sin rightly so-called." By this he meant a
conscious or intentional breach of God's will or laws. A person could still be
able to sin, but intentional or wilful sin could be avoided. Secondly, to be
made perfect in love meant, for Wesley, that a Christian could live with a
primary guiding regard for others and their welfare. He based this on Christ's
quote that the second great command is "to love your neighbour as you love
yourself." In his view, this orientation would cause a person to avoid any
number of sins against his neighbour. This love, plus the love for God that
could be the central focus of a person's faith, would be what Wesley referred
to as "a fulfilment of the law of Christ." Wesley believed that this doctrine
should be constantly preached, especially among the people called Methodists.
In fact, he contended that the purpose of the Methodist movement was to "spread
scriptural holiness across England." Advocacy of Arminianism. Wesley entered
controversies as he tried to enlarge church practice. The most notable of his
controversies was that on Calvinism. His father was of the Arminian school in
the church. Wesley came to his own conclusions while in college and expressed
himself strongly against the doctrines of Calvinistic election and reprobation.
Whitefield inclined to Calvinism. In his first tour in America, he embraced the
views of the New England School of Calvinism. When in 1739 Wesley preached a
sermon on "Freedom of Grace", attacking the Calvinistic understanding of
predestination as blasphemous, as it represented "God as worse than the devil,"
Whitefield asked him not to repeat or publish the discourse, as he did not want
a dispute. Wesley published his sermon anyway. Whitefield was one of many who
responded. The two men separated their practice in 1741. Wesley wrote that
those who held to unlimited atonement did not desire separation, but "those who
held 'particular redemption' would not hear of any accommodation." Whitefield,
Harris, Cennick, and others, became the founders of Calvinistic Methodism.
Whitefield and Wesley, however, were soon back on friendly terms, and their
friendship remained unbroken although they travelled different paths. In 1770
the controversy broke out anew with violence and bitterness, as people's view
of God related to their views of men and their possibilities. Augustus Montague
Toplady, Rowland, Richard Hill, and others were engaged on the one side, and
Wesley and Fletcher on the other. Toplady was editor of "The Gospel Magazine",
which had articles covering the controversy. In 1778 Wesley began the
publication of "The Arminian Magazine", not, he said, to convince Calvinists,
but to preserve Methodists. He wanted to teach the truth that "God willeth all
men to be saved." A "lasting peace" could be secured in no other way. His
system of thought has become known as Wesleyan Arminianism, the foundations of
which were laid by Wesley and Fletcher. Personality and activities. John Wesley
travelled generally on horseback, preaching two or three times each day.
Stephen Tomkins writes that he "rode 250,000 miles, gave away 30,000 pounds,
... and preached more than 40,000 sermons[.]" He formed societies, opened
chapels, examined and commissioned preachers, administered aid charities,
prescribed for the sick, helped to pioneer the use of electric shock for the
treatment of illness, superintended schools and orphanages, and received at
least Â£20,000 for his publications but used little of it for himself. After
attending a performance in Bristol Cathedral in 1758, Wesley said: "I went to
the cathedral to hear Mr. Handel's "Messiah". I doubt if that congregation was
ever so serious at a sermon as they were during this performance. In many
places, especially several of the choruses, it exceeded my expectation." He is
described as below medium height, well proportioned, strong, with a bright eye,
a clear complexion, and a saintly, intellectual face. Wesley married very
unhappily at the age of forty-eight to a widow, Mary Vazeille, and had no
children. Vazeille left him fifteen years later, to which Wesley wryly reported
in his journal, "I did not forsake her, I did not dismiss her, I will not
recall her." In 1770, at the death of George Whitefield, Wesley wrote a
memorial sermon which praised Whitefield's admirable qualities and acknowledged
the two men's differences: "There are many doctrines of a less essential nature
... In these we may think and let think; we may 'agree to disagree.' But,
meantime, let us hold fast the essentials..." Wesley was the first to put the
phrase 'agree to disagree' in print. Wesley died on 2 March 1791, in his
eighty-seventh year. As he lay dying, his friends gathered around him, Wesley
grasped their hands and said repeatedly, "Farewell, farewell." At the end, he
said "The best of all is, God is with us", lifted his arms and raised his
feeble voice again, repeating the words, "The best of all is, God is with us."
Wesley was entombed at Wesley's Chapel, which he built in Greater London, in
England. The site also is now both a place of worship and a visitor attraction,
incorporating the Museum of Methodism and John Wesley's House. Because of his
charitable nature he died poor, leaving as the result of his life's work
135,000 members and 541 itinerant preachers under the name "Methodist". It has
been said that "when John Wesley was carried to his grave, he left behind him a
good library of books, a well-worn clergyman's gown," and the Methodist Church.
Literary work. Wesley was a logical thinker and expressed himself clearly,
concisely and forcefully in writing. His written sermons are characterised by
spiritual earnestness and simplicity. They are doctrinal but not dogmatic. His
"Notes on the New Testament" (1755) are enlightening. Both the "Sermons" (about
140) and the "Notes" are doctrinal standards. Wesley was a fluent, powerful and
effective preacher. He usually preached spontaneously and briefly, though
occasionally at great length. As an organiser, a religious leader and a
statesman, he was eminent. He knew how to lead and control men to achieve his
purposes. He used his power, not to provoke rebellion, but to inspire love. His
mission was to spread "Scriptural holiness"; his means and plans were such as
Providence indicated. The course thus mapped out for him he pursued with a
determination from which nothing could distract him. Wesley's prose "Works"
were first collected by himself (32 vols., Bristol, 1771â€“74, frequently
reprinted in editions varying greatly in the number of volumes). His chief
prose works are a standard publication in seven octavo volumes of the Methodist
Book Concern, New York. The "Poetical Works" of John and Charles, ed. G.
Osborn, appeared in 13 vols., London, 1868â€“72. In addition to his "Sermons"
and "Notes" are his "Journals" (originally published in 20 parts, London,
1740â€“89; new ed. by N. Curnock containing notes from unpublished diaries, 6
vols., vols. i.-ii., London and New York, 1909â€“11); "The Doctrine of Original
Sin" (Bristol, 1757; in reply to Dr. John Taylor of Norwich); "An Earnest
Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion" (originally published in three parts; 2d
ed., Bristol, 1743), an elaborate defence of Methodism, describing the evils of
the times in society and the church; a "Plain Account of Christian Perfection"
(1766). Wesley adapted the Book of Common Prayer for use by American
Methodists. In his Watch Night service, he made use of a pietist prayer now
generally known as the Wesley Covenant Prayer, perhaps his most famous
contribution to Christian liturgy. He also was a noted hymn-writer, translator
and compiler of a hymnal In spite of the proliferation of his literary output,
Wesley was challenged for plagiarism for borrowing heavily from an essay by
Samuel Johnson, publishing in March 1775. Initially denying the charge, Wesley
later recanted and apologised officially. Legacy. Today, Wesley's influence as
a teacher persists. He continues to be the primary theological interpreter for
Methodists the world over; the largest bodies being the United Methodist
Church, the Methodist Church of Great Britain and the African Methodist
Episcopal Church. Wesleyan teachings also serve as a basis for the holiness
movement, which includes denominations like the Wesleyan Church, the Free
Methodist Church, the Church of the Nazarene, the Christian and Missionary
Alliance, and several smaller groups, and from which Pentecostalism and parts
of the charismatic movement are offshoots. Wesley's call to personal and social
holiness continues to challenge Christians who attempt to discern what it means
to participate in the Kingdom of God. He is commemorated in the Calendar of
Saints of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America on 2 March with his
brother Charles. The Wesley brothers are also commemorated on 3 March in the
Calendar of Saints of the Episcopal Church and on 24 May in the Anglican
calendar. Wesley's legacy is preserved in Kingswood School, which he founded in
1748 in order to educate the children of the growing number of Methodist
preachers. Also, one of the four form houses at the St Marylebone Church of
England School, London, is named after John Wesley. He was recently listed at
50 on the BBC's list of the 100 Greatest Britons. In 1831, Wesleyan University
in Middletown, Connecticut was the first institution of higher education in the
United States to be named after Wesley. The now-secular institution was founded
as an all-male Methodist college. About twenty unrelated colleges and
universities in the U.S. were subsequently named after him. In film. In 1954
the Radio and Film Commission of the Methodist Church in cooperation with J.
Arthur Rank produced the film "John Wesley". The film was a live action re-
telling of the story of the life of John Wesley, with Leonard Sachs as Wesley.
In 2009 a more ambitious feature film, "Wesley", was released by Foundery
Pictures, starring Burgess Jenkins as John Wesley, with June Lockhart as
Susanna Wesley, R. Keith Harris as Charles Wesley, and Golden Globe winner
Kevin McCarthy as Bishop Ryder. The movie was directed by award-winning
filmmaker John Jackman.
