Karaite Judaism Karaite Judaism or Karaism ( or ; ") is a Jewish movement
characterized by the recognition of the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible) alone as its
supreme legal authority in Halakhah (Jewish law) and theology. It is distinct
from mainstream Rabbinic Judaism (also known as Rabbinism, and its
practitioners sometimes as Rabbanites), which considers the Oral Torah, the
legal decisions of the Sanhedrin as codified in the Talmud, and subsequent
works to be authoritative interpretations of the Torah. Karaism is thought to
have arisen in the 7th-9th centuries CE in Baghdad and possibly in Egypt.
Karaites maintain that all of the divine commandments handed down to Moses by
God were recorded in the written Torah, without additional Oral Law or
explanation. As a result, Karaite Jews do not accept as binding the written
collections of the oral tradition in the Mishnah or Talmud. When interpreting
the Tanakh, Karaites strive to adhere to the plain or most obvious meaning
(""peshat"") of the text; this is not necessarily the literal meaning, but
rather the meaning that would have been naturally understood by the ancient
Israelites when the books of the Tanakh were first written. Due to the
tremendous changes in Jewish culture and religious practice over the past 4,000
years, the "peshat" may not be as easily understood as it once was in Biblical
Israel, and must now be derived from textual clues such as language, and
context. In contrast, Rabbinic Judaism relies on the legal rulings of the
Sanhedrin, the highest court in ancient Israel, as they are codified in the
Mishnah, Talmud, and other sources, to indicate the authentic meaning of the
Torah. Karaite Judaism holds every interpretation of the Tanakh to the same
scrutiny regardless of its source, and teaches that it is the personal
responsibility of every individual Jew to study the Torah, and ultimately
decide for themselves its correct meaning. Therefore, Karaites may consider
arguments made in the Talmud and other works without exalting them above other
viewpoints. According to Rabbi Avraham ben David, in his "Sefer HaQabbalah",
the Karaite movement crystallized in Baghdad in the Gaonic period ("circa"
7th‚Äì9th centuries CE), under the Abbasid Caliphate in what is present-day
Iraq. This is the view universally accepted among Rabbinic Jews. However, the
claim has been made that Karaites were already living in Egypt in the first
half of the 7th century, the evidence consisting of a legal document that the
Karaite community in Egypt had in its possession until the end of the 19th
century, which document was said to be stamped by the palm of ÀÅAmr Ibn al-
ÀÅA·π£, the first Islamic governor of Egypt, in which he ordered the leaders of
the Rabbanite community not to interfere in the way of life of the Karaites nor
with the way they celebrate their holidays. This document was reported to be
dated 20¬ AH (641¬ CE). Many traditionalist Karaites maintain that the origin
of the Karaite Judaism was with the giving of the Torah to Moses, that Karaite
Judaism is the form of Judaism practiced by the original Israelites under
Moses. Under this view, the Karaites would not have been significantly distinct
from any other form of Judaism until the formation of the Pharisees far after
the return of the exiles in Babylon. This view proposes that Rabbinic Judaism
(which formed from the Pharisees) innovated the religion with the Oral Law,
while this view also proposes that Karaite Judaism is primarily unchanged from
Judaism's original form. Historians have argued over whether Karaism has a
direct connection to anti-Rabbinic sects and views, such as those of the
Sadducees, dating back to the end of the Second Temple period (70¬ CE), or
whether Karaism represents a novel emergence of similar views. Karaites have
always maintained that, while there are some similarities to the Sadducees,
there are also differences, and that the ancestors of the Karaites were another
group called "Benei ·π¢edeq" during the Second Temple Period. Karaites were at
one time a significant proportion of the Jewish population. In the early 21st
century, it was estimated that there were somewhat more than 50,000 Karaites
worldwide, over 40,000 of whom had made "aliyah" (emigrated to Israel) from
Arab countries such as Egypt and Iraq. History. Origins. Arguments among Jewish
sects regarding the validity of the Oral Law can be dated back to the 1st and
2nd centuries BCE. Accordingly, some scholars trace the origin of Karaism to
those who rejected the Talmudic tradition as an innovation. Abraham Geiger
posited a connection between the Karaites as a remnant of the Sadducees, the
1st-century Jewish sect that followed the Hebrew Bible literally and rejected
the Pharisees' notion of an Oral Torah even before it was written. Geiger's
view is based on comparison between Karaite and Sadducee "halakhah": for
example, there is a minority in Karaite Judaism who, like the Sadducees, do not
believe in a final resurrection or after-life. The British theologian John Gill
(1767) noted, Gill, John. "[http://books.google.com/
books?id=59wOAAAAIAAJ&pg=PA536&lpg=PA536#v=onepage&q=&f=false A Collection of
Sermons and Tracts ...: To which are Prefixed, Memoirs of the Life, Writing,
and Character of the Author, Volume 3". London: George Keith, 1778. However,
Bernard Revel, in his dissertation on "Karaite Halakhah," rejects many of
Geiger's proofs. Revel also points to the many correlations between Karaite
halakha and theology and the interpretations Philo of Alexandria, the 1st-
century philosopher and Jewish scholar, as well as the writings of a 10th-
century Karaite who brings down the writings of Philo, showing that the
Karaites made use of Philo's writings in the development of their movement.
Although later Medieval Karaite commentators did not view Philo in a favorable
light. These attitudes show a friction between later Karaite theology and
possible connections to Philo's philosophy which could serve as either a
rejection of their origins, rejecting theological positions no longer accepted,
or that Philo's philosophy was not entirely utilized in its founding (although
some influences remain possible). Others suggest that the major impetus for the
formation of Karaism was a reaction to the rise of Islam, which recognized
Judaism as a fellow monotheistic faith, but claimed that it detracted from this
monotheism by deferring to rabbinical authority. Some claim that Karaism is the
original form of Judaism and rabbinic Judaism branched off from it. 9th
century. Anan Ben David (c. 715¬ ‚Äì 795 or 811?) () is widely considered to be
a major founder of the Karaite movement. His followers were called Ananites
and, like modern Karaites, did not believe the Rabbinic Jewish oral law was
divinely inspired. According to 12th century Rabbanite account, in
approximately 760¬ CE, Shelomoh ben ·∏§isdai II the Jewish exilarch in Babylon
died, and two brothers among his nearest kin, ‚ÄòAnan ben David (whose name
according to the Rabbanite account was ‚ÄòAnan ben Shafa·π≠, but was called ben
David due to his Davidic lineage) and ·∏§ananyah, were next in order of
succession. Eventually ·∏§ananyah was elected by the rabbis of the Babylonian
Jewish colleges (the Ge‚Äôonim) and by the notables of the chief Jewish
congregations, and the choice was confirmed by the Caliph of Baghdad. A schism
may have occurred, with ‚ÄòAnan Ben David being proclaimed exilarch by his
followers. However, not all scholars agree that this event occurred. Leon Nemoy
notes that "Natronai, scarcely ninety years after ‚ÄòAnan's secession, tells us
nothing about his aristocratic (Davidic) descent or about the contest for the
office of exilarch which allegedly served as the immediate cause of his
apostasy." He later notes that Natronai ‚Äî a devout Rabbanite Jew ‚Äî lived
where ‚ÄòAnan's activities took place, and that the Karaite sage Ya‚Äòakov Al-
Qirqisani never mentioned ‚ÄòAnan's purported lineage or candidacy for
exilarch. Anan allowed himself to be proclaimed Exilarch by his followers, a
step construed into treason by the Mahommedan government. He was sentenced to
death, but his life was saved by his fellow prisoner, Abu Iianifa, the founder
of the great school of Moslem theology and jurisprudence. Ultimately he and his
followers were permitted to migrate to Palestine. They erected a synagogue in
Jerusalem which continued to be maintained until the time of the Crusades. From
this centre the sect diffused itself thinly over Syria, spread into Egypt, and
ultimately reached S.E. Europe. Ben David challenged the Rabbanite
establishment and some scholars conjecture that his followers may have absorbed
Jewish Babylonian sects such as the Isunians (followers of Abu ‚ÄòIsa al-
Isfahani), Yudghanites, and the remnants of the pre-Talmudic Sadducees and
Boethusians; later, non-Ananist sects such as the Ukbarites emerged. However,
the Isunians, Yudghanites, ‚ÄòUkabarites, and Mishawites all held views that
did not accord with either those of the ‚ÄòAnanites or the Karaites. Abu ‚ÄòIsa
al-Isfahani, who was an illiterate tailor, claimed to be a prophet, prohibited
divorce, claimed that all months should have thirty days, believed in Jesus and
Muhammad as prophets, and told his followers that they must study the New
Testament and the Qur‚Äôan; Yudghan was a follower of ‚ÄòIsa al-Isfahani and
claimed to be a prophet and the Messiah and claimed that the observance of
Shabbat and Holy Days was no longer obligatory; Isma‚Äò‚Äôil al-‚ÄòUkbari
believed he was the prophet Elijah, and hated ‚ÄòAnan; and Mishawayh al-
‚ÄòUkbari, who was a disciple of Isma‚Äò‚Äôil al-‚ÄòUkbari and the founder of
the Mishawites, taught his followers to use a purely solar calendar of 364 days
and 30 day months, insisted that all the Holy Days and fast days should always
occur on fixed days in the week, rather than on fixed days of the months, and
said that Shabbat should be kept from sunrise on Saturday to sunrise on Sunday.
Such beliefs were anathema to Ananites and Karaites and their practitioners
were excoriated by the Karaites, thus the conjecture that they were absorbed by
the Ananites and Karaites is absurd. Anan devoted himself to the development of
his movement's core tenets. His "Sefer HaMi·π£wot" ("The Book of the
Commandments") was published about 770. He adopted many principles and opinions
of other anti-rabbinic forms of Judaism that had previously existed. He took
much from the old Sadducees and Essenes, whose remnants still survived, and
whose writings‚Äîor at least writings ascribed to them‚Äîwere still in
circulation. Thus, for example, these older sects prohibited the burning of any
lights and the leaving of one's dwelling on the Sabbath (unlike the Sadducees,
‚ÄòAnan and the Qumran sectaries prohibited leaving one's town or camp, but not
one's house; ‚ÄòAnan said that one should not leave one's house for frivolous
things, but only to go to prayer or to study scripture); they also enjoined the
actual observation of the new moon for the appointment of festivals, and the
holding of the Pentecost festival always on a Sunday. The Golden Age. In the
"Golden Age of Karaism" (900‚Äì1100) a large number of Karaite works were
produced in all parts of the Muslim world. Karaite Jews were able to obtain
autonomy from Rabbanite Judaism in the Muslim world and establish their own
institutions. Karaites in the Muslim world also obtained high social positions
such as tax collectors, doctors, and clerks, and even received special
positions in the Egyptian courts. Karaite scholars were among the most
conspicuous practitioners in the philosophical school known as Jewish Kalam.
According to historian Salo Wittmayer Baron, at one time the number of Jews
affiliating with Karaism comprised as much as 40 percent of world Jewry, and
debates between Rabbanite and Karaite leaders were not uncommon. Most notable
among the opposition to Karaite thought and practice at this time are the
writings of Rabbi Saadia Gaon, which eventually led to a permanent split
between some Karaite and Rabbanite communities. Russian Karaimi (Qaraylar).
During the late 19th century, Russian Karaites began to be differentiated from
Rabbanite Jews, which freed them from various anti-Semitic laws that affected
Jews. The Tsarist governor of the Crimea told the Karaite leaders that, even
though the Tsarist government liked the idea that the Karaites did not accept
the Talmud (which the church taught was the reason the Jews did not accept
Jesus), they were still Jews and responsible for the death of Jesus and subject
to the new antisemitic laws. The leaders, hearing that, devised a ruse by which
they could be freed of the oppressive laws and told him that the Karaites were
already settled in the Crimea before the death of Jesus. The Tsarist government
then said that, if they could prove it, they would be free of the oppressive
laws. Avraham Firkovich was charged by the community leaders to gather anything
that could help "prove" that they were not in Jerusalem at the time of Jesus
and, thus, not responsible for his death. Through his work he helped establish
the idea amongst the Tsarist authorities that the Karaites were descendants of
the exiled northern kingdom of Israel and therefore were already in exile for
centuries before the death of Jesus and were thus not responsible for it.
Through referring to the tombstones in Crimea (and altering the dates) and the
gathering of thousands of Karaite, Rabbanite, and Samaritan manuscripts,
including one Rabbanite document from the southern Caucasus that claims that
the Jews there were descendants of the exiles from the northern Kingdom of
Israel. While that ruse did help relieve the Karaites of many of the oppressive
laws, they still were second class citizens. A new ruse was to convince the
Tsarist government that the Karaites actually were descendents of Turks/Mongols
of Khazar origin that were converted to the Karaite religion by descendants of
exiles from the northern kingdom of Israel and thus Karaites were otherwise not
Jewish descended. These actions convinced the Russian Czar that Karaite
ancestors could not have killed Jesus; that thus their descendants were free of
familial guilt (which was an underlying reason or pretext given at that time
for anti-Semitic laws). All this was for external consumption. Within the
community ·∏§akhamim still taught that the Karaites were and have always been a
part of the Jewish people, prayer was in Hebrew, the lineage of Kohanim,
Levites, and families of Davidic descent were meticulously preserved, books
printed in Hebrew adamantly stated that the Karaites were Jews. In 1897, the
Russian census counted 12,894 Karaims in the Russian Empire. By the early 20th
century, most European Karaites were no longer very knowledgeable about the
religion and Seraya Szapszal, a Karaite soldier of fortune who had been the
tutor to the son of the last Qajar Shah of Persia and a Russian spy, managed to
get himself elected Chief ·∏§akham of the Karaites in the Russian Empire (by
that time, due to Russian regulations, the position was more of a political one
than a spiritual one), and influenced by the Pan-Turkic movement in Turkey (see
Dan Shapira's work on the subject), made his position into that of an Emperor-
priest, changing the title ·∏§akham to ·∏§akhan (being a cross between the
Turkic titles Khaqan and Khan), forbade the use of Hebrew, introduced pagan
elements (such as the worship of sacred oaks trees in the cemetery), and
claimed that both Jesus and Muhammad were prophets (thus appeasing both the
Russian Orthodox Tsarist government and the Muslim Turkic peoples). After the
Bolshevik Revolution, atheism became official state policy and Karaite
religious schools and places of worship were the very first religious
institutions closed by the Soviet government. After that the only information
about the Karaites that was allowed to be taught were the Szapszalian
doctrines, and the official definition according to Russian law (carried over
from Tsarist law) was the erroneous one that the Karaimi were the Turkic
descendants of the Khazars and not Yevrei (the word in Russian for Rabbanite
Jews) or Zhidi (the pejorative word in Russian for Rabbanite Jews). Not all
European Karaites (Qaraylar Qaray [sing. in Qaray√ßa Jud√¶o-Tatar; Karaim
Karaimi [pl. in Russian) accepted the Szapszalian doctrines. Some Hakhamim and
a small part of the general Karaite population still preserved their Jewish
heritage, but most dared not oppose Szapszal openly due to his official
standing vis-√ -vis the Soviet government. Crimean and Lithuanian Karaites. The
"Karaim" (Turkish "Karaylar") are a distinctive Karaite community from the
Crimea. Their Turkic language is called Karaim. According to a Karaite
tradition several hundred Crimean Karaites were invited to Lithuania by Grand
Duke Vytautas to settle in Trakai ca. 1397. A small community remains there to
this day, which has preserved its language and distinctive customs, such as its
traditional dish called "kibinai", a sort of meat pastry, and its houses with
three windows, one for God, one for the family, and one for Grand Duke
Vytautas. This community has access to two Kenessas (Synagogues). Until recent
years the Qaraylar significantly outnumbered Karaite Jews in the region.
Qaraylar claim to be the only group which most authentically preserves the
ancient Karaite ideas of Abu Isa and Jacob Qirqisani. As a result of Qaraylar
divorcing their movement from Judaism at large in previous centuries, the
Mo‚Äòe·π£et Ha·∏§akhamim committee promotes the exclusion of the Qaraylar from
Universal Karaite Judaism and ‚ÄòAliyah. Spanish Karaites. During the 10th and
11th Centuries, Karaite Jews in Spain had become "a force to be reckoned with."
In Castile, high-ranking Rabbinical Jews such as Joseph Ferrizuel persuaded the
king to allow the persecution and expulsion of Karaite Jews by the Rabbanites.
With royal assistance, Rabbi Todros Halevi and Joseph ibn Alfakhar successfully
drove out a large portion of the surviving Karaite population. Beliefs.
Karaites believe they observe the original form of Judaism, as prescribed by
God in the Tanakh, and do not accept what they consider to be later additions
such as the Oral Law of Rabbinic Judaism. They place the ultimate
responsibility of interpreting the Tanakh on each individual. Karaism does not
reject Biblical interpretation but rather holds every interpretation up to the
same objective scrutiny regardless of its source. Karaites believe in an
eternal, one, and incorporeal God, Creator of Universe, who gave the Tanakh to
humankind, through Moses and the Prophets. Karaites trust in Divine providence
and the majority hope for the coming of the Messiah. Views on the Mishnah.
◊ï÷∞◊ê÷∑◊ó÷≤◊®÷µ◊ô-◊õ÷µ◊ü, ◊ß÷∏◊®÷∏◊ê ◊ê÷∂◊™-◊õ÷∏÷º◊ú-◊ì÷¥÷º◊ë÷∞◊®÷µ◊ô
◊î÷∑◊™÷º◊ï÷π◊®÷∏◊î, ◊î÷∑◊ë÷∞÷º◊®÷∏◊õ÷∏◊î,
◊ï÷∞◊î÷∑◊ß÷∞÷º◊ú÷∏◊ú÷∏◊î‚Äî◊õ÷∞÷º◊õ÷∏◊ú-◊î÷∑◊õ÷∏÷º◊™◊ï÷º◊ë, ◊ë÷∞÷º◊°÷µ◊§÷∂◊®
◊î÷∑◊™÷º◊ï÷π◊®÷∏◊î.◊ú÷π◊ê-◊î÷∏◊ô÷∏◊î ◊ì÷∏◊ë÷∏◊®, ◊û÷¥◊õ÷π÷º◊ú ◊ê÷≤◊©÷∂◊Å◊®-
◊¶÷¥◊ï÷∏÷º◊î ◊û÷π◊©÷∂◊Å◊î‚Äî◊ê÷≤◊©÷∂◊Å◊® ◊ú÷π◊ê-◊ß÷∏◊®÷∏◊ê
◊ô÷∞◊î◊ï÷π◊©÷ª◊Å◊¢÷∑, ◊ ÷∂◊í÷∂◊ì ◊õ÷∏÷º◊ú-◊ß÷∞◊î÷∑◊ú ◊ô÷¥◊©÷∞◊Ç◊®÷∏◊ê÷µ◊ú
◊ï÷∞◊î÷∑◊ ÷∏÷º◊©÷¥◊Å◊ô◊ù ◊ï÷∞◊î÷∑◊ò÷∑÷º◊£, ◊ï÷∞◊î÷∑◊í÷µ÷º◊®, ◊î÷∑◊î÷π◊ú÷µ◊ö÷∞
◊ë÷∞÷º◊ß÷¥◊®÷∞◊ë÷∏÷º◊ù. "After that, he read all the words of the Torah, the
Blessing and the Curse, according to all that is written in the Torah scroll.
There was not a word of all that Moses had commanded that Joshua failed to read
in the presence of the entire assembly of Israel, and the women, and the little
ones, and the strangers that walked among them." Since Joshua read from the
Torah every word Moses had written, this implies that Moses had not been given
an Oral Law, since Joshua could not have "read" an Oral Law from the written
Torah. Secondly, there could not have been additional commandments outside of
the written Torah, since all the commandments that existed could be read from
the Torah scroll. This book of the law is not to depart out of your mouth, but
you are to meditate on it day and night, so that you may observe to do
according to all that is "written" in it. Karaite interpretations of the Torah.
Theoretically, most historical Karaites would not object to the idea of a body
of interpretation of the Torah, along with extensions and development of
"halakhah". In fact, several hundred such books have been written by various
Karaite sages throughout the movement's history, although most are lost today.
The disagreement arises over the perceived exaltation of the Talmud and the
writings of the Rabbis above the Torah, so that, in the view of Karaites, many
traditions and customs are kept that are in contradiction with those expressed
in the Torah. This is seen especially by the fact that the Karaites also have
their own traditions that have been passed down from their ancestors and
religious authorities. This is known as "Sevel HaYerushah", which means "the
yoke of inheritance." It is kept primarily by traditional Karaites, and any
tradition therein is rejected if it contradicts the simple meaning of the
Torah. Additionally, these traditions are not forced upon any Karaite Jew or
convert to Karaite Judaism. Those newly entered Karaites who do not have such
an inheritance or tradition tend to rely heavily upon just the Torah and those
practices mentioned in it, and to adapt Biblical practices to their cultural
context. One reason for this lack of tradition is that many modern Karaites
spring from the Karaite revival due largely to the revival group known as the
World Karaite Movement founded by Nehemia Gordon and Meir Rekhavi in the early
1990s. However, this situation has improved, with the formation of Karaite
Jewish University (KJU) which was approved by the Mo‚Äòe·π£et Ha·∏§akhamim, the
Council of Sages, in Israel to teach an introductory course which could lead to
a student's conversion by a "bet din" authorized by the Mo‚Äòe·π£et
Ha·∏§akhamim. KJU teaches various forms of Karaite Judaism and includes "Sevel
HaYerushah" in its course materials. Thus, newly admitted converts to Karaite
Judaism now have the ability to accept or reject Sevel HaYerushah. Another
reason is that Karaite communities are so small, and generally isolated, that
their members commonly adopt the customs of their host country. In Israel too,
traditional Karaites tend to be culturally assimilated into mainstream society.
The calendar. Karaites use the observational form of the Hebrew calendar used
by Jews in the Land of Israel until at least the end of the Second Temple
period. Under that system, a new month (Rosh Chodesh) commences with the
observation of a new moon in Israel, and the start of new year in the first
biblical month is based upon the observation of the agricultural stage of
ripeness of the barley (called the "Aviv" stage). Before quick worldwide
communication was available, Karaites in the Diaspora used a calculated form of
the Hebrew calendar similar to, yet different from, that used by Jews in
general, for convenience. Shabbat. As with other Jews, during the Jewish
Sabbath (Shabbat), Karaites attend synagogues to worship and to offer prayers.
However, many Karaites refrain from sexual relations on that day. Their prayer
books are composed almost completely of Biblical passages. Karaites often
practice full prostration during prayers, while most other Jews no longer pray
in this fashion. Unlike Rabbinic Jews, Karaites do not practice the ritual of
lighting candles before Shabbat, because of their interpretation of the Torah
verse, "You shall not (Heb: "bi‚Äòer" the pi‚Äòel form of "ba‚Äòar") a fire in
any of your dwellings on the day of Shabbat." In Rabbinic Judaism, the "qal"
verb form "ba‚Äòar" is understood to mean to mean "burn," whereas the "pi`el"
form (present here) is understood to be, not intensive as usual but causative.
(The rule being that the pi'el of a stative verb will be causative, instead of
the usual hif'il.) Hence "bi`er" means "kindle," which is why Rabbinic Judaism
prohibits "starting" a fire on Shabbat. Many Karaite Jews hold that, throughout
the Tanakh, "ba‚Äòar" explicitly means "to burn," while the Hebrew word meaning
"to ignite" or "to kindle" is "hidliq". Accordingly, these Karaites take this
to indicate that fire should not be left burning in a Jewish home on Shabbat,
regardless of whether it was lit prior to, or during the Sabbath. However,
those Karaites who view the prohibition to be on kindling a fire often permit a
fire to continue burning into the Sabbath. In fact, some have suggested that
the Rabbinic ritual of lighting candles on Shabbat may have been instituted as
anti-Karaite halakhah. However, the second chapter of Tractate Shabbat in the
Mishnah as well as the corresponding chapter of the Talmud treat lighting
Sabbath candles as a basic religious obligation. Since the Mishnah dates to no
later than the second century at the very latest, and indeed much of its
material comes from centuries earlier, it is unlikely that candle-lighting
would have been instituted as a measure against Karaism. Historically Karaites
refrained from utilizing or deriving benefit from fire until the Sabbath ends
resulting in Karaites having unlit homes during the night of the Sabbath.
However, many modern Karaites now use a fluorescent light powered by a battery
that is turned on prior to Shabbat. Many observant Karaites either unplug their
refrigerators on Shabbat or turn off the circuit breakers. Electricity that is
produced on Shabbat is considered by Karaites a violation of Shabbat, no matter
who produces it, in contrast to the Rabbanites who have ruled that work done by
gentiles on Shabbat is permitted. Additionally, purchasing electricity that is
charged on an incremental basis during the Shabbat is viewed as a commercial
transaction that the Tanakh prohibits, no matter when the payment is made,
since the recording of the electric meter is considered as conducting a
commercial transaction. Laws of ritual purity. Karaites maintain that in the
absence of a Temple, ordinary washing with flowing waters (described in the
Torah as "living"‚Äîflowing‚Äîwater) should be substituted for the red heifer
ritual‚ÄîKaraites believe this was the practice before the Temple was built.
For this reason, many of the laws of avoiding "tum‚Äôat met" (ritual impurity
caused by contact with a dead body) are no longer considered relevant in
Rabbinic Judaism, but are still followed by Karaite Jews. Sephirath Ha‚ÄòOmer
and Shavu‚Äòoth. The Karaite method of counting the days from the offering of
the ‚ÄòOmer is different from the Rabbinic method. The Karaites understand the
term "morrow after the Sabbath" in Leviticus 23:15‚Äì16 to refer to the weekly
Sabbath, whearas Rabbinic Judaism interprets it as referring to the day of rest
on the first day of ·∏§agh HaMa·π£·π£ot. So while Rabbinic Judaism begins the
count on the 16th of Nisan and celebrates Shavu‚Äòot on the 6th of Sivan,
Karaite Jews count from the day after the weekly Sabbath (i.e., the Sunday that
occurs during the seven days of ·∏§agh HaMa·π£·π£ot) to the day after the
seventh weekly Sabbath and celebrate Shavu‚Äòot on the following Sunday, no
matter what that calendar date of that Sunday on which it happens to fall.
·π¢i·π£itiyot. A ·π¢i·π£it (alternatively spelled tzitzit, plural: ·π£i·π£iyot
or tzitziyot) is a braided fringe worn by observant Jews (both Karaite and
Rabbinic) on each of the four corners of their outer garment or their tallit.
The Torah commands Israel to make fringes on the corners of their outer garment
containing a thread of "tekhelet" () and repeats this command using the word
for "braids" instead of "fringes" at . The purpose of the fringes is stated in
the Book of Numbers as a visual reminder to the Israelites to remember the
commandments given by God. The thread of tekhelet is a blue thread which,
according to the traditions of Rabbinic Judaism, is to be dyed with a specific
kind of dye derived from a mollusc (possibly the murex trunculus sea snail).
Due to a number of factors, including the Rome outlawing the use of blue by
commoners, the actual source and practice of using a blue thread in ·π£i·π£it
was lost for many Rabbinic Jews, and thus their ·π£i·π£iyot are usually all
white. Against this, Karaites believe that the importance of tekhelet is that
the color of thread is blue, and not necessarily that it must be a specific
dye. Additionally, it is also believed by the Karaites that the Rabbinic
tradition that the dye comes from a mollusc is incorrect because such an un-
kosher source would be prohibited by the Torah (a belief that is also backed up
by the Oral Law of Rabbinic Jews), proposing instead that the source of the dye
was indigo or woad (the "Asp of Jerusalem" plant, taxonomic name "Isatis
tinctoria", used as a fast dye in Ancient Egypt). As a result, Karaites do
include a thread of blue in their ·π£i·π£it. Among Rabbinic Jews, there are
specific traditions on how the fringes are to be knotted or braided. Karaites
also have traditions on how the fringes are to be knotted or braided, but these
traditions were not strictly enforced as they are in Rabbinic Judaism. As a
result, besides the usual lack of blue in a Rabbinic ·π£i·π£it, how the
·π£i·π£iyot are tied distinguishes Karaite ·π£i·π£iyot from Rabbinic
·π£i·π£iyot. A rabbinic myth against the Karaites is that Karaite Jews wear
their ·π£i·π£iyot on the walls of their homes, implying that Karaites take the
statement "that you may look upon it" () literally, and thus use ·π£i·π£iyot as
a wall decoration. However, Karaites do not hang ·π£i·π£iyot on their walls,
but only wear them on their clothing in the same way as Rabbinic Jews do. It is
clear from the context of the commands regarding ·π£i·π£iyot that these are to
be worn on the four corners of one's personal clothing. Tefillin. Contrary to
the beliefs of some, Karaite Jews do not wear tefillin in any form. According
to Karaites, the Biblical passages cited for this practice are metaphorical,
and mean to "remember the Torah always and treasure it". This is because the
commandment in scripture is "And these words, which I command thee this day,
shall be upon thy heart"‚Ä¶ "And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thy hand,
and they shall be for forehead ornaments between thine eyes". (Deuteronomy 6:
5,9) Since words cannot be on one's heart, or bound on one's hand, the entire
passage is understood metaphorically. Furthermore, the same expressions ("And
thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thy hand" as well as "and they shall be as
frontal ornaments between thine eyes") are used in Exodus 13:9 in reference to
the commandments of ·∏§agh HaMa·π£·π£ot, in Exodus 13:16 in reference to the
ritual of redeeming the first born, in Deuteronomy 6:8 in reference to the
‚ÄòAseret HaDevarim (Ten Commandments), and in Deuteronomy 11:18 in reference
to all the words of the Torah, indicating that, from a Karaite perspective,
they must be metaphorical in nature (because one could never ritually "write"
and "bind" upon their hearts themselves). Mezuzot. Like Tefillin, Karaites
interpret the scripture that mandates inscribing the Law on doorposts and city
gates as a metaphorical admonition, specifically, to keep the Law at home and
away. This is because the previous commandment in the same passage is the
source for Tefillin for Rabbinic Judaism, and is understood metaphorically due
to the language. As a result, the entire passage is understood as a metaphor.
Therefore, they do not put up mezuzot, although many Karaite Jews do have a
small plaque with the ‚ÄòAseret HaDevarim on their doorposts. However, there
are exceptions. An account in the 19th century tells of a Karaite synagogue in
Constantinople that had a mezuzah. (What the gentile visitors mistook for the
Rabbanite Mezuzah was, in fact, the plaque mentioned in the previous
paragraph). In Israel, in an effort to make Rabbinic Jews comfortable, many
Karaite Jews do put up mezuzot, but not out of belief that it is commanded.
Mamzerim. In both Deuteronomy 23:3, and Zechariah 9:6, the Hebrew word "mamzer"
is referenced alongside the nations of Ammon and Moab (in Deut 23:3), and the
Philistine cities of Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron and Ashdod (in Zech 9:5‚Äì6). From
such, Karaites have come to consider the most logical understanding of the
Hebrew word "mamzer", which modern Rabbinical Jews understand to refer to
either children born from adultery or from incest (Talmud Bavli, Masekhet
Yevamot), to actually speak of a nation or people. Karaites think that such an
understanding fits perfectly into the context of both Deuteronomy 23 and
Zechariah 9, (and this was also the understanding of the Rabbanite commentator
Yehudah ben Shemu‚Äôel ibn Bil‚Äòam). Several Medieval Rabbanite Jewish sages
felt it necessary to debate this topic with Medieval Karaite Jewish sages. Four
species. Karaite Judaism maintains that what the Rabbanites call the four
species are actual three, i.e., fruit of splendorous tree: date palm fronds
(Kappoth Temarim), branches of thickly leaved trees (‚ÄòE·π£ ‚ÄòAvoth), and
willow branches (‚ÄòAravoth Na·∏•al), must be used to construct the roof of the
sukkah; they are not made into a lulav and shaken in four directions, as is the
Rabbinic practice. In the book of Nehemiah (8:15), Israel is instructed to
construct their sukkot out of the species and olive branches, and oil tree
branches, as well as date palm fronds, and branches other thickly leaved trees
are mentioned in the same passage as materials for the construction. Nehemiah
8:14‚Äì15 "And they found written in the Torah, how YHWH had commanded by
Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in Sukkot in the feast of the
seventh month; and that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities,
and in Jerusalem, saying: 'Go forth into the mountains, and fetch olive
branches, and oil tree branches, and myrtle branches, and palm branches, and
branches of thickly leaved trees, to make Sukkot, as it is written." Who is a
Jew? Karaite Judaism follows patrilineal descent, meaning a Jew is someone
whose father is Jewish, or who has undergone a formal conversion, since all
Jewish descent in the Tanakh is traced patrilineally. However, anyone who
formally accepts the God of Israel as his own God, the people of Israel as his
own people, and is circumcised (males only), is a fully established member of
the people of Israel (Jew); Karaites believe this should be done, after living
amongst Karaites and studying the Torah, in the form of a vow before the Beit
Din, see Exodus 12:43‚Äì49, Ruth 1:16, Esther 8:17, and Isaiah 56:6‚Äì7; also
Ezekiel the prophet states that strangers who have joined themselves to the
Children of Israel will be given land inheritance among the Tribes of Israel
amongst whom they live during the final redemption. Pronouncing the
Tetragrammaton. Explicitly saying the Tetragrammaton name of God is a
controversial issue among Karaite Jews today. Some traditional Karaites view
the pronunciation of God's name to be blasphemous, and adhere to the rabbinic
tradition of substituting "Adonai", when coming across YHWH while reading.
Other traditional Karaites and some of those coming from a rabbinic background,
as well some converts to Karaite Judaism, do not consider it the pronunciation
of the Tetragrammaton forbidden, even though there is no agreement among
scholars as to the correct pronunciation. Some view it as a mitzvah to do so.
Nehemia Gordon argued that, though modern scholars universally take the
pronunciation of YHWH to be YAH-weh, the proper pronunciation is ye-ho-VAH. He
claimed that the Masoretes belonged to the group of Karaites who did not
pronounce the name and for that reason omitted the middle vowel O (as seen in
the earliest complete manuscripts of the Tanakh), "to prevent their fellow
Karaites from simply reading the name as it was written". However, Gordon also
published an article translated in 1971 from the Hebrew by ·∏§akham Avraham
Ben-Ra·∏•ami√´l Qana√Ø, which was a study by ·∏§akham Mordekhai Alfandari,
according to which the proper and original pronunciation of the Name is
"Yihweh". Rather than attempt an uncertain pronunciation of the divine name,
some have argued that instead of saying "Adonai" the term YAH should be used
based upon its usage in Psalm 68:5. Writings. Karaism has produced a vast
library of commentaries and polemics, especially during its "Golden Age". These
writings prompted new and complete defenses of the Mishnah and the Talmud, the
culmination of these in the writings of Saadia Gaon and his criticisms of
Karaism. Though he opposed Karaism, the Rabbinic commentator Abraham Ibn Ezra
regularly quoted Karaite commentators, particularly Yefet ben ‚ÄòEli, to the
degree that a legend exists among some Karaites that Ibn Ezra was ben ‚ÄòEli's
student. The most well-known Karaite polemic is Yi·π£·∏•aq ben Avraham of
Troki's "·∏§izzuq Emunah" (◊ó◊ñ◊ï◊ß ◊ê◊û◊ï◊ ◊î) (Faith Strengthened), a
comprehensive Counter-Missionary polemic, which was later translated into Latin
by Wagenseil as part of a larger collection of Jewish anti-Christian polemics
entitled "Tela Ignea Satan√¶, sive Arcani et Horribiles Jud√¶orum Adversus
Christum, Deum, et Christianam Religionem Libri" (Altdorf, 1681) (translation:
'The Fiery Darts of Satan, or the Arcane and Horrible Books of the Jews Against
Christ, God, and the Christian Religion'). Many Counter-Missionary materials
produced today are based upon or cover the same themes as this book. Scholarly
studies of Karaite writings are still in their infancy, and owe greatly to the
Firkovich collections of Karaite manuscripts in the Russian National Library
that have become accessible after the collapse of the Soviet Union. The
cataloguing efforts of scholars at the Biblioth√®que Nationale in Paris and in
the United States and England is continuing to yield new insights into Karaite
literature and thought. Karaites, Aharon Ben Mosheh Ben Asher, and the
Masoretic text. Aharon ben Mosheh ben Asher was a Jewish scholar from Tiberias,
famous as the most authoritative of the Tiberias masoretes, and a member of a
family who had been involved in creating and maintaining the Masorah
(authoritative text of the Hebrew scripture), for at least five generations.
His vocalization of the Bible is still, for all intents and purposes, the text
all Jews continue to use, and he was the first systematic Hebrew grammarian.
His Sefer Diqduqei HaTe‚Äòamim (Grammar of the Punctuation/Vocalizations) was
an original collection of grammatical rules and masoretic information.
Grammatical principles were not at that time considered worthy of independent
study. The value of this work is that the grammatical rules presented by Ben-
Asher reveal the linguistic background of vocalization for the first time. He
had a tremendous influence on the world of Biblical grammar and scholarship.
From documents found in the Cairo Geniza, it appears that this most famous
masorete (and, possibly, his family for generations) were Karaite. It should
not be surprising to discover that many masoretes, so involved in the Masorah,
held Karaite beliefs. After all, it was the Karaites who placed such absolute
reliance on the Torah text. It would be natural that they would devote their
lives to studying every aspect of it. In 989¬ CE, an unknown scribe of a former
Prophets manuscript vouched for the care with which his copy was written by
claiming that he had vocalized and added the Masorah "from the books that were
vocalized by Aaron ben Moses Ben-Asher". Rambam, by accepting the views of Ben-
Asher (though only in regard to open and closed sections), helped establish and
spread his authority. Referring to a Bible manuscript then in Egypt, he wrote:
"All relied on it, since it was corrected by Ben-Asher and was worked on and
analyzed by him for many years, and was proofread many times in accordance with
the masorah, and I based myself on this manuscript in the Sefer Torah that I
wrote" It was known that Saadia Gaon had written against the Karaites. In his
critiques, Saadia mentioned a "Ben Asher". Until recently, it never occurred to
Jewish scholars to associate the "Ben Asher" of Saadia's diatribe with the
famous Aharon ben Asher of Tiberius. After all, Aharon ben Asher was respected
throughout the Jewish world. The Karaites were considered outsiders. It was
unthinkable that traditional "normative" Jews would accept the work of a
Karaite. Recent research indicates, however, that it is probable that the
subject of Saadia's attack was Aharon ben Mosheh ben Asher. In his work Sefer
Diqduqei HaTe‚Äòamim, Aharon ben Asher wrote, "The prophets... complete the
Torah, are as the Torah, and we decide Law from them as we do from the Torah."
This is a Karaite belief. It also has forced scholars to re-evaluate the
relationship between Rabbanite Jews and Karaite Jews in the 10th century
despite the writings of Saadia Gaon. See, Karaites today. Other estimates of
the size of the modern Karaite movement put the number at 4,000 Karaites in the
United States, about 100 families in Istanbul, and over 40,000 in Israel, the
largest communities being in Ramlah, Ashdod and Beer-Sheva. At the 2002 Polish
census, only 45 people declared themselves "Karaims", including 43 Polish
citizens. In the early 1950s, the Israeli Chief Rabbinate originally objected
to the immigration of Karaite Jews to Israel, and unsuccessfully tried to
obstruct it. In 2007, however, Rabbi David ·∏§ayim Chelouche, the chief rabbi
of Netayana was quoted in "The Jerusalem Post" as saying, "A Karaite is a Jew.
We accept them as Jews and every one of them who wishes to come back mainstream
Judaism we accept back. There was once a question about whether Karaites needed
to undergo a token circumcision in order to switch to rabbinic Judaism, but the
rabbinate agrees that today that is not necessary." Mosheh Marzouq, one of the
Egyptian Jews executed in 1954 for planting bombs at Cairo in the service of
Israeli Military Intelligence (the Lavon Affair) was a Karaite. Marzouk was
considered a hero in Israel; however, his Karaite identity was downplayed in
newspapers, which usually just described him as an Egyptian Jew. However, in
2001, the Israeli government, through the Israel Postal Authority, issued a
special memorial sheet honoring him and many other Karaite Jews that gave their
lives for Israel. In Israel, the Karaite Jewish leadership is directed by a
group called Universal Karaite Judaism. Most of the members of its Board of
·∏§akhamim are of Egyptian Jewish descent. There are about 4,000 Karaites
living in the United States. The Synagogue KJA Congregation B'nai Israel is
located in Daly City, California, which is a suburb of San Francisco. It is the
only Karaite synagogue in the United States with a permanent dedicated
facility. The leaders of the congregation are of Egyptian Karaite background.
One notable congregant, Mark Kheder, the Synagogue's treasurer, has described
his internment in an Egyptian prisoner of war camp during the 1967 Six Day war.
The congregation's acting Rav, Joe Pessah, was also among those who were
arrested by the Egyptian government. Another, much smaller congregation,
Karaite Jewish Congregation Ora·∏• ·π¢addiqim, exists in Albany, NY, but they
have yet to find a permanent dedicated facility and, in the mean time,continue
to use a room in the home of their ·∏§akham, ·∏§akham Avraham Ben-Ra·∏•ami√´l
Qana√Ø, as their temporary synagogue. On 1 August 2007, some members of the
first graduating class of Karaite Jewish University were converted,
representing the first new authorized members into Karaite Judaism in 500
years. At a ceremony in its Northern California synagogue, ten adults and four
minors joined the Jewish people by taking the same oath that Ruth took. The
group's course of study lasted over one year. This conversion comes 15 years
after the Karaite Council of Sages reversed its centuries-old ban on accepting
converts. On 17 February 2009, the second graduating class of converts took the
oath this included 11 adults and 8 minors. There are about 80 Karaites living
in Istanbul, Turkey, where the only Karaite synagogue in Turkey, the "Kahal
haKadosh Bene Mikra", is still functional in the Hask√∂y neighborhood in the
European part of the city. In Poland, Karaites are a recognized minority,
represented by the Association of Polish Karaites () and the Karaite Religious
Association in the Polish Republic (). Karaites live primarily in and around
Warsaw, Wroc≈Çaw and Tricity, they are linguistically assimilated. Karaism in
Rabbinic Jewish opinion. Rabbinic Judaism's scholars, such as Maimonides, write
that people who deny the divine authority of the Oral Torah are to be
considered among the heretics. However, at the same time Maimonides holds
(Hilkhot Mamrim 3:3) that most of the Karaites and others who claim to deny the
"oral teachings" are not to be held accountable for their errors in the law
because they are led into error by their parents and are similar to a tinoq
shenishbah (a captive baby), or to one who was forced. Rabbinic scholars have
traditionally held that, because the Karaites do not observe the rabbinic law
on divorce, there is a strong presumption that they are mamzerim (adulterine
bastards), so that marriage with them is forbidden even if they return to
Rabbinic Judaism. Some recent Ashekenazi ·∏§aredi scholars have held that
Karaites should be regarded as Gentiles in all respects, though this is not
universally accepted. They hasten to add that this opinion is not intended to
insult the Karaites, but only to give individual Karaites the option of
integrating into mainstream Judaism by way of conversion. As opposed this, in
1971 Rav ‚ÄòOvadia Yosef, who was then the Rishon Le·π¢iyyon/Chief Rabbi of the
Sefaradim and ‚ÄòEdot HaMizra·∏• of Israel proclaimed that Karaites are Jews
"LeKhol Davar" (literally, for all purposes) and that it is permissible for
Rabbanite Jews to marry with them. In response to the position taken by the
Karaites in regards to the authority of the Talmud, Orthodox Judaism counters
first that the majority of the Oral Law codified in the Mishnah and Talmud are
the legal rulings of the last Sanhedrin, a body of 71 elders that made up the
highest court of jurisprudence in ancient Israel, and that not all of the Oral
Law are literally "Laws given to Moses on Mount Sinai". The decisions made by
this High Court must be upheld, per se the Law of Moses (Deuteronomy 17), this
gives their legal rulings divine authority. Secondly Rabbinic Judaism points to
the innumerable examples of biblical commandments that are either too ambiguous
or documented in such a concise fashion that proper adherence could not be
enforced on a national scale without the further legislation provided by the
Talmud. Orthodox Judaism also notes that the Torah was never meant to be
observed as a personal covenant between the individual Jew and God, but a
national covenant wherein the Torah functions as the constitution of Israel as
a whole. Orthodox Jews point out that the Torah could never be enforced as a
national law, as it was during the time of Joshua, King David, and Ezra, if
every individual Jew had their own opinion on how to observe its commandments.
In order for the Torah to properly govern the Jewish people, and for its laws
be legally enforced with the punishments and penalties prescribed in the Torah,
those laws must be legislated and clearly defined by a ruling Sanhedrin. For
Karaites, in sum, the rabbinic interpretations above, as codified in oral law,
are only one form of interpretation. They are not divinely ordained, and they
are neither binding halakhah nor practical religious law. Halakhic status as
Jews. A person whose mother was a Karaite Jew is regarded as halakhically
Jewish by the Orthodox Rabbinate. Likewise, someone who is patrilineally Jewish
is regarded as a Jew by the "Mo‚Äòe·π£et Ha·∏§akhamim", or the Karaite Counsel
of Sages. Although it is widely accepted that Karaite Jews are halakhically
Jewish, there is still a question as to whether or not marriage between the
Karaite and Rabbanite communities is permitted. Two Sephardi chief rabbis,
Eliahu Bakshi-Doron and Ovadia Yosef encouraged such marriages, hoping it would
help Karaites to assimilate into Orthodox Judaism. Maimonides decreed that Jews
raised in a Karaite household are considered to be "tinoq shenishbah", like
babies taken captive by non-Jews; they cannot be punished for their wayward
behavior, because it is the result of their parents' influence. Rabbi David
·∏§ayim Chelouche, the chief rabbi of Netanya is quoted in the Jerusalem Post
as saying: "A Karaite is a Jew. We accept them as Jews and every one of them
who wishes to come back mainstream Judaism we accept back. There was once a
question about whether Karaites needed to undergo a token circumcision in order
to switch to rabbinic Judaism, but the rabbinate agrees that today that is not
necessary."
