Kingdom of Israel (Samaria) The Kingdom of Israel () was, according to the
Bible, one of the successor states to the older United Monarchy (also often
called the 'Kingdom of Israel'). It was thought to exist roughly from the 930s
BCE until about the 720s BCE, when the kingdom was conquered by the Assyrian
Empire. The major cities of the kingdom were Shechem, Tirzah, and Shomron
(Samaria). Historians often refer to ancient Israel as the Northern Kingdom to
differentiate it from the Southern Kingdom of Judah. Name. In the Hebrew Bible,
the Kingdom of Israel has been referred to as "House of Joseph". It has also
been referred to as "Israel in Samaria". Territory. The territory of the
Kingdom of Israel comprised the territories of the tribes of Zebulun, Issachar,
Asher, Naphtali, Dan, Manasseh, Ephraim, Reuben and Gad. Its capital was
Samaria. History. United Monarchy. The united Kingdom of Israel is said to have
existed from about 1030 to about 930 BCE. It was a union of all the twelve
Israelite tribes living in the area that presently approximates modern Israel
and the Palestinian territories. Division. After the death of Solomon in about
931 BCE, all the Israelite tribes except for Judah and Benjamin (called the ten
northern tribes) refused to accept Rehoboam, the son and successor of Solomon,
as their king. The rebellion against Rehoboam arose after he refused to lighten
the burden of taxation and services that his father had imposed on his
subjects. Jeroboam, who was not of the Davidic line, was sent for from Egypt by
the malcontents. The Tribe of Ephraim and all Israel raised the old cry, "Every
man to his tents, O Israel". Rehoboam fled to Jerusalem, and in 930 BCE (some
date it in 920 BCE), Jeroboam was proclaimed king over all Israel at Shechem.
After the revolt at Shechem at first only the tribe of Judah remained loyal to
the house of David. But very soon after the tribe of Benjamin joined Judah. The
northern kingdom continued to be called the Kingdom of Israel or Israel, while
the southern kingdom was called the kingdom of Judah. 2 Chronicles 15:9 also
says that members of the tribes of Ephraim, Manasseh and Simeon fled to Judah
during the reign of Asa of Judah. Both Eusebius and Josephus place the division
in 997 BCE - lunar dates of Venus can be mistaken as 64 years earlier.
(Crossing of sun over Mars as Tamuz would be 10 July 997 BCE.) Shechem was the
first capital of the Kingdom of Israel. Afterwards it was Tirzah. King Omri
built his capital in Samaria (1 Kings 16:24), which continued as such until the
destruction of the Kingdom by the Assyrians (). During the three-year siege of
Samaria by the Assyrians, Shalmaneser V died and was succeeded by Sargon II of
Assyria, who himself records the capture of that city thus: "Samaria I looked
at, I captured; 27,280 men who dwelt in it I carried away" into Assyria. Thus,
around 720 BCE, after two centuries, the kingdom of the ten tribes came to an
end. Today, among archaeologists, Samaria is one of the most universally
accepted archaeological sites from the biblical period At around 850 BCE, the
Mesha Stele, written in Old Hebrew alphabet, records a victory of King Mesha of
Moab against king Omri of Israel and his son Ahab. Relations between the
kingdoms. For the first sixty years, the kings of Judah tried to re-establish
their authority over the northern kingdom, and there was perpetual war between
them. For the following eighty years, there was no open war between them, and,
for the most part, they were in friendly alliance, co-operating against their
common enemies, especially against Damascus. The conflict between Israel and
Judah was resolved when Jehoshaphat, King of Judah, allied himself with the
house of Ahab through marriage. Later, Jehosophat's son and successor, Jehoram
of Judah, married Ahab's daughter Athaliah, cementing the alliance. However,
the sons of Ahab were slaughtered by Jehu following his coup d'Ã©tat around 840
BCE. Destruction of the kingdom. In c. 732 BCE, Pekah of Israel allied with
Rezin, king of Aram, threatened Jerusalem, and Ahaz, king of Judah, appealed to
Tiglath-Pileser III, the king of Assyria, for help. After Ahaz paid tribute to
Tiglath-Pileser Tiglath-Pileser sacked Damascus and Israel, annexing Aram and
territory of the tribes of Reuben, Gad and Manasseh in Gilead including the
desert outposts of Jetur, Naphish and Nodab. People from these tribes including
the Reubenite leader, were taken captive and resettled in the region of the
Khabur River system. Tiglath-Pilesar also captured the territory of Naphtali
and the city of Janoah in Ephraim and an Assyrian governor was placed over the
region of Naphtali. According to and , the population of Aram and the annexed
part of Israel was deported to Assyria. Israel continued to exist within the
reduced territory as an independent kingdom until around 720 BCE, when it was
again invaded by Assyria and the rest of the population deported. The Bible
relates that the population of Israel was exiled, becoming known as The Ten
Lost Tribes, leaving only the Tribe of Judah, the Tribe of Simeon (that was
"absorbed" into Judah), the Tribe of Benjamin and the people of the Tribe of
Levi who lived among them of the original Israelites nation in the southern
Kingdom of Judah. However, other writers estimate that only a fifth of the
population (about 40,000) were actually resettled out of the area during the
two deportation periods under Tiglath-Pileser III and Sargon II. Many also fled
south to Jerusalem, which appears to have expanded in size fivefold during this
period, requiring a new wall to be built, and a new source of water (Siloam) to
be provided by King Hezekiah. The remainder of the northern kingdom was
conquered by Sargon II, who captured the capital city Samaria in the territory
of Ephraim. He took 27,290 people captive from the city of Samaria resettling
some with the Israelites in the Khabur region and the rest in the land of the
Medes thus establishing Jewish communities in Ecbatana and Rages. The Book of
Tobit additionally records that Sargon had taken other captives from the
northern kingdom to the Assyrian capital of Nineveh, in particular Tobit from
the town of Thisbe in Naphtali. In medieval Rabbinic fable the concept of the
ten tribes who were taken away from the House of David (who continued the rule
of the southern kingdom of Judah) becomes confounded with accounts of the
Assyrian deportations leading to the myth of the "Ten Lost Tribes". The
recorded history differs from this fable: No record exists of the Assyrians
having exiled people from Dan, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun or western Manasseh.
Descriptions of the deportation of people from Reuben, Gad, Manasseh in Gilead,
Ephraim and Naphtali indicate that only a portion of these tribes were deported
and the places to which they were deported are known locations given in the
accounts. The deported communities are mentioned as still existing at the time
of the composition of the books of Kings and Chronicles and did not disappear
by assimilation. 2 Chronicles 30:1-11 explicitly mentions northern Israelites
who had been spared by the Assyrians in particular people of Ephraim, Manasseh,
Asher, Issachar and Zebulun and how members of the latter three returned to
worship at the Temple in Jerusalem during the reign of Hezekiah. Kingdom of
Judah. The Kingdom of Judah continued to exist as an independent state until
586 BCE, when it was conquered by the Neo-Babylonian Empire. Culture. Religion.
The religious climate of the Kingdom of Israel appears to have followed two
major trends. The first, that of YHWH, and the second the cult of Baal as
detailed in the Hebrew Bible, and in the so-called "Baal cycle" discovered at
Ugarit. It is recorded in the Hebrew Bible that Jeroboam built two places of
worship, one at Bethel and one at far northern Dan, to be an alternative to the
Temple in Jerusalem. He did not want the people of his kingdom to have
religious ties to Jerusalem, the capital city of the rival Kingdom of Judah. He
erected golden bulls at the entrance to the Temples to represent the national
god. These acts became known as the way of Jeroboam or the errors of Jeroboam.
() Ahab allowed the cult worship of Baal to become an acceptable religion of
the kingdom. His wife Jezebel was a devotee to Baal worship. () Royal Houses of
Israel. this period, most historians follow either of the older chronologies
established by William F. Albright or Edwin R. Thiele, or the newer
chronologies of Gershon Galil and Kenneth Kitchen, all of which are shown
below. All dates are BC/BCE.
