Korban The term offering as found in the Hebrew Bible in relation to the
worship of Ancient Israel is mainly represented by the Hebrew noun "korban"
(×§Ö¸×¨Ö°×‘Ö¸Ö¼×Ÿ) whether for an animal or other offering. Other terms include
animal sacrifice ("zevah" ×–Ö¶×‘Ö·×—), traditionally peace offering and "olah",
traditionally "burnt offering." In Hebrew the noun "korban" is used for a
variety of sacrificial offerings described and commanded in the Hebrew Bible.
Such sacrifices were offered in a variety of settings by the ancient
Israelites, and later by the Jewish priesthood, the priests, at the Temple in
Jerusalem. A "korban" was often an animal sacrifice, such as a sheep or a bull
that underwent Jewish ritual slaughter, and was often cooked and eaten by the
offerer, with parts given to the priests and parts burned on the Temple
mizbe'ah. Sacrifices could also consist of doves, grain or meal, wine, or
incense. The Hebrew Bible narrates that God commanded the Israelites to offer
offerings and sacrifices on various altars, and describes the offering of
sacrifices in the Tabernacle, in the Temple in Jerusalem until the First Temple
was destroyed, and resumed with the Second Temple until it was destroyed in 70
CE. The practice of offerings and animal sacrifices in Judaism mostly ended
with the destruction of the Temple, although it was briefly reinstated during
the Jewish-Roman Wars of the 2nd century AD and was continued in certain
communities thereafter. Rabbinic Judaism continued to maintain that the Torah
allowed observance of Jewish law without animal sacrifice based upon oral
tradition and strong support from scripture, such as Psalms 51:16-19 and Hosea
6:6. However, the practice and nature of sacrifices continue to have relevance
to Jewish theology and law, particularly in Orthodox Judaism. Etymology. Noun
"korban" and verb "karab". The Hebrew noun "korban", in Classical Hebrew, is
pronounced "qarban" in Sephardic Hebrew. The plural is "korbanot" or
"qorbanoth" (×§Ö¸×¨Ö°×‘Ö³Ö¼× ×•Ö¹×ª). The Hebrew feminine noun "qorban" (plural
"qorbanot") first occurs in the Hebrew Bible in Leviticus 1:2 and in all occurs
80 times in the Massoretic Text; of which 40 in Leviticus, 38 in Numbers and 2
in Ezekiel. The related form "qurban" appears only in Nehemiah 10:35 and 13:31
"wood offering." Traditionally the etymology is from the verb stem "karab" and
indicates the purpose to bring man back to God. The same stem is found in the
Akkadian language noun "aqribtu" "act of offering." The Hebrew word "qorban"
passed as a loan word into Samaritan as "qaraban", into Syriac as "qurbana",
and is documented in The Septuagint generally translates the term in Greek as
"doron", "gift", "thusia" "sacrifice", or "prosfora" "offering up", while the
New Testament preserves "korban" once as a transliterated loan-word, otherwise
using "doron", "thusia", "prosfora" and other terms drawn from the Septuagint.
The word Korban is pronounced identically in the Arabic language (Arabic
"kurban" Ù‚Ø±Ø¨Ø§Ù†) and Mizrahi Hebrew, and also means a sacrifice offered to
God. The word is used in Islam besides its use in Judaism. Hebrew Bible.
Offerings were practiced from earliest times, particularly for over one
thousand years in the tabernacle and during the eras of the Temple of Solomon
and the Second Temple in Jerusalem when the Israelites lived in the Land of
Israel until the destruction of Judea, Jerusalem, and the Temple by the Roman
Empire in 70 CE. Offerings are mentioned in Genesis, but codified in the later
four books of the Torah outlining their origins and history. Every regular
weekday, Sabbath, and many Jewish holidays had their own unique offerings. The
priests performed the offerings first in the ancient Tabernacle and then in the
Temple of Solomon (the first Temple in Jerusalem) and later in the Second
Temple in Jerusalem. The Hebrew Bible describes the priests as descendants of
Aaron who meet certain marriage and ritual purity requirements. The high priest
in particular played a crucial role in this regard on the Day of Atonement, a
day when multiple offerings were offered. In the Prophets. Many books of the
prophets in the Hebrew Bible, such as the Book of Isaiah and Book of Jeremiah,
spoke out against those Israelites who brought forth sacrifices but did not act
in accord with the precepts of the Law. The Prophets disparaged sacrifices that
were offered without a regeneration of the heart, i.e., a determined turning
from sin and returning to God by striving after righteousness (Hosea 14:1-2,
Joel 2:13, Micah 6:6-8). At the same time, prophets stressed the importance of
offerings combined with justice and good even as they taught that offerings
were unacceptable unless combined with heartfelt repentance and good deeds.
Malachi, the last prophet in the Hebrew Bible, emphasized that the goal of
repentance is not to end sacrifices, but to make the offerings fit for
acceptance once again (Malachi 3:3-4). Similarly, the Book of Isaiah despite
disparagement of sacrifices without justice, portrays sacrifice as having a
role complementary with prayer in a universalistic eschatology (Isaiah 56:1; 6-
7). Rabbinical interpretation. 100 among the 613 commandments. In classical
rabbinic literature Leviticus is sometimes known as "Torat kohanim" "Law of the
Priests," the "Law of the Priests". According to Maimonides, about one hundred
of the permanent 613 commandments based on the Torah, by rabbinical
enumeration, directly concern sacrifices, (excluding those commandments that
concern the actual Temple and the priests themselves of which there are about
another fifty) Instructions in Mishnah and Talmud. The Mishnah and Talmud
devote a very large section, known as a "seder", to the study and analysis of
this subject known as "Kodshim", whereby all the detailed varieties of
"korbanot" are enumerated and analyzed in great logical depth, such as "kodshim
kalim" ("of minor degree of sanctity") and "kodashei kodashim" ("of major
degree of sanctity"). In addition, large parts of every other book of the
Talmud discuss various kinds of sacrifices. As but a few examples, "Pesachim"
is largely devoted to a discussion of how to offer the Pesach (Passover)
sacrifice. "Yoma" contains a detailed discussion of the offerings and Temple
ritual on Yom Kippur (Day of Atonement), and there are sections in "seder Moed"
(Festivals) for the special offerings and Temple ritual for other major Jewish
holidays. "Sheqalim" discusses the annual half-shekel offering for Temple
maintenance and Temple governance and management, "Nashim" discusses the
offerings made by Nazirites and the suspected adultress, etc. The Talmud
provides extensive details not only on how to perform sacrifices but how to
adjudicate difficult cases, such what to do if a mistake was made and whether
improperly performing one of the required ritual elements invalidates it or
not. The Talmud explains how to roast the Passover offering, how to dash blood
from different kinds of sacrifices upon the altar, how to prepare the incense,
the regulatory code for the system of taxation that financed the priesthood and
public sacrifices, and numerous other details. Rationale and Rabbinic
commentary. In contrast, many others such as Nachmanides (in his Torah
commentary on Leviticus 1:9) disagreed. Nachmanides cites the fact that the
Torah records the practices of animal and other sacrifices from the times of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and earlier. Indeed, the purpose of recounting the
near sacrifice of Isaac, known in Judaism as "The Binding of Isaac" ("Akeidat
Yitzhak" or the "Akeidah") was to illustrate the sublime significance and need
of animal sacrifices as supplanting the abomination of human sacrifices. In
Spiritual practice. The "korban" also has a spiritual meaning, and refers to
some part of an individual's ego, which is given up as a sacrifice to God in
honor of the mortality of the worshipper. In keeping with the root of the word,
meaning to draw close, and to the common usage as the sacrifice of an animal,
so too can the worshipper sacrifice something of this world in order to become
closer to God. The end of sacrifices. With the destruction of the Second Temple
in Jerusalem by the Romans, the Jewish practice of offering korbanot stopped
for all intents and purposes. Despite subsequent intermittent periods of small
Jewish groups offering the traditional sacrifices on the Temple Mount, the
practice effectively ended. Rabbinic Judaism was forced to undergo a
significant development in response to this change; no longer could Judaism
revolve round the Temple services. The destruction of the Temple led to a
development of Judaism in the direction of text study, prayer, and personal
observance. Orthodox Judaism regards this as being largely an alternative way
of fulfilling the obligations of the Temple. Other branches of Judaism
(Conservative, Reform, and Reconstructionist) regard the Korbanot as an ancient
ritual that will not return. A range of responses is recorded in classical
rabbinic literature, describing this subject. In the Babylonian Talmud, a
number of sages opined that following Jewish law, doing charitable deeds, and
studying Jewish texts is greater than performing animal sacrifices. Liturgical
attention to end of sacrifices. Numerous details of the daily religious
practice of an ordinary Jew are connected to keeping memory of the rhythm of
the life of the Temple and its sacrifices. For example, the Mishna begins with
a statement that the Shema Yisrael (Hear O Israel) prayer is to be recited in
the evening at the time when Kohanim who were Tamei (ritually impure) are
permitted to enter to eat their Terumah (a food-tithe given to priests)
following purification, requiring a detailed discussion of the obligations of
tithing, ritual purity, and other elements central to the Temple and priesthood
in order to determine the meaning of the contemporary daily Jewish obligation.
Modern view and resumption of sacrifices. Future of sacrifices in Judaism.
Since the destruction of the Temple, Judaism has instituted a system of study,
public Torah readings, and prayers that connect the Jewish people to the Temple
and the Temple service. The prevailing belief among rabbinic Jews is that in
the messianic era, the Jewish Messiah will come and a Third Temple will be
built. It is believed that the "korbanot" will be reinstituted, but to what
extent and for how long is unknown. Some biblical and classical rabbinic
sources hold that most or all sacrifices will not need to be offered. Orthodox
Judaism holds that in the messianic era, most or all of the korbanot will be
reinstituted, at least for a time. Other, non-Torah observant Jewish movements,
such as Conservative Judaism and Reform Judaism, hold that no animal sacrifices
should be offered in a rebuilt Temple at all, not for any Halakhic reason, but
because animal sacrifice appears to be incompatible with their view of the
modern world. See the article on the Temple in Jerusalem for examples of how
prayerbooks by many Jewish groups deal with this issue. Nineteenth and
Twentieth century. In the 1800s a number of Orthodox rabbis studied the idea of
reinstating "korbanot" on the Temple Mount, even though the messianic era had
not yet arrived and the Temple was not rebuilt. A number of responsa concluded
that within certain parameters, it is permissible according to Jewish law to
offer such sacrifices. During the early 20th century, Rabbi Yisrael Meir Kagan
known as the "Chofetz Chaim" and himself a "kohen", advised some followers to
set up special yeshivas for married students known as "Kodshim Kollels" that
would specialize in the study of the "korbanot" and study with greater
intensity the "kodshim" sections of the Talmud in order to prepare for the
arrival of the Jewish Messiah who would oversee the rebuilding of the original
Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem that would be known as the Third Temple. His
advice was taken seriously and today there are a number of well-established
"Haredi" institutions in Israel that focus solely on the subject of the
"korbanot", "kodshim", and the needs of the future Jewish Temple, such as the
Brisk yeshivas. Efforts to restore Korbanot. A few groups, notably the Temple
Institute and the Temple Mount Faithful, have petitioned the Israeli government
to rebuild a Third Temple on the Temple Mount and restore sacrificial worship.
The Israeli government has not responded favorably. Most Orthodox Jews regard
rebuilding a Temple as an activity for a Jewish Messiah as part of a future
Jewish eschatology, and most non-Orthodox Jews do not believe in the
restoration of sacrificial worship at all. The Temple Institute has been
constructing ritual objects in preparation for a resumption of sacrifices. View
among modern Jewish denominations. Contemporary Orthodox Judaism. Today
Orthodox Judaism includes mention of each "korban" on either a daily basis in
the "siddur" (daily prayer book), or in the "machzor" (holiday prayerbook) as
part of the prayers for the relevant days concerned. They are also referred to
in the prayerbooks of Conservative Judaism, in an abbreviated fashion. On each
Jewish holiday the sections in the Torah mentioning that festival's "korbanot"
is read out loud in synagogue. Daily Services. In the very early morning daily
"Shacharit" prayers for example, they include the following in order of
mention, actually called the "korbanot". (The following example is taken from
the Ashkenazi liturgy.) The Amidah The weekday Torah reading In Conservative
Judaism. Conservative Judaism disavows the resumption of Korbanot. Consistent
with this view, it has deleted prayers for the resumption of sacrifices from
the Conservative Siddur, including both the morning study section from the
sacrifices, prayers for the restoration of Korbanot in the Amidah, and various
mentions elsewhere. Consistent with its view that a priesthood and sacrificial
system will not be restored, Conservative Judaism has also lifted certain
restrictions on Kohanim, including limitations on marriage prohibiting marrying
a divorced women or a convert. Conservative Judaism does, however, believe in
the restoration of a Temple in some form, and in the continuation of Kohanim
and Levites under relaxed requirements, and has retained references to both in
its prayer books. Consistent with its stress on the continuity of tradition,
many Conservative synagogues have also retained references to Shabbat and
Festival Korbanot, changing all references to sacrifices into the past tense
(e.g. the Orthodox "and there we will sacrifice" is changed to "and there they
sacrificed"). Some more liberal Conservative synagogues, however, have removed
all references to sacrifices, past or present, from the prayer service. The
most recent official Conservative prayer book, Sim Shalom, provides both
service alternatives. In Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism. Reform Judaism
and Reconstructionist Judaism disavow all belief in a restoration of a Temple,
the resumption of Korbanot, or the continuation of identified Kohanim or
Levites. These branches of Judaism believe that all such practices represent
ancient practices inconsistent with the requirements of modernity, and have
removed all or virtually all references to Korbanot from their prayer books.
Martyrs as "korbanot". Classical Judaism teaches that after the destruction of
the Temple, any Jew can become a "korban" for God as a martyr, both as a
"kadosh" and as a "korban". A "kadosh" means a "holy" or "sanctified" person
who has given up his life for God, which is known as "kiddush Hashem" or
"sanctification of God's name". The word for "korbanot" is "kodshim", meaning
"holy things" and the name for martyrs is "kedoshim" meaning "holy ones". So it
is no wonder that Jews murdered during the Holocaust are referred to as both
""korbanot"" and "the "kedoshim"". The relationship between martyrs and
sacrifices has its sources in the Torah. One strong proto-type for the subject
is the near sacrifice of Isaac, where God calls Isaac an "olah" ("burnt
offering"): "...God tested Abraham...'Take your son, the only one you love,
Isaac...Bring him as an "olah" (an all-burned offering)...'...Abraham built the
altar there, and arranged the wood. He then bound his son Isaac, and placed him
on the altar on top of the wood. Abraham reached out and took the slaughter
knife to slit his son's throat. God's angel called to him from heaven...Abraham
then looked up and saw a ram caught by its horns in a thicket. He went and got
the ram, sacrificing it as an all-burned offering in his son's place..."
(Genesis 22:1-19). Thus, this ram is interchangeable with Isaac, as any animal
"korban" is symbolic of its human owner. In times when there is no Temple, the
individual martyr is his or her own "korban" according to most classical views
in Jewish thought on this subject. This lesson was embedded into the Jewish
national consciousness because it became their "mental framework" and means of
rationalizing the persecutions against them over the centuries. A rabbinical
teaching (Rashi "Torat Kohanim", Leviticus) that when Jews are suffering, God
looks to the "ashes" of Isaac on the altar, as if he had been burned like a
"korban olah", a complete "burned offering", (since Isaac accepted his fate, it
is considered to be the equivalent of him having actually "gone through with
it" on a metaphysical level), and it then serves the same purposes of gaining
atonement as the sacrifices would have done in the ancient Temples. A noted
verse in the Book of Psalms says "...But for your [God's] sake are we killed
all the day; we are considered like sheep for the slaughter. " (Psalms 44:23).
The image of Jews going like "sheep to the slaughter" has been used as the
metaphor for both Jewish powerlessness as well as absolute fealty by them to
their God. The death of people martyred for their faith was deemed to be the
equivalent of sacrifices in the ancient Temples and hence the nomenclature
utilized is the same as well. The word "Holocaust" derives from the Greek term
for a "completely burnt" ("olah") offering. In Christianity. Most Christians
(Jesus Christ in Gospel and St Paul in The Epistles) believe that sacrifices
were commanded by God because of mankind's need to be ransomed from the
punishment of sin (Lev. 17:11). They believe that since God is holy, he demands
perfection in his followers, which is an unattainable standard (Rom. 3:23). The
sacrificed animals were a sign of God's grace to mankind - in effect allowing
the death of an acceptable animal to take the place of a man's death. Many
Christians believe that this system of substitutionary atonement was prophesied
to end with the coming of the Messiah. The Messiah's death was to be the
atoning sacrifice for the entire world, thereby invalidating the need for the
old system of animal sacrifice (Heb. 10:1-18). See Isaiah 53 Some other
Christians (arguably fewer in number) believe that the atonement by the
sacrificial system worked in allowing the worshiper to approach a Holy God who
dwelled among them, but did not take away sins which they never intended to do.
Lewis Sperry Chafer taught that the entire modus operandi of the Levitical
priesthood was a "shadow Christology." This included the structures, furniture,
furnishings, clothing, and rituals. Hebrews 10:1 "For the law having a shadow
of the good things to come, not the very image of the things, can never with
the same sacrifices year by year, which they offer continually, make perfect
them that draw nigh." The writer of Hebrews asserts that these sacrifices do
not have the ability to "make perfect them that draw nigh," but were instead, a
"shadow of good things to come," specifically, the person and work of Jesus
Christ. The Book of Hebrews, written c. 67 AD, was addressed to the Jews living
in Jerusalem. The content, grammar, syntax, style, and the use of Attic and
Patristic Greek terms, idiom, and structures, all point to the writer being
someone intimately familiar with the Old Testament rituals, and solidly
educated in Greek. All the Old Testament quotes are directly from the
Septuagint. Two examples of Jesus Christ fulfilling the "shadows" are the
following: John the Baptist noted (John 1:29) "On the morrow he seeth Jesus
coming unto him, and saith, Behold, the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sin
of the world!" In John 8:12, Jesus states, "Again therefore Jesus spake unto
them, saying, I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk
in the darkness, but shall have the light of life." In the context, Jesus is
referring to the golden candelabra that is in the Holy Place inside the
Tabernacle. John 10:22 tells us the time period during which Jesus made this
statement. Jesus rebuked some of the Pharisees for their inappropriate position
on Korban Mark Chapter 7, also parallel Matthew Chapter 15. In these passages,
Jesus condemned the Pharisees for "â€¦making void the word of God by your
traditionâ€¦" by violating the Fifth Commandment to <"honor your father and
mother">, when they rather followed their "traditions". In the Gospel
narrative, the Pharisees were keeping people obligated to their vow once
something was set aside as Korban, prohibiting them to use it even in order to
attend to the need of the parents. Many modern translations render Matthew 15:
6 as if putting aside as Korban exempts people from their filial duty to the
parents. Thus, it relieves people of any further responsibility to support
their parents, whether it was actually turned over to the Temple treasury,
being not important. This line of eisegesis interpretation is easily spotted in
many Bible commentaries on this Gospel text. The phrase al-Qurbaan al-Muqaddas
(Ø§Ù„Ù‚Ø±Ø¨Ø§Ù† Ø§Ù„Ù…Ù‚Ø¯Ø³; The Holy Korban) is the usual term used to
translate the term "Eucharist" into Arabic among Arab Christians.
