Lay reader A lay reader (in some jurisdictions simply Reader) is a layperson
authorized by a bishop of the Anglican Church to read some parts of a service
of worship. They are members of the congregation called to preach or lead
services, but not called to full-time ministry. Although in many parishes,
these duties can be performed by any reasonably competent lay person who has
been properly instructed, the key to the Reader's license is that he or she is
permitted to do them "in the absence of a priest". Licensed Readers are
entitled to wear a blue tippet with choir dress. The first female lay readers
were licensed during the First World War due to the shortage of men. They
existed in 22 Dioceses in England and 1 diocese in Canada. The first group were
called "Bishop's Messengers". There was then a gap until 1969 until more female
lay readers were appointed. In the Church of England, the office is sometimes
known simply as Reader. Their theological training enables them to preach,
teach, and lead worship, and they are also able to assist in pastoral,
evangelistic and liturgical work. The office of Lay Reader has existed in its
present form since 1866, and there are now around ten thousand lay readers in
the Church of England. For the purposes of carrying out the practical aspects
of their training for ordination, students studying for the ordained ministry
may be licensed as Student Readers. In some provinces of the Anglican
Communion, such as the Church of Ireland, a Student Reader's license permits
them to serve in any diocese rather than being bound (as in the case of a Lay
Reader) to the diocese of their licensing bishop.
