Legalism (theology) Legalism, in Christian theology, is a usually-pejorative
term referring to an over-emphasis on discipline of conduct, or legal ideas,
usually implying an allegation of misguided rigour, pride, superficiality, the
neglect of mercy, and ignorance of the grace of God or emphasizing the letter
of law over the spirit. Legalism is alleged against any view that obedience to
law, not faith in God's grace, is the pre-eminent principle of redemption. In
the New Testament. The words 'legalism' or 'legalist' do not occur in the Old
or New Testaments. Legalism's root word, "law" (Greek "nomos"), occurs
frequently in the New Testament, and sometimes connotes legalism. In 1921,
Ernest De Witt Burton stated that in , ""nomou" is here evidently used ... in
its legalistic sense, denoting divine law viewed as a purely legalistic system
made up of statutes, on the basis of obedience or disobedience to which
individuals are approved or condemned as a matter of debt without grace. This
is divine law as the legalist defined it." The Greek of Paul's day lacked any
term corresponding to the distinct position of "legalism", "legalist", or
"legalistic", leading C.E.B. Cranfield to commend "the possibility that Pauline
statements which at first sight seem to disparage the law, were really directed
not against the law itself but against that misunderstanding and misuse of it
for which we now have a convenient terminology" (legalism). Messianic Jewish
Bible translator David H. Stern cited these two scholars to support the
translation framework that often "'"nomos"' means 'legalism' and not God's
"Torah"", especially in Paul's constructs "erga nomou" (literally "works of
law", rendered by Stern "legalistic observance of "Torah" commands") and "upo
nomon" (literally "under law", rendered by Stern by 13 words, "in subjection to
the system which results from perverting the "Torah" into legalism"). One
concept of legalism, the belief that salvation can be earned by obedience to
laws, is referred to in various New Testament books, including Galatians. In
this case, some Jews who had become Christians believed that in order to obtain
salvation, both faith in Christ (as Messiah), and obedience to the Mosiac laws
were required, such as the cases of the circumcision controversy and the
Incident at Antioch. Generally, however, these cases are referred to as the
Judaizer controversy, rather than a legalism controversy, but the two are
related. Legalism refers to any doctrine which states salvation comes strictly
from adherence to the law. It can be thought of as a works-based religion.
Groups in the New Testament said to be falling into this category include the
Pharisees, Sadducees, Scribes, Judaizers, and Nicolaitans. They are legalists
because they emphasized obeying the Law of Moses, in the case of the Pharisees
and Scribes, to the letter without understanding the concept of grace. Jesus
condemned their legalism in Matthew 23. The Pharisees love of the praises of
men for their strict adherence is said to be a prime example of legalism.
Legalism is sometimes confused with obedience. New Testament books such as
Romans, speak of grace and obedience together. An example is found in Romans 1:
5 (New American Standard Version) speaking of Christ 'through whom we have
received grace and apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith among all
the Gentiles, for His name's sake...' The goal of receiving the grace was to
bring about obedience of faith. Here grace, faith and obedience are tied
together. Other references are in Acts 5:29, 32; Romans 16:19; 2 Corinthians 7:
15; Hebrews 5:9. Legalism is also confused with discipline, which is often
spoken of in a positive light. See 1 Corinthians 9:17; 1 Timothy 4:7; 2 Timothy
1:7 and Hebrews 12:5–11. A third common misunderstanding of legalism is the
word law. Law in many places in the Bible refers to the Law of Moses, see also
Biblical law in Christianity. In Galatians the Judaizers were trying to insist
that salvation required that a person be circumcised prior to obeying the Law
of Christ. Galatians 2:16 says, "Knowing that a man is not justified by the
works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the law: for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified"
(King James Version). The faith here is the Law of Christ and the law here is
the Law of Moses. The legalism of the Judaizers was that obedience to the law
of Moses was necessary to be saved. Legalism in the New Testament is believed
by some as being revealed by the life of Saul prior to his conversion. Some
believe that Saul sought to redeem himself by his works of persecution of the
church and its ultimate destruction. Acts 26:9–11 reveals, "I verily thought
with myself, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of
Nazareth. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem: and many of the saints did I
shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests; and when
they were put to death, I gave my voice against them. And I punished them oft
in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad
against them, I persecuted them even unto strange cities" (King James Version).
Galatians 1:13–14 states, "For ye have heard of my conversation in time past
in the Jews' religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God,
and wasted it: And profited in the Jews' religion above many my equals in mine
own nation, being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers"
(King James Version). These two texts emphasize the nature of Saul's religion,
works. However, in this passage the obedience is not tied to the obeying of
specific Old Testament laws, such as keeping Sabbath or circumcision. Though
the "Apostolic Decree" is no longer observed by many Christian denominations
today, it is still observed in full by the Greek Orthodox.and it was a very
effective philosophie during that time. In intra-Christian relations. Roman
Catholic Church. In Roman Catholicism, good works are done in service to God
and one's neighbour, by faith working through love. In contrast, an excess of
severity in the imposition of, or overly-scrupulous conformity to any rule of
piety, may be charged with legalism. Faith and good works, giving the
individual free will to choose. In an attempt to resolve the dispute over
legalism, the Joint Declaration on the Doctrine of Justification was a document
issued in 1999 by Lutheran-Catholic clerical representatives, declaring a
common belief in "Sola gratia", that grace alone can save the faithful, and
that there is a "progressive infusion" of grace in the spirit of the believer.
Eastern Orthodox Churches. The Eastern Orthodox, for another example, rejects
the satisfaction theory of the atonement as "legalistic". The satisfaction
theory states that mankind's Original Sin violated God's law, resulting in all
men being born guilty: an idea prevalent in the writings of Tertullian and
Augustine of Hippo of the Western Church. Anselm formally developed the theory
that the legal problem of guilt before the Law, required the legal solution of
retribution, in order to achieve a just salvation. The solution was for God's
son Jesus to willingly die on the Cross in place of humanity, thus allowing the
legal penalty to be fully carried out, satisfying the justice of God, and thus
clearing the way for mercy to be shown to sinners. The Eastern Orthodox charge
that this theory is too dependent upon Roman legal concepts of retribution and
justice. Protestant churches. In Protestant, Evangelical, Christian theology,
especially in popular versions of the same, the charge of legalism is an
accusation of overzealous adherence to the word of the Bible (as law) in all
things said, established or accomplished in a believer's life (cf.
bibliolatry). All is in accordance to the word. In that context, to apply the
criticism of legalism to a theological position or religious attitude implies
that the accused has overturned the Gospel of salvation through faith and new
life in Jesus Christ and has instead substituted some principle of personal
works of strict adherence to the word, through action, thought, or speech for
the unearned grace of God. In history. Several underlying dynamics appear in
these controversies. The permitted scope of veneration of material objects
versus claims that such veneration is idolatry, affects the perceived sanctity
of ritual spaces and objects, and therefore of the rituals and customs
themselves. Teachings about the authority of the church, the sources of
legitimacy of that authority, and the role of clergy versus the priesthood of
all believers, also affect these debates.
