List of saints This is an incomplete list of Christian saints in alphabetical
order by Christian name, but if necessary by surname, the place, or attribute
part of the name as well. There are more than 10,000 Roman Catholic saints.
Among the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Communions, the numbers may be
even higher, since there is no fixed process of "canonization" and each
individual jurisdiction within the two Orthodox communions independently
maintains parallel lists of saints that have only partial overlap. Note that
the Anglican Communion have only ever canonised one saintâ€”King Charles I of
England (see Society of King Charles the Martyr). However, it recognises pre-
Reformation saints, as does the United Methodist Church. Persons who have led
lives of celebrated sanctity or missionary zeal are included in the Calendar of
the Prayer Book "without thereby enrolling or commending such persons as saints
of the Church". Similarly, any individuals commemorated in the Lutheran
calendar of saints will be listed as well. Wikipedia contains calendars of
saints for particular denominations, listed by the day of the year on which
they are traditionally venerated, as well as a Chronological list of saints and
blesseds, listed by their date of death. Christian saints since 450 A.D..
Notes. 1 The saint has been removed from the Roman Catholic calendar of saints
due to a lack of historical evidence. Removal is not automatically a judgement
about the existence of the saint in question, and is also not equivalent with
"de-canonization", it only means that the saint no longer has an official
'feast' day. 2 St. George is specifically mentioned in the English Book of
Common Prayer from 1662, and "Common Worship" of 2000. However, other Anglican
churches have since removed reference to him, or never included him in the
past. 3 The Anglican feast is "Michael and All Angels". 4 "Common Worship" has
"Commemoration". 5 Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church only, based on a local
tradition of his conversion and martyrdom. 6 Eastern Rite Catholic Churches
only. 7 Russian Orthodox Church only.
