List of Jain temples There are many Jain Tirtha or pilgrimage sites throughout
the Indian subcontinent, many of which were built several hundred years ago.
Many of these temples are classified according to Jain sects. Many Jain Temples
are found in other areas of the world. This article lists and documents
prominent Jain temples and Tirthas around the world. India. Uttarakhand.
Badrinath, District Chamoli Behind Bangad Dharmashala, At Post Badrinath,
District Chamoli 'Charan' of Lord Adinath have been installed here as a symbol
of Kailash Parvat. Temple and Dharamshala are open from Akshay Tritiya to
Sharad Pournima. Rest of the year everything is closed due to snowfall.
Management Trust: Shri Adinath adhyatmik Ashimsa Foundation, Indore. President:
Shri Pradeepkumar Kasliwal (0731 2413104) Secretary: Shri Lalitkumar Badjatya
(0731 - 2414104) Uttar Pradesh. Hastinapur Bada Gaon, Bagpat Varanasi Sarnath
Haryana. Ranila is an Atishya kshetra where idol of first Jain Tirathankar
Adinath was found by Ranjit Singh on the auspicious day of Dussehra. Ranila is
located in Bhiwani District near Charkhi Dadri. Hansi is an Atishya kshetra in
Hissar District. Kasan is an Atishya kshetra in Gurgaon District. Madhya
Pradesh. Sidhwarkoot (Jain Tirth) Shri Siddhaverkoot is an ancient sacred.
Siddha Kshetra surrounded by a series of hills full of natural beauty. From
this place two Chakravarties, ten Kamdeos and three & half crores of ascetic
saints achieved the salvation,full & finel freedom from world to enjoy the
spiritual bliss for indefinite time.This place is situated on a plane on the
top of a hill. Important of this place is described in Nirvankand. Jain Temples
outside the Indian subcontinent. There are several Jain temples in various
countries outside the Indian subcontinent. United Kingdom. jainsamaj manchester
www.jainsamajmanchester.org
