Liturgical colours Liturgical colours are those specific colours which are used
for vestments and hangings within the context of Christian liturgy. The
symbolism of violet, white, green, red, gold, black, rose and other colours may
serve to underline moods appropriate to a season of the liturgical year or may
highlight a special occasion. There is a distinction between the colour of the
vestments worn by the clergy and their choir dress, which with a few exceptions
does not change with the liturgical seasons. Roman Catholic Church. Post-1969
Rubrics. In the Roman Rite, as reformed by Pope Paul VI, the following colours
are used. On more solemn days, festive, that is, more precious, sacred
vestments may be used, even if not of the colour of the day. Such vestments
may, for instance, be made from cloth of gold or cloth of silver. Moreover, the
Conference of Bishops may determine and propose to the Apostolic See
adaptations suited to the needs and culture of peoples. Ritual Masses are
celebrated in their proper colour, in white, or in a festive colour. Masses for
Various Needs, on the other hand, are celebrated in the colour proper to the
day or the season or in violet if they bear a penitential character. Votive
Masses are celebrated in the colour suited to the Mass itself or even in the
colour proper to the day or the season. Pre-1969 Rubrics. Pope Pius X raised
the rank of Sundays of ordinary time, so that on those that fell within octaves
green was used instead of the colour of the octave, as had previously been the
rule. The rules on liturgical colours before the time of Pope Pius X were
essentially those indicated in the edition of the Roman Missal that Pope Pius V
promulgated in 1570, except for the addition of feasts not included in his
Missal. The scheme of colours in his Missal reflected usage that had become
fixed in Rome by the twelfth century. Byzantine Rite. The Byzantine Rite, which
is used by all the member churches of the Eastern Orthodox Church and the
Eastern Catholic Churches of Byzantine Rite, does not have a universal system
of colours, with the service-books of the Byzantine tradition only specifying
"light" or "dark" vestments in the service books. In the Greek tradition,
maroon or burgundy are common for solemn feast days, and a wide variety of
colours are used at other times, the most common of which are gold and white.
The colours would be changed before Vespers on the eve of the day being
commemorated. During Great Feasts, the colour is changed before the vespers
service that begins the first day of a forefeast, and remains until the
apodosis (final day of the afterfeast). Under Western influence, black is often
used for funerals, weekdays in Great Lent and Holy Week in the Slavic churches,
as a sign of penance and mourning, but in the second half of the 20th century,
the ancient white became more common, as a sign of the hope of the
Resurrection. Russian liturgical colours. According to the Russian Orthodox
Church's "Nastol'naya Kniga Sviashchenno-sluzhitelia", up to eight different
liturgical colours may be used throughout the year. Exact usage of these
colours varies, but the following are the most common uses. Coptic and Ethiopic
Rites. The Coptic tradition, followed also in Ethiopia and Eritrea, uses only
white vestments, with gold and silver being considered variations of white.
Anglicanism. Most Anglican churches use the colours appointed in the Roman
Rite, usually in its post-1969 form, with the exception of Sarum Blue replacing
Violet for Advent, but some use the earlier form, with, for instance, black in
place of red on Good Friday. Some churches use black at masses for the dead,
but more commonly white or purple is used. For historical reasons much of the
worldwide Anglican Communion takes a noticeable lead from the practice of the
Church of England. Since the 1980 Alternative Service Book liturgical colours
have been recommended for seasons, with more detailed advice offered as part of
the Common Worship series of liturgies, including colours for all Sundays and
festivals printed in the 'core volume' next to collects. The Church's published
Lectionary now makes detailed suggestions for liturgical colour throughout the
year, which corresponds almost exactly with the above table of Roman Rite
(post-1969 usage) usage with five minor exceptions, and one more significant
one: there is no reference in Anglican usage to masses of deceased popes and
cardinals; no liturgical colour at all is suggested for Holy Saturday (the
words "hangings removed" are printed); the recommendation of red for
confirmation rites is extended also to ordination rites; Lenten Array
(unbleached linen) continues to be listed as an alternative option to purple
during Lent; the option exists for using red instead of green during the
"Kingdom Season", the four last Sundays of the liturgical year, culminating in
Christ the King, as is common is some Lutheran traditions (see below); finally,
more significantly, the Church of England provision suggests white throughout
the Sundays after Epiphany as a distinct "Epiphany season", with ordinary time
commencing the day after Candlemas. The Church of England suggested scheme of
colours also indicates where gold vestments should be used in those churches
which possess both gold and white as distinct colours. The use of rose-pink
vestments, as in the Roman Rite table above, was mentioned as an option in
early editions of Common Worship, and is a listed option in the annual
published lectionary; however, later Common Worship publications have begun to
refer to this practice as "traditional" reflecting its resurgence. Lutheranism.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, uses the same colour scheme as that
of the Anglicans and their Scandinavian Lutheran counterparts, but with the use
of gold only for the Easter Vigil and Easter Sunday services, with Holy Week
using scarlet in place of crimson – congregations lacking scarlet vestments
use purple from Palm Sunday through Holy Wednesday and white for Maundy
Thursday. Black, traditionally used by the Anglican Communion for Good Friday
and funerals, was used by the ELCA only for Ash Wednesday, but effective with
the new "Evangelical Lutheran Worship" (ELW) book, which replaces the "Lutheran
Book of Worship" (LBW), black is no longer suggested for Ash Wednesday or Good
Friday – purple may be used for Ash Wednesday and no colour for Good Friday.
In addition, the ELW suggests that blue, the traditional colour for Advent
(with purple being the alternate), be used for the Advent season, reflecting
the traditional use of blue in the Scandinavian Lutheran churches. Both the
Lutheran Church - Missouri Synod (LCMS) and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran
Synod (WELS), along with the United Methodist Church use a similar system, but
with purple being the primary colour for both Advent and Lent (with blue being
the alternate colour for Advent only), and the use of gold in place of white
for both Christmas and Easter (in similar practice to the Roman Catholic
Church). In the WELS, the use of red is also done during the "Period of End
Times", a period of the Church in regards to the teachings of the Book of
Revelation, culminating in the creation of the New Jerusalem (corresponding to
Christ the King in the ELCA). In all three churches, including the ELCA, red is
also worn on the last Sunday of October, in celebration of the Reformation on
October 31, when Martin Luther nailed the 95 Theses onto the door of Wittenberg
Castle Church. Other Protestants. Some Protestant churches, historically
especially Methodists, and today many mainline Protestants, use a colour scheme
similar to those used by Anglicans and Roman Catholics, although the practice
is not universally followed. Many Protestant churches do not use liturgical
colours at all. The United Methodist Church, prior to the early-1990s, used red
solely for Pentecost, even including the Sundays after Pentecost Sunday, with
the use of green being reserved for the season of Kingdomtide, which usually
lasted from late August/early September until Christ the King (the last Sunday
in Kingdomtide). Since the publication of the 1992 Book of Worship, the UMC has
followed the ELCA practice of wearing red only for Pentecost and Reformation
Sundays and green for the rest of the Pentecost season. The Presbyterian Church
(USA) has sanctioned the use of liturgical colours and promoted their use in
the 1993 Book of Common Worship (although their use was also promoted in the
church's annual Planning Calendars beginning in the 1980s). Advent and Lent are
periods of preparation and repentance and are represented by the colour purple.
The feasts of Christmas Day and Christmastide, Epiphany Sunday, Baptism of the
Lord Sunday, Transfiguration Sunday, Easter Season, Trinity Sunday, and Christ
the King Sunday are represented by white. Green is the colour for periods of
Ordinary Time. Red is for Pentecost Sunday, but may also be used for
ordinations, church anniversaries, and memorial services for ordained clergy.
Red or purple is appropriate for Palm Sunday. During Holy Week, the church may
use purple or remain bare (although a few churches will use black for Good
Friday). Similarly, the United Church of Christ includes indications of which
liturgical colour to use for each Sunday in its annual calendar. The general
Western pattern is followed, with either Purple or Blue recommended for Advent.
