Luciferianism Luciferianism is a belief system that venerates the essential
characteristics that are affixed to Lucifer. The tradition usually reveres
Lucifer, not as the Devil, but as a rescuer or guiding spirit or even the true
god as opposed to Jehovah. Luciferianism is identified by some people as an
auxiliary of Satanism, due to the popular identification of Lucifer with Satan.
Some Luciferians accept this identification or consider Lucifer the "light
bearer" aspect of Satan. Others reject it, arguing that Lucifer is a more
positive ideal than Satan. Historical Luciferianism. The "Gesta Treverorum"
records that, in 1231, heretics began to be persecuted throughout Germany.
Among them were Luciferians, principally in the Archdiocese of Trier, but also
Mainz and Cologne. Over the following three years, several people were burned
as a result. According to a papal letter from Gregory IX, "Vox in Rama", dated
from July 13, 1233, one of the claims made by the Luciferians was that Lucifer
had been cast out of Heaven On the other hand, Richard Cavendish has argued:
"The confessions Conrad of Marburg extracted were apparently made without
torture, but under the threat of death if the victim did not confess. "If these
confessions were accurate, the Luciferans were full-blown Satanists." They
worshiped the Devil as creator and ruler of the world, complained that he had
been unjustly and treacherously banished from Heaven, and believed that he
would overthrow the God of the Christians and return to Heaven, when they would
enjoy eternal happiness with him. They reveled in whatever displeased the
Christian God and hated whatever pleased him..."
