Magnificat The Magnificat (Latin: "soul magnifies") â€” also known as the Song
of Mary or the Canticle of Mary â€” is a canticle frequently sung (or spoken)
liturgically in Christian church services. It is one of the eight most ancient
Christian hymns and perhaps the earliest Marian hymn. Its name comes from the
first word of the Latin version of the canticle's text. The text of the
canticle is taken directly from the Gospel of Luke () where it is spoken by the
Virgin Mary upon the occasion of her Visitation to her cousin Elizabeth. In the
narrative, after Mary greets Elizabeth, who is pregnant with the future John
the Baptist, the child moves within Elizabeth's womb. When Elizabeth praises
Mary for her faith, Mary sings what is now known as the "Magnificat" in
response. The canticle echoes several Old Testament biblical passages, but the
most pronounced allusions are to the Song of Hannah, from the Books of Samuel
(). Along with the "Benedictus", as well as several Old Testament canticles,
the "Magnificat" is included in the Book of Odes, an ancient liturgical
collection found in some manuscripts of the Septuagint. Within Christianity,
the "Magnificat" is most frequently recited within the Liturgy of the Hours. In
Western Christianity, the "Magnificat" is most often sung or recited during the
main evening prayer service: Vespers within Roman Catholicism and Lutheranism,
and Evening Prayer (or Evensong) within Anglicanism. In Eastern Christianity,
the "Magnificat" is usually sung at Sunday Matins. Among Protestant groups, the
"Magnificat" may also be sung during worship services. Text. The original
language of the "Magnificat" is Koine Greek, the language of the New Testament.
However, in the liturgical and devotional use of the Western Church, it is most
often found in Latin or the vernacular. (optional ending commonly used in
Anglican service: Liturgical use. The text forms a part of the daily office in
the Roman Catholic Vespers service, the Lutheran Vespers service, and the
Anglican services of Evening Prayer, according to both the "Book of Common
Prayer" and "Common Worship" (see Evening Prayer (Anglican)). In the "Book of
Common Prayer" Evening Prayer service, it is usually paired with the "Nunc
dimittis". (The "Book of Common Prayer" allows for an alternative to the
"Magnificat" â€” the Cantate Domino, Psalm 98 â€”Â and modern Anglican rubrics
generally allow for a wider selection of canticles, but the "Magnificat" and
"Nunc dimittis" remain the most popular.) In Anglican, Lutheran, and Roman
Catholic services, the "Magnificat" is generally followed by the "Gloria
Patri". It is also commonly used (at least amongst Lutherans) at the Feast of
the Visitation (July 2). As a canticle, the Magnificat has frequently been set
to music. Most compositions were originally intended for liturgical use,
especially for Vesper services and celebrations of the Visitation, but some are
also performed in concert. Musical settings. As the Magnificat is part of the
sung Vespers, many composers, starting with the Renaissance, set the words, for
example Claudio Monteverdi in his "Vespers for the Blessed Virgin, 1610".
Vivaldi composed a setting of the Latin text for soloists, choir and orchestra,
also Johann Sebastian Bach in his Magnificat, BWV 243, for the Christmas
vespers of 1723. Bach set the German words in his cantata for Visitation of
1724, "Meine Seel erhebt den Herren, BWV 10". Anton Bruckner composed a
Magnificat for soloists, choir, orchestra and organ. Rachmaninoff, and more
recently John Rutter also set extended versions of the text. Arvo PÃ¤rt
composed a setting for choir a cappella. Together with the Nunc dimittis, the
Magnificat is a regular part of the Anglican Evensong. The "Mag and Nunc" was
set by many composers - such as Thomas Tallis, Herbert Sumsion, Charles Wood
and John Tavener - of Anglican church music, often for choir a cappella or
choir and organ. Since the canticles are sung every day at some cathedrals,
Charles Villiers Stanford wrote a Magnificat in every major key, and Herbert
Howells published twenty settings over his career. Society and politics. In
Nicaragua, the "Magnificat" is a favourite prayer among many peasants and is
often carried as an amulet. During the Somoza years, campesinos were required
to carry proof of having voted for Somoza; this document was mockingly referred
to as the "Magnificat". The "Magnificat" has also been covered by Richard Wu in
the album "Let Morning Shine". The album was aimed to ameliorate the lives of
North Koreans.
