Major orders The term major orders or greater orders was for some centuries
applied in the Roman Catholic Church to distinguish what the Council of Trent
also called holy orders from what at that time were termed "minor orders" or
"lesser orders". The Catechism of the Council of Trent spoke of the "several
distinct orders of ministers, intended by their office to serve the priesthood,
and so disposed, as that, beginning with the clerical tonsure, they may ascend
gradually through the lesser to the greater orders", and stated: The Catechism
of the Council of Trent thus repeats what is stated in chapter II of that
Council's Decree on the Sacrament of Order, using the word "priest" to refer
both to bishops and to presbyters. In chapter IV, it uses the word "priest" to
refer instead to presbyters alone. It thus speaks of bishops as "superior to
priests", and of "the ordination of bishops, priests, and of the other orders".
In its canon VI, it declares that in the Catholic Church "there is a hierarchy
by divine ordination constituted, consisting of bishops, priests, and
ministers". By his motu proprio "Ministeria quaedam" of 15 August 1972, Pope
Paul VI decreed: "The orders hitherto called minor are henceforth to be spoken
of as 'ministries'." This abandonment of the term "minor orders" automatically
brought an end also to use of the term "major orders". The same motu proprio
also decreed that the Latin Church would no longer have the major order of
subdiaconate, but it permitted any episcopal conference that so desired to
apply the term "subdeacon" to those who hold the ministry (formerly called the
minor order) of "acolyte". For the Latin Church there are thus now only three
orders, as stated in the Code of Canon Law: "The orders are the episcopate, the
presbyterate, and the diaconate." These three orders are also referred to as
"sacred orders" or "holy orders".
