Maronites The Maronites (; "al-mawƒÅrinah", ; "maronƒÅy√©") are a Christian
ethnoreligious group in the Levant. They derive their name from the Syriac
saint Mar Maron whose followers moved to Mount Lebanon from northern Syria
establishing the Maronite Church. Maronites were able to maintain an
independent status in Mount Lebanon and its coastline after the Arab Islamic
conquest, maintaining their religion and language until the 13th century. The
Ottoman Mount Lebanon Mutasarrifate and later the Republic of Lebanon were
created under the auspice of European powers with the Maronites as their main
ethnic component. Mass immigration to the Americas at the wake of the 20th
century and the Lebanese Civil War decreased their numbers greatly in the
Levant. Maronites today form more than one quarter of the total population in
the country of Lebanon. Oral traditions impose that each President of Lebanon
be of Maronite faith. History. A number of Maronite historians claim that the
Maronites were the descendants of the Canaanites or Phoenicians, or also the
Marada (""), residents in parts of Greater Syria, who kept their identity under
both Byzantine and Arab authorities. The reason for their adoption of the name
is disputed and historians disagree whether it refers to Mar Maron, a 4th
century Syriac Christian saint, or to John Maron, the first bishop of Lebanon.
Population. The Maronite population is estimated to be about 3 millions,
according to the Catholic Near East Welfare Association. Originating in the
northern Levant, it has largely dispersed into diaspora over the last two
centuries, now having large communities in the Americas. Significant Maronite
communities still reside in the Middle East¬ ‚Äì most notably in Lebanon and
Syria and to a lesser degree in Cyprus, Israel, Jordan and Egypt. Lebanon.
According to a 2007 report, there are approximately 930,000 Maronites in
Lebanon, where they constitute up to 22% of the population. Under the terms of
an agreement between the various political and religious leaders of Lebanon,
the president of the country must be a Maronite. Syria. Syrian Maronites total
51,000, belonging to the archdioceses of Aleppo and Damascus and the Diocese of
Latakia. Cyprus. There is also a Maronite community in Cyprus, which speaks
Cypriot Maronite Arabic. They are a recognized religious minority on the island
and the community elects a representative to sit in the House of
Representatives to voice their interests. They are descended from those
Maronites who accompanied the crusaders, although more recent Lebanese
immigrants are often included as part of the community, which now numbers
10,000. Israel. A noticeable Maronite community exists in northern Israel,
numbering 7,504, composed of the long existing community in Jish area, and
recent fugitives (mostly former South Lebanon Army militia members and their
families), who fled South Lebanon to Galilee in April-May 2000. Diaspora.
Americas. The two residing eparchies in the United States have issued their own
"Maronite Census", designed to estimate how many Maronites reside in the United
States. Many Maronites have been assimilated into Western Catholicism as there
were no Maronite parishes or priests available. The "Maronite Census" was
designed to locate these Maronites. There are also eparchies at S√£o Paulo in
Brazil; as well as in Argentina, Canada and Mexico. Australia. Significant
Maronite communities also reside in Australia, many with origins in traders who
settled during the 19th Century. France. An important Maronite community exists
in France. South Africa. The history of the Lebanese Community goes back to the
late 19th century, when the first immigrants arrived in Johannesburg, the
biggest city in the Transvaal coming from Sebhel, Mesyara, Becharre, Hadath El-
Joube, Maghdoushe and other places. It is recorded that in the year 1896 the
first Maronite and Lebanese immigrants arrived in Durban, Cape Town, and
Mozambique, and congregated around their local Catholic Churches. The majority
of the Lebanese immigrants were Maronite and being concerned about keeping
their Maronite faith alive in a new country, they wrote to the Maronite
Patriarch, insisting on the need for a Maronite priest to come to South Africa
to continue their tradition and the Maronite Rite. In 1905, Patriarch Elias El-
Hoyek sent Fr. Emmanuel El-Fadle to South Africa from Kfarhata‚ÄìElzawye, North
Lebanon. A historical year for the entire Maronite Community in South
Africa¬ ‚Äì Fr. Emmanuel El-Fadle was the first Maronite priest to walk on
South African soil. Having spent time as a student in Rome and Paris, he began
serving the South African community on both spiritual and social levels. He
converted a building in Johannesburg into a church and residence. He left South
Africa after 2 years. Fr. El-Fadle never returned to Lebanon; he was a
passenger on board the ship SS "Waratah", which disappeared in July 1909 en
route from Durban to Cape Town. In 1910, Fr. Ashkar arrived to build a church
and a home for the priests. The Patriarch, then sent another priest to
assist¬ ‚Äì Fr. Wakim Estphan. Fr. Ashkar returned to Lebanon and retired in
1928. The mission was then handed over to The Congregation of Maronite Lebanese
Missionaries. Fr. Yousef Juan, who was appointed as a temporary visitor,
received instruction from the Patriarch and the General Superior for Fr. Yousef
Moubarak to succeed him in serving the South African Maronite Community. The
Congregation of Maronite Lebanese Missionaries have since served in South
Africa among other countries and continue in their mission in serving and
assisting in the Maronite Rite. Identity. The followers of the Maronite Church
form a part of the Syriac Christians and belong to the West Syriac Rite. The
Maronite Syriac Church of Antioch traces its foundation to Maron, an early 5th-
century Syriac monk venerated as a saint. Before the conquest by Arabian
Muslims reached Lebanon, the Lebanese people, including those who would become
Muslim and the majority who would remain Christian, spoke a dialect of Aramaic
called Syriac. Syriac remains the liturgical language of the Maronite Church.
Phoenicianism. Phoenicianism as an alternative to acceptance of an Arab
identity on the part of Lebanese Christians has never developed into an
integrated ideology led by key thinkers, but there are a few who have stood out
more than others: Charles Corm, Michel Chiha, and Said Aql in their promotion
of Phoenicianism. In post civil-war Lebanon since the Taif agreement,
politically Phoenicianism is restricted to a small group. Among leaders of the
movement Etienne Saqr, Said Akl, Charles Malik, Camille Chamoun, and Bachir
Gemayel have been notable names, some going as far as voicing anti-Arab views.
In his book the Israeli writer Mordechai Nisan, who at times met with some of
them during the war, quoted Said Akl, a famous Lebanese poet and philosopher,
as saying; Akl believes in emphasizing the Phoenician legacy of the Lebanese
people and has promoted the use of the Lebanese dialect written in a modified
Latin alphabet, that had been influenced by the Phoenician alphabet, rather
than the Arabic one. In opposition to such views, Arabism was affirmed at the
March 1936 Congress of the Coast and Four Districts, when the Muslim leadership
at the conference made the declaration that Lebanon was an Arab country,
indistinguishable from its Arab neighbors. In the April 1936 Beirut municipal
elections, Christian and Muslim politicians were divided along Phoenician and
Arab lines in the matter of whether the Lebanese coast should be claimed by
Syria or given to Lebanon, increasing the already mounting tensions between the
two communities. Phoenicianism is still disputed by many Arabist scholars who
have on occasion tried to convince its adherents to abandon their claims as
false and to embrace and accept the Arab identity instead. This conflict of
ideas of identity is believed to be one of the pivotal disputes between the
Muslim and Christian populations of Lebanon and what mainly divides the country
to the detriment of national unity. In general it appears that Muslims focus
more on the Arab identity of Lebanese history and culture whereas the older
Christian communities focus on the pre-Arabization, pre-Islamic and non-Arab
elements of the Lebanese identity and rather refrain from the Arab
characterization. Support for Lebanese nationalism. Lebanese Christians are
known to be specifically linked to the root of Lebanese Nationalism and
opposition to Pan-Arabism in Lebanon, this being the case during 1958 Lebanon
crisis. When Muslim Arab nationalists backed by Gamel Abdel Nasser tried to
overthrow the then Christian dominated government in power, due to displeasure
at the government's "pro-western" policies and their lack of commitment and
duty to the so-called "Arab brotherhood" by preferring keep Lebanon away from
the Arab League and the political confrontations of the Middle East. A more
hard-nosed nationalism among some Christian leaders, who saw Lebanese
nationalism more in terms of its confessional roots and failed to be carried
away by Chiha's vision, clung to a more security-minded view of Lebanon. They
regarded the national project as mainly a program for the security of
Christians and a bulwark against threats from Muslims and their hinterland. The
right-wing yet secular Guardians of the Cedars, with its exiled Leader and
founder Etienne Saqr (also the father of singers Karol Sakr and Pascale Sakr)
took no sectarian stance and even had Muslim members who joined in their
radical stance against Arabism and Palestinian forces in Lebanon. Saqr
summarized his party's view on the Arab Identity on their official ideological
manifesto by stating; On an Al Jazeera special dedicated to the political
Christian clans of Lebanon and their struggle for power in the 2009 election
entitled, "Lebanon: The Family Business" the issue of identity was brought up
on several occasions, by various politicians including Druze leader Walid
Jumblatt, who claimed that all Lebanese lack somewhat of a real identity and
the country is yet to discover one everybody could agree on. Sami Gemayel, of
the Gemayel clan and son of former president Amin Gemayel, stated he did not
consider himself an Arab but instead identified himself as a Syriac, going on
to explain that to him and many Lebanese the "acceptance" of Lebanon's "Arab
identity" according to the Taef Agreement wasn't something that they "accepted"
but instead were forced into signing through pressure. In a speech in 2009 to a
crowd of Christian Kataeb supporters Gemayel declared that he felt there was
importance in Christians in Lebanon finding an identity and went on to state
what he finds identification with as a Lebanese Christian, concluding with a
purposeful exclusion of Arabism in the segment. The speech met with an applause
afterward from the audience; Etienne Sakr, of the Guardians of the Cedars
Lebanese party, in an interview responded "We are not Arabs" to an interview
question about the Guardians of the Cedars' ideology of Lebanon being Lebanese.
He continued by talking about how describing Lebanon as being not Arab was a
crime in present day Lebanon, about the Lebanese civil war, and about Arabism
as being first step towards Islamism, claiming that "the Arabs want to annex
Lebanon" and in order to do this "to push the Christians out (out of Lebanon)",
this being "the plan since 1975", among other issues. Embrace of Arab identity.
During a final session of the Lebanese Parliament, a Marada Maronite MP states
his identity as an Arab: "I, the Maronite Christian Lebanese Arab, grandson of
Patriarch Estefan Doueihy, declare my pride to be a part of our people‚Äôs
resistance in the South. Can one renounce what guarantees his rights?" Lebanese
controversial historian Kamal Salibi (a Protestant Christian) in his 'A House
of Many Mansions' states (ch. 6): "It is very possible that the Maronites, as a
community of Arabian origin, were among the last Arabian Christian tribes to
arrive in Syria before Islam. Certainly, since the 14th century, their language
has been Arabic. Syriac, which is the Christian literary form of Aramaic, was
originally the liturgical language of all the Semitic Christian sects, in
Arabia as well as in the Levant and Mesopotamia." Culture. Religion. The
Maronites belong to the Maronite Syriac Church of Antioch, which is a Eastern
Catholic Syriac Church that had affirmed its communion with Rome since 1180
A.D., although the official view of the Church is that it had never accepted
the Monophysitic views held by their Syriac neighbours, which were condemned in
the Council of Chalcedon. The Maronite Patriarch is traditionally seated in
Bkerke north of Beirut. Names. Modern Maronites often adopt French or other
Western European given names (with biblical origins) for their children like
Michel, Marc, Marie, Georges, Carole, Charles, Antoine and Pierre. Given names
of Arabic origins identical with those of their Muslim neighbors are also
common, such as Khalil, Toufic, Jamil, Samir, Salim or Hisham. Other common
names are strictly Christian and are Aramaic, or Arabic, forms of biblical,
Hebrew, or Greek Christian names, such as Antun (Anthony or Antonios), Butros
(Peter), Boulos (Paul), Semaan or Shamaoun (Simon or Simeon), Jergyes (George),
Elie (Ilyas or Elias), Iskander (Alexander) and Beshara (literally Good News in
reference to the Gospel). Other common names are Sarkis (Sergius) and Bakhos
(Bacchus), while others are common both among Christians and Muslims, such as
Youssef (Joseph) or Ibrahim (Abraham). Some Maronite Christians are named in
honour of Maronite saints, including the Aramaic names Maroun (after their
patron saint, Maron), Nimtullah, Charbel and Rafqa (Rebecca). Persecution &
struggle. Maronite Christians felt fear and exclusion from Pan Arabism in
Lebanon. Part of its historic suffering is the Damour massacre by the PLO,
which was a response to the Karantina massacre by Phalangist Christians. Until
recently, the Cyprus Maronites battle to preserve their ancestral language. The
Maronite monks maintain that Lebanon is synonymous with Maronite history and
ethos; that its Maronitism antedates the Arab conquest of Syria and Lebanon and
that Arabism is only a historical accident.
