Messianic Judaism Messianic Judaism is a syncretic religious movement that
arose in the 1960s and 70s. It blends evangelical Christian theology with
elements of religious Jewish practice and terminology. Messianic Judaism
generally holds that Jesus is both the Jewish Messiah and "God the Son" (one
person of the Trinity), though some within the movement do not hold to
Trinitarian beliefs. With few exceptions, both the Tanakh and the New Testament
are believed to be authoritative and divinely inspired scripture. Salvation in
most forms of Messianic Judaism is achieved only through acceptance of Jesus as
one's savior. It is believed that all sin has been atoned for by Jesus' death
and resurrection. Any Jewish laws or customs that are followed are cultural and
do not contribute to attaining salvation. Belief in the messiahship and
divinity of Jesus, which Messianic Judaism generally shares, is viewed by many
Christian denominations and Jewish religious movements as a defining
distinction between Christianity and Judaism. Accordingly, mainstream Christian
groups usually accept Messianic Judaism as a form of Christianity. Some
adherents of Messianic Judaism are ethnically Jewish, and many of them argue
that the movement is a sect of Judaism. Jewish organizations, and the Supreme
Court of Israel (regarding the Law of Return), have rejected this claim, and
instead consider Messianic Judaism to be a form of Christianity. From 2003 to
2007, the movement grew from 150 Messianic houses of worship in the United
States to as many as 438, with over 100 in Israel and more worldwide;
congregations are often affiliated with larger Messianic organizations or
alliances. In 2008, the movement was reported to have between 6,000 and 15,000
members in Israel and 250,000 in the United States. History. Pre-19th century.
Efforts by Jewish Christians to proselytize Jews go back to the first Century
when Paul preached first at the synagogues in each city he visited. However,
early accounts of missions to the Jews, such as Epiphanius of Salamis' record
of the conversion of Count Joseph of Tiberias, and Sozomen's accounts of Jewish
conversions, do not mention converted Jews playing any leading role in
proselytization. Notable converts from Judaism who themselves attempted to
convert other Jews are more visible from at least the 13th century, when Jewish
convert Pablo Christiani attempted to convert other Jews. This activity,
however, typically lacked any independent Jewish-Christian congregations, and
was often imposed through force by organized Christian churches. In the 15th
and 16th century, Jewish Christians occupying professorships at the European
universities began to provide translations of Hebrew texts. Scholars such as
Paul Nu√±ez Coronel, Alfonso de Zamora, Alfonso de Alcal√°, Domenico
Gerosolimitano and Giovanni Battista Jona were actively engaged in spreading
Jewish learning. 19th and early 20th centuries. In the 19th century, some
groups attempted to create congregations and societies of Jewish converts to
Christianity, though most of the early congregations were short-lived. Early
formal organizations run by converted Jews include: the Anglican London Society
for promoting Christianity among the Jews of Joseph Frey (1809), which
published the first "Yiddish New Testament" in 1821; the "Beni Abraham"
association, established by Frey in 1813 with a group of 41 Jewish Christians
who started meeting at Jews' Chapel, London for prayers Friday night and Sunday
morning; and the London Hebrew Christian Alliance of Great Britain founded by
Dr. Carl Schwartz in 1866. The September 1813 meeting of Frey's "Beni Abraham"
congregation at the rented "Jews' Chapel" in Spitalfields is sometimes pointed
to as the birth of the semi-autonomous Hebrew Christian movement within
Anglican and other established churches in Britain, though the non-Anglican
minister of the chapel at Spitalfields evicted Frey and his congregation only
three years later, and Frey severed his connections with the Society. A new
location was found and the Episcopal Jew's Chapel Abrahamic Society registered
in 1835. In Eastern Europe, Joseph Rabinowitz established a Hebrew Christian
mission and congregation called "Israelites of the New Covenant" in Kishinev,
Ukraine in 1884. Rabinowitz was supported from overseas by the Christian
theologian Franz Delitzsch, translator of the first modern "Hebrew New
Testament." In 1865, Rabinowitz created a sample order of worship for Sabbath
morning service based on a mixture of Jewish and Christian elements. Mark John
Levy pressed the Church of England to allow members to embrace Jewish customs.
In the United States, a congregation of Jewish converts to Christianity was
established in New York City in 1885. In the 1890s, immigrant Jewish converts
to Christianity worshiped at the Methodist "Hope of Israel" mission on New
York‚Äôs Lower East Side while retaining some Jewish rites and customs. In
1895, the 9th edition of Hope of Israel's "Our Hope" magazine carried the
subtitle ‚ÄúA Monthly Devoted to the Study of Prophecy and to Messianic
Judaism‚Äù, the first use of the term "Messianic Judaism". Hope of Israel was
controversial; other missionary groups accused its members of being Judaizers,
and one of the two editors of "Our Hope" magazine, Arno C. Gaebelein,
eventually repudiated his views, and, as a result, was able to become a leader
in the mainstream Christian evangelical movement. In 1894, Christian missionary
and Baptist minister Leopold Cohn, a convert from Judaism, founded the
Brownsville Mission to the Jews in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, New
York as a Christian mission to Jews. After several changes in name, structure
and focus, the organization is now called Chosen People Ministries and has
operations and staff in the US and 11 other nations. Missions to the Jews saw a
period of growth between the 1920s and the 1960s. In the 1940s and 50s,
missionaries in Israel, including the Southern Baptists, adopted the term
"meshichyim" (◊û◊©◊ô◊ó◊ô◊ô◊ù "Messianics") to counter negative connotations of
the word "notsrim" (◊ ◊ï◊¶◊®◊ô◊ù "Christians", from "Nazarenes"); the term was
used to designate all Jews who had converted to Protestant evangelical
Christianity. The Messianic Judaism movement, 1970s. Messianic Judaism itself
arose in the 1960s and 70s. In the 1970s, a growing number of young Jews who
had converted to Christianity were committed to maintaining a culturally Jewish
lifestyle, in the mode advocated by Rabinowitz in the 19th century. Going
against the thinking of the older members of the Hebrew Christian movement,
they believed that different methods of evangelism of Jews were needed. They
looked to and adopted some of the evangelizing techniques of Jews for Jesus.
According to Hocken (2009) "the new thrust that turned Hebrew Christians into
Messianic Jews was distinctly charismatic." This reflected the influence of the
charismatic Jesus movement at the same period. These younger members pressed
the HCAA to change the "outdated" name of the Hebrew Christian Alliance of
America (HCAA) to the Messianic Jewish Alliance of America (MJAA). In 1915,
when the HCAA was founded, it had "consistently assuaged the fears of
fundamentalist Christians by emphasizing that it is not a separate denomination
but only an evangelistic arm of the evangelical church", and insisted that it
would be free of these Judaizing practices "now and forever". Martin Chernoff,
who was president of the HCAA from 1971 to 1975, led the effort to shift the
organization's focus. In June 1973, a motion was made to change the name of the
HCAA to the Messianic Jewish Alliance of America (MJAA), and the name was
officially changed in June 1975. According to David A. Rausch, "The name
change, however, signified far more than a semantical expression‚Äîit
represented an evolution in the thought processes and religious and
philosophical outlook toward a more fervent expression of Jewish identity". The
Messianic Israel Alliance, an organization of over 130 Messianic congregations
and ministries, was formed in 1999. Theology and core doctrines. As with many
religious faiths, the exact tenets held vary from congregation to congregation.
In general, essential doctrines of Messianic Judaism include views on God (that
he is omnipotent, omnipresent, eternal, outside creation, infinitely
significant and benevolent‚Äîviewpoints on the Trinity vary), Jesus (who is
believed to be the Jewish Messiah, though views on his divinity vary), written
Torah (with a few exceptions, Messianic Jews believe that Jesus taught and
reaffirmed the Torah and that it remains fully in force), Israel (the Children
of Israel are central to God's plan; replacement theology is opposed), the
Bible (Tanakh and the New Testament are usually considered the divinely
inspired Scripture, though Messianic Judaism is more open to criticism of the
New Testament canon than is Christianity), eschatology (sometimes similar to
many evangelical Christian views), and oral law (See also Christian Oral
Tradition - observance varies, but most deem these traditions subservient to
the written Torah). Certain additional doctrines, including those on sin and
atonement and on faith and works, are more open to differences in
interpretation. God and Jesus. The Trinity. Many Messianic Jews affirm the
doctrine of the Trinity: God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit
as three representations of the same divinity. Jesus. The place of Jesus in
Messianic Judaism is usually clearly defined. His Jewishness and that of all
the original disciples is affirmed. Messianic Judaism asserts that Jesus is the
Word of God become manifest (John 1:1;14), a belief that is identical with
normative Christian doctrine regarding the nature and identity of the son of
God. Furthermore, Messianic Judaism generally asserts that the Messiah has a
dual aspect as revealed in Scripture. Messianic Jews believe Jesus' first role
as Messiah was to rescue the world from spiritual bondage, and that he will
return again to rescue the world from physical oppression and establish his
unending Kingdom‚Äîagain, a belief that is identical to the normative Christian
view of the Messiah. George Berkley writes that the Messianic Jews of the MJAA
"worship not just God but Jesus" whom they call "Yeshua". Scriptures and
writings. The Bible. Both the Tanakh and the New Testament (sometimes called
the "B‚Äôrit Chadasha", from the Hebrew for "new covenant") are usually
considered to be the established and divinely inspired Biblical scriptures by
Messianic Jews. Messianic believers generally consider the written Torah, the
five books of Moses, to remain in force as a continuing covenant, revised by
Jesus in the New Testament, that is to be observed both morally and ritually.
Jesus did not do away with the Torah, but its interpretation is revised through
the Apostolic scriptures. Jewish oral tradition. Some Messianic communities
believe that the rabbinic commentaries such as the Mishnah and the Talmud,
while historically informative and useful in understanding tradition, are not
normative and may not be followed where they differ from the messianic
scriptures. Other Messianic believers call rabbinic commentaries such as the
Mishnah and the Talmud "dangerous", stating that followers of rabbinic and
halakhic explanations and commentaries are not believers in Jesus as the
Messiah. Furthermore, many Messianic believers deny the authority of the
Pharisees, believing that they were superseded, and their teachings
contradicted, by Messianism. There is no unanimity among Messianic
congregations on the issue of the Talmud and the Oral Torah. Most Messianic
congregations and synagogues can be said to believe that the oral traditions
are subservient to the Written Torah, and where there is a conflict between the
Torah and the Talmud, the plain interpretation of the Written Torah take
precedence. Some congregations believe that adherence to the Oral Law, as
encompassed by the Talmud, is against Messianic beliefs, since the Talmud was
not written until after the whole of the affirmed canon (begun 70 CE, completed
approx 500 CE). A few congregations believe that adherence to the Talmud is
outright dangerous. Other congregations are selective in their applications of
Talmudic law. Still others encourage a serious observance of Jewish halakha.
Messianic Bible translations. Messianic Jews generally consider the entire
Christian Bible to be sacred scripture. Theologian David H. Stern in his
"Jewish New Testament Commentary" argues that the writings and teachings of
Paul are fully congruent with Messianic Judaism, and that the New Testament is
to be taken by Messianic Jews as the inspired Word of God. This is the
mainstream view within the movement, although‚Äîas with many religions‚Äîthere
are several schools of thought. A very few Messianic believers are troubled by
the writings of Paul and may reject his writings, holding them in less esteem
than those of the Gospel writers. Messianic publications. There are a number of
Messianic commentaries on various books of the Bible, both Tanakh and New
Testament texts, such as Matthew, Acts, Romans, Galatians, and Hebrews. David
H. Stern has released a one-volume Jewish New Testament Commentary, providing
explanatory notes from a Messianic Jewish point of view. Other noted New
Testament commentary authors include: Joseph Shulam, who has written
commentaries on Acts, Romans, and Galatians; Arnold Fruchtenbaum of Ariel
Ministries, who has written commentaries on the Epistles, Judges & Ruth, and
Genesis, and 7 systematic doctrinal studies; Tim Hegg of TorahResource, who has
written commentaries on Romans, Galatians, Hebrews, and is presently examining
Matthew; Daniel Thomas Lancaster, who has written extensively for the First
Fruits of Zion Torah Club series; Stuart Sacks, author of "Hebrews Through a
Hebrews' Eyes"; and J.K. McKee of TNN Online who has written several volumes
under the byline "for the Practical Messianic" (James, Hebrews, Philippians,
Galatians, and surveys of both the Tanakh and the Apostolic Scriptures).
Attitudes toward Paul. Messianic Jews understand (as suggested by some recent
scholars) that Paul the Apostle (who is often referred to as Sha‚Äôul, his
Hebrew name) remained a Jewish Pharisee even as a believer until his death (see
Paul of Tarsus and Judaism). This is based on Acts 23:6, detailing events after
Paul's acceptance of Jesus as Messiah. "But when Paul perceived that the one
part were Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, Men
brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: of the hope and resurrection
of the dead I am called in question." Messianic believers cite the cutting off
of Paul‚Äôs hair at Cenchrea because of a vow he had taken (Acts 18:18),
references in passing to him observing the Jewish holidays, and his consistent
good standing with his Rabbinic master Gamaliel, to show that he was wholly in
continued observance of the laws and traditions of Judaism. They maintain that
Paul never set out to polarize the gospel between faith and righteous works,
but that one is necessary to maintain the other. The New Perspective on Paul is
important in Messianic Judaism. Sin and atonement. Messianic believers define
sin as transgression of the Torah (Law/Instruction) of God (1 John 3: 4‚Äì5).
Messianics hold to a belief that all sin (whether committed yet or not) is
already atoned for because of Jesus's death and resurrection. Evangelism and
attitudes toward Jews and Israel. Messianic Jews believe God's people have a
responsibility to spread his name and fame to all nations (Psalms 96:3, Ezekiel
3:18‚Äì19) It is believed that the Children of Israel were, remain, and will
continue to be the chosen people of the God, and are central to his plans for
existence. Most Messianic believers, whether Jewish or non-Jewish, can be said
to oppose supersessionism (popularly referred to as replacement theology), the
view that the Church has replaced Israel in the mind and plans of God. There
exist among Messianic believers a number of perspectives regarding who exactly
makes up God's chosen people. Most commonly, Israel is seen as distinct from
the church; Messianic Jews, being a part of both Israel and the church, are
seen as the necessary link between the 'gentile' People of God and the
commonwealth of God's people of Israel. The two-house view, and the "one law/
grafted-in" view are held by many identifying as Messianic, although some
Messianic groups do not espouse these theologies. According to the Messianic
group Jerusalem Council, "the people of Israel are members of the covenant
HaShem made with Avraham, Yitzhak, and Ya'akov. Covenant membership is extended
to converts to Judaism from the nations, as well as to the descendants of
covenant members. Israel is a nation of nations and their descendants, or more
specifically a people group called out from other people groups to be a people
separated unto HaShem for his purposes. HaShem's promise of covenantal
blessings and curses as described in the Torah are unique to Am Yisrael (People
of Israel), and to no other nation or people group. The bible describes an
Israelite as one descended from Ya'akov ben Yitzhak ben Avraham, or one who has
been converted or adopted into that group by either human or spiritual means."
According to certain branches of Messianic Judaism, Jews are individual who
have one or more Jewish parents, or who have undergone halakhic conversion to
Judaism. As in Reform Judaism, those who have Jewish fathers but gentile
mothers are considered Jewish only if the individual claims Jewish identity.
The statement of the Messianic Jewish Rabbinical Council on Jewish identity is
often disputed among Messianic believers who either don't find it necessary or
discourage halakhic conversion, in accordance with their interpretation of
Romans 2:29 (that a "Jew" is not one who is one "outwardly" but is one who is a
Jew in his heart). They also believe that salvation is received by accepting
Jesus into one's heart and confessing that he is Lord. Messianic believers from
the nations are also considered a part of the People of God. Depending on their
status within various Messianic Jewish groups, such as the Union of Messianic
Jewish Congregations, an allowance for formal conversion is made based on their
understanding that Messianic converts are not automatically considered Jewish.
The reasoning for this variance is as follows: While Titus may have been the
norm in the epistles, a Gentile not converted to Judaism, Paul nevertheless
made an exception for Timothy, whom he circumcised and brought under the
Covenant, probably because though Timothy's father was Greek, his mother was
Jewish. According to the statement of the Messianic Jewish Rabbinical Council
regarding Conversion, converts to Judaism do not in any way have a higher
status within Messianic Judaism than the Messianic believers who are considered
by the UMJC to still be gentiles who are attached to their communities. One Law
theology. One Law theology teaches that anyone who is a part of Israel is
obligated to observe the Covenant and its provisions as outlined in the Torah.
Dan Juster of Tikkun, and Russ Resnik of the UMJC, have argued against the One
Law movement's insistence on Gentiles being required to observe the entirety of
Torah in the same way as Jews. Tim Hegg responded to their article defending
what he believes to be the biblical teaching of "One Law" theology and its
implications concerning the obligations of Torah obedience by new Messianic
believers from the nations. Two House theology. Proponents of Two House
theology espouse their belief that the phrase "House of Judah" in scripture
refers to Jews, while "the House of Israel" refers to the Ten Lost Tribes of
Israel, or Ephraim. Where scripture states the House of Israel and Judah will
again be "one stick" (), it is believed to be referring to the End Times,
immediately prior to the Second Coming, when many of those descended from
Israel will come back to Israel. Advocates of this theology postulate that the
reason so many "gentiles" are converting to Messianic Judaism is that the vast
majority of them are truly Israelites. Like One Law groups, the Two House
movement has many superficial similarities to Messianic Judaism, such as their
belief in the ongoing validity of the Mosaic Covenant. While much of the Two
House teaching is based on interpretations of Biblical prophecy, the biggest
disagreements are due to inability to identify the genealogy of the Lost
Tribes. Organizations such as the Messianic Jewish Alliance of America and
Union of Messianic Jewish Congregations have explicitly opposed the Two House
teaching Supersessionism. Historically, Christianity has taught supersessionism
(replacement theology), which implies or outright states that Christianity has
superseded Judaism, that the Mosaic Covenant of the Hebrew Bible has been
superseded by the New Covenant of Jesus, wherein salvation is brought about by
the grace of God, and not by obedience to the Torah. This is generally
complemented with the concept of God having transferred the status of "God's
people" from the Jews to the Christian Church. Messianic Jews, in varying
degrees, challenge both thoughts, and instead believing that although Israel
has rejected Jesus, it has not forfeited its status as God's chosen people
(Matthew 5:17). Often cited is Romans 11:29: "for God's gifts and his call are
irrevocable". The core of supersessionism, in which the Mosaic Covenant is
canceled, is less agreed upon. Though the mitzvot may or may not be seen as
necessary, most are still followed, especially the keeping of Shabbat and other
holy days. Some followers of the movement believe that Jews can still find
favor with God through the Torah without accepting Jesus, as did Moses, David,
and the Prophets. Eschatology. Some Messianic Jews hold to certain
eschatological beliefs concerning events such as the End of Days, the Second
Coming of Jesus as the conquering Messiah, the re-gathering of Israel, a
rebuilt Third Temple, a Resurrection of the Dead, and the Millennial Sabbath.
Some Messianic Jews believe that all of the moedim, and indeed the entire
Torah, intrinsically hint at the Messiah, and thus no study of the End Times is
complete without understanding the major Jewish Festivals in their larger
prophetic context. To certain believers, the feasts of Pesach and Shavuot were
fulfilled in Jesus's first coming, and Yom Teruah, Yom Kippur, and Sukkot will
be at his second. Some also believe in a literal 7000-year period for the human
history of the world, with a Millenial Messianic kingdom prior to a final
judgment. Torah observance. There is a variety of practice within Messianic
Judaism regarding the strictness of Torah observance. Generally, "Torah
observant" congregations observe Jewish Law, biblical feasts, and Sabbath.
While most traditional Christians deny that the ritual laws and specific civil
laws of the Pentateuch apply to gentiles, certain passages regarding Torah
observance in the New Testament are cited by Messianic believers as proof that
Torah was not abolished for Jews. They point out that in Acts 21 Jewish
believers in Jerusalem are described as "zealous for Torah", and that Paul
himself never stopped being observant. Religious practices. Sabbath and holiday
observances. Worship services are generally held on Friday evenings ("Erev
Shabbat") or Saturday mornings. According to the Southern Baptist Messianic
Fellowship (SBMF), services are held on Saturday to "open the doors to Jewish
people who also wish to keep the Sabbath." The liturgy used is similar to that
of a Jewish siddur with some important differences including the omission of of
"salvation by works" as the Messianic belief is Salvation through Jesus.
According to the SBMF, the main purpose in using a liturgy similar to a Jewish
siddur is to bring others to Jesus. Other branches of the movement have
attempted to "eliminate the elements of Christian worship that cannot be
directly linked to their Jewish roots". The Messianic Jewish Rabbinical Council
recommends the observance of Jewish holidays. Most larger Messianic Jewish
congregations follow Jewish custom in celebrating seven key holidays (Pesach,
Shavuot, Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, Sukkot, Hanukkah, and Purim). Celebration
of other holidays is less widespread. Dietary laws. The observance of the
"kashrut" dietary laws is a subject of continued debate among Messianic Jews.
Some Messianic believers keep kosher purely for the purposes of evangelism to
Jewish people. Most avoid pork and shellfish, but there is disagreement on more
strict adherence to kosher dietary laws. Conversion to Messianic Judaism.
Messianic perspectives on "Who is a Jew" vary. The Messianic Jewish Rabbinical
Council, (West Haven, Connecticut, 2006) a global Messianic body, acknowledges
a Jew as one born to a Jewish mother, or who has converted to Judaism. Copying
from the Reform stream of Judaism, the Council also recognizes as a Jew one who
was born to a Jewish father (but not a Jewish mother) on the condition that the
family of the child (or the individual as an adult) has undertaken public and
formal acts of identification of the individual with the Jewish faith and
people. Large numbers of those calling themselves Messianic Jews are not of
Jewish descent, but join the movement anyway as they "enjoy the Messianic
Jewish style of worship." The MJAA views conversion for Gentiles an unbiblical
practice, but accepts gentiles into their congregations, and other Messianic
organizations hold to similar views. Baptism. Messianic Jews practice baptism,
calling it a "mikveh" ("cistern", from Leviticus 11) rather than the term
"hattvila" ("baptism" ◊î◊ò◊ë◊ô◊ú◊î in the Hebrew New Testament). Circumcision.
Some within the Ephraimite movement seek to convert themselves for
identification with Israel, but most Messianic governing bodies acknowledge the
presence of gentiles in the congregations, and do not see a need for them to
convert to worship in the Messianic style and understanding. When conversion is
sincerely desired by a gentile Messianic believer, Messianic Jewish halachic
standards (including circumcision) are imposed to maintain integrity among the
world Messianic Jewish community. Use of Hebrew names and vocabulary in
English. The movement generally avoids common Christian terms, such as Christ
and cross ("tsalav" - ◊¶◊ú◊ë), and prefers to maximise the use of Hebrew terms.
Messianic Jews take the opposite approach from the Sacred Name Movement
regarding the name of God. The transliterated name "Yahweh" is rarely used, nor
the New Testament "Lord", but "HaShem" (Hebrew ◊î◊©◊ù, "the name"). Messianic
Jews take the same approach as the Sacred Name Movement for the name "Yeshua".
Culture. Music. Messianic Jewish hymnologies are not merely Christian
evangelical ones. Many of the hymns relate to Israel‚Äôs role in history,
convey a messianic hope, and refer to Jesus as the Savior of Israel. In
addition , small changes differentiate them from the usual contemporary
evangelical hymns, such as the use of the name Yeshua instead of Jesus.
Messianic hymnals also include a large number of Israeli songs. The movement
also has several recording artists who consider their music to be Messianic in
message, such as Joel Chernoff of the duo Lamb, Paul Wilbur, Marty Goetz, Ted
Pearce and Chuck King. Many of these artists have been influenced by Jewish
music and often incorporate Hebrew phrases into their lyrics. Reception of the
Messianic Judaism movement. Reception among mainstream Christianity. In America
the emergence of the Messianic Jewish movement created some stresses with
previous Jewish-Christian and proselytzing organization; the Fellowship of
Christian Testimonies to the Jews (FCTJ) in 1975 condemned several aspects of
the Messianic Jewish movement. In Israel, the linguistic distinction between
Messianic Jews and generic Christians is less clear, and the name "Messianic"
("Meshiyhiy" ◊û◊©◊ô◊ó◊ô) is commonly used by churches anyway, in preference of
the secular government administrative term for Christian, "Nazarene" ("Notsri"
◊ ◊ï◊¶◊®◊ô). The Israel Trust of the Anglican Church (ITAC) based at Christ
Church, Jerusalem, although ecumenical, and running an inter-faith school in
Jerusalem gives some social support to Messianic Jews in Israel. Reception
among Jews. Specific response to Messianic Judaism. Jewish objections to
Messianic Judaism are numerous, and often begin with objections to the term
"Messianic Judaism" itself: They state that while Judaism is a messianic
religion, its messiah is not Jesus, and thus the term is misleading. Use of
"Judaism" in the term is also considered misleading and as a subversive tactic
used for missionary purposes. All denominations of Judaism, as well as national
Jewish organizations, reject Messianic Judaism being a form of Judaism, often
on the grounds that belief in Jesus as the Messiah is an insuperable dividing
line between Christianity and Judaism. Opposition to Messianic Judaism from the
Jewish community by Robinson, B. (Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance)
Canadian B'nai Brith considers messianic activities as antisemitic incidents.
Several anti-missionary organizations, such as Outreach Judaism and Jews for
Judaism oppose Messianic Judaism on theological grounds, usually from an
Orthodox Jewish perspective. In recent years these organizations have
noticeably narrowed their focus from countering the missionizing of Jews in the
name of Christianity in general to countering the spread of Messianic Judaism
in particular. The Jewish anti-missionary organizations view the latter
(Messianic Judaism) as a more threatening and subversive form of missionary
activity than the former (openly missionizing in the name of Christianity).
Jewish leaders dispute the Jewishness of the movement. Rabbi Tovia Singer,
founder of an organization dedicated to opposing Christian efforts to convert
Jews, noted of a Messianic rabbi in Toledo: "He‚Äôs not running a Jewish
synagogue ... It‚Äôs a church designed to appear as if it were a synagogue and
I‚Äôm there to expose him. What these irresponsible extremist Christians do is
a form of consumer fraud. They blur the distinctions between Judaism and
Christianity in order to lure Jewish people who would otherwise resist a
straightforward message." Religious leaders across the Jewish spectrum have all
declared that Messianic Jews are not Jews. General response of religious
Judaism to Christianity. In Judaism‚Äî Response of Israeli government.
Messianic Jews are considered eligible for the State of Israel's Law of Return
only if they can also claim Jewish descent. An assistant to one of the two
lawyers involved with an April 2008 Supreme Court of Israel case explained to
the Jerusalem Post that Messianic Jews who are not Jewish according to Jewish
law, but who had sufficient Jewish descent to qualify under the Law of Return,
could claim automatic new immigrant status and citizenship despite being
Messianic. The state of Israel grants "Aliyah" (right of return) and
citizenship to Jews, and to those with Jewish parents or grandparents who are
not considered Jews according to halakha, e.g. people who have a Jewish father
but a non-Jewish mother. The old law had excluded any ‚Äúperson who has been a
Jew and has voluntarily changed his religion,‚Äù and an Israeli Supreme Court
decision in 1989 had ruled that Messianic Judaism constituted another religion.
However, on April 16, 2008, the Supreme Court of Israel ruled in a case brought
by a number of Messianic Jews with Jewish fathers and grandfathers. Their
applications for Aliyah had been rejected on the grounds that they were
Messianic Jews. The argument was made by the applicants that they had never
been Jews according to halakha, and were not therefore excluded by the
conversion clause. This argument was upheld in the ruling. The International
Religious Freedom Report 2008, released by the Bureau of Democracy, Human
Rights, and Labor in the US states that discrimination against Messianic Jews
in Israel is increasing. Some acts of violence have also occurred such as
incident on March 20, 2008, a bomb concealed as a Purim gift basket was
delivered to the house of a prominent Messianic Jewish family in Ariel, in the
West Bank, which severely wounded the son. The bombing was eventually traced to
Yaakov "Jack" Teitel, an "alleged Jewish terrorist" who immigrated to Israel
from the United States has been arrested in connection with several bombings,
murders and attempted murders in Israel. This antagonism has led to harassment
and some violence, especially in Israel, where there is a large and militant
Orthodox community. Several Orthodox organizations, including Yad L'Achim, are
dedicated to rooting out missionary activity in Israel, including the Messianic
Jewish congregations. One tactic is to plaster posters asking Israelis to
boycott shops where Messianic Jews are owners or employees; another is to
report Messianic Jews to the Interior ministry, which is charged with enforcing
an Israeli law forbidding proselytizing. In another incident, the mayor of Or
Yehuda, a suburb of Tel Aviv, held a public book-burning of literature passed
out to Ethiopian immigrants. He later apologized for the action. Response of US
government. The US Navy made a decision that Messianic Jewish chaplains must
wear as their insignia the Christian cross, and not the tablets of the law, the
insignia of Jewish chaplains. According to Yeshiva World News, a website
covering stories of Jewish interest, the Navy Uniform Board commanded that
Michael Hiles, a candidate for chaplaincy, wear the Christian insignia. Hiles
resigned from the program, rather than wear the cross. Rabbi Eric Tokajer, a
spokesman for the Messianic Jewish movement, responded that "This decision
essentially bars Messianic Jews from serving as chaplains within the U.S. Navy
because it would require them to wear an insignia inconsistent with their faith
and belief system."
