Messiah A messiah is a savior or liberator of a people in the Jewish,
Christian, Islamic or other religions. In the Hebrew Bible a messiah (or
"mashiach") is a king or High Priest traditionally anointed with holy anointing
oil. However, messiahs were not exclusively Jewish kings, and the Hebrew Bible
refers to Cyrus the Great, king of Persia, as a messiah. Following the death of
Simon bar Kokhba, a messiah came to be a Jewish king who would rule at the end
of history. In later Jewish messianic tradition and eschatology, a messiah is a
leader anointed by God, and in some cases, a future King of Israel, physically
descended from the Davidic line, who will rule the united tribes of Israel and
herald the Messianic Age of global peace. The translation of the Hebrew word ""
as ŒßœÅŒπœÉœÑœåœÇ ("Khrist√≥s") in the Greek Septuagint became the accepted
Christian designation and title of Jesus of Nazareth. Christians believe that
prophecies in the Hebrew Bible (especially Isaiah) refer to a spiritual savior
and believe Jesus to be that Messiah (Christ). Islamic tradition holds the view
that Isa, son of Maryam (aka Jesus, son of Mary), was the promised "nabi"
(Prophet) and "masih" (Messiah) sent to the Israelites, and that he will again
return to Earth in the end times, along with "al-Mahdi", and they will defeat
"Masih ad-Dajjal" (lit. "false Messiah"; cf. antichrist). Etymology. Messiah (;
in modern Jewish texts in English sometimes spelled "Moshiach"; Aramaic: ,
Greek: , Syriac: , , , , Latin: "Messias") literally means "anointed ". In
standard Hebrew, the Messiah is often referred to as ◊û◊ú◊ö ◊î◊û◊©◊ô◊ó ( in the
Tiberian vocalization, pronounced ), literally meaning "the Anointed King." The
Greek Septuagint version of the Old Testament renders all thirty-nine instances
of the Hebrew word for "anointed" ("") as ŒßœÅŒπœÉœÑœåœÇ ("Khrist√≥s"). The New
Testament records the Greek transliteration ŒúŒµœÉœÉŒØŒ±œÇ, "Messias" twice in
John. "Masih" () is the Arabic word for messiah. In modern Arabic, it is used
as one of the many titles of Jesus. Masih is used by Arab Christians as well as
Muslims, and is written as "Yasu' al-Masih" (Ÿäÿ≥Ÿàÿπ ÿßŸÑŸÖÿ≥Ÿäÿ≠ )by
Christian Arabs or "Isa al-Masih" (ÿπŸäÿ≥Ÿâ ÿßŸÑŸÖÿ≥Ÿäÿ≠) by Muslims. The word
"Masih" literally means "The anointed one" and in Islam, "Isa al-Masih" is
believed to have been anointed from birth by All√§h with the specific task of
being a prophet and a king. The Israelites, to whom Isa was sent, had a
traditional practice of anointing their kings with oil. An Imam Bukhari Hadith
describes Jesus as having wet hair that looked as if water was dripping from
it, possibly meaning he was naturally anointed. Muslims believe that this is
just one of the many signs that proves that Jesus is the Messiah. Judaism. The
literal translation of the Hebrew word "moshiach" (messiah) is ‚Äúanointed,‚Äù
which refers to a ritual of consecrating someone or something by putting holy
oil upon it. It is used throughout the Hebrew Bible in reference to a wide
variety of individuals and objects; for example, a Jewish king, Jewish priests,
and prophets, the Jewish Temple and its utensils, unleavened bread, and a non-
Jewish king (Cyrus king of Persia). The Torah describes the advent of a messiah
in the Torah portion of Balak, couched in poetic prophetic prose: "I see him,
but not now. I perceive him, but he is not near. There shall step forth a star
out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of Israel... From Jacob shall issue
out and destroy the remnant of the city", which Jewish Biblical scholars
expound refers to the king's victory over Israel's enemies. Modern Jewish
movements are based on Pharisaic Judaism was embodied in the Talmud. The Talmud
is replete with references and anecdotes about the Messiah and the Messianic
era. It states in "tractate Sanhedrin" "The Jews are destined to eat fill in
the days of the Messiah", "The world was created only...for the sake of the
Messiah." and "All the prophets prophesied the good things only in respect of
the Messianic era." It also provides exegesis of scriptural verses which
illustrate the events that will occur at that time. For example, resurrection
of the dead, which is exegetically supported by a verse in Exodus 15: "Az
Yashir Moshe..." - "Then will sing...", from which is derived that "then" (in
the Messianic Era) Moses will arise and once again sing as he did at the time
of the Exodus. (Some Jewish texts also refer to a "Messiah ben Joseph" or
"Messiah ben Ephraim", a military leader descended from the biblical Ephraim,
who will successfully lead the army of Israel in many battles before being
killed by Armilus, when Israel is defeated by Gog and Magog. His body will
subsequently lie unburied in the Jerusalem streets for forty days, and he will
be the first person resurrected by the Messiah descended from King David). In
Jewish eschatology, the term came to refer to a future Jewish King from the
Davidic line, who will be "anointed" with holy anointing oil and rule the
Jewish people during the Messianic Age. Belief in the eventual coming of a
future messiah is a fundamental part of Judaism, and is one of Maimonides' 13
Principles of Faith. In Judaism, the Messiah is not considered to be God or a
Son of God. Mishneh Torah, Laws of Kings 12:5 Mishneh Torah, Laws of Kings 11:
4 Tracey Rich "Moshiach: The Messiah." The Messianic Idea in Judaism. Judaism
101. Sept. 10, 2009.
www.jewfaq.org/moshiach.htm > A common modern rabbinic interpretation is that
there is a "potential" messiah in every generation. The Talmud, which often
uses stories to make a moral point ("aggadah"), tells of a highly respected
rabbi who found the Messiah at the gates of Rome and asked him, "When will you
finally come?" He was quite surprised when he was told, "Today." Overjoyed and
full of anticipation, the man waited all day. The next day he returned,
disappointed and puzzled, and asked, "You said messiah would come 'today' but
he didn't come! What happened?" The Messiah replied, "Scripture says, 'Today,
'if you will but hearken to His voice.'" A Kabbalistic tradition within Judaism
is that the commonly-discussed messiah who will usher in a period of freedom
and peace (Messiah ben David) will be preceded by Messiah ben Joseph, who will
die sacrificing himself while uniting all of Israel in preparing the world for
the arrival of Messiah ben David. Christianity. Christianity emerged early in
the first century AD as a movement among Jews (Jewish Christians) and their
Gentile converts (sometimes called Godfearers) who believed that Jesus is the
Christ or Messiah. The Greek translation for 'Messiah' is "khristos"
(œáœÅŒπœÉœÑŒøœÇ), anglicized as "Christ". Christians commonly refer to Jesus as
either the "Christ" or the "Messiah." In Christian theology the two words are
synonymous. Christians believe Jesus to be the Messiah that the Jews were
expecting: The first thing Andrew did was to find his brother Simon and tell
him, "We have found the Messiah" (that is, the Christ). And he brought him to
Jesus. The Christian concept of the Christ/Messiah as "the Word made Flesh"
(see also Logos) is fundamentally different from the Jewish and Islamic. The
majority of historical and mainline Christian theologies, as seen within the
Nicene Creed, consider Jesus to be God or God the Son. Christians believe that
Daniel (Hebrew: ◊ì÷∏÷º◊ ÷¥◊ô÷µ÷º◊ê◊ú, or Daniyyel) was a prophet and gave an
indication of when the Messiah, the prince "mashiyach nagiyd", would come in
the Prophecy of Seventy Weeks. Daniel's prophecies refer to him as a descendant
of King David, a Son of Man, who will rebuild the nation of Israel, destroy the
wicked, and ultimately judge the whole world. In the New Testament, Jesus often
referred to himself as 'Son of Man' , a clear reference to the first century
apocrophal book of Enoch Yet for "son of Man (Ben-Adam), one is also wise to
note that HaShem, throughout the Book of "Ezekial," refers to the prophet
himself only by the title "ben-Adam." Because Christians believe that Jesus is
the Messiah and that he claimed to be the Son of Man referred to by Daniel,
Christianity interprets as a statement of the Messiah's authority and that the
Messiah will have an everlasting kingdom in the Messianic Age. Jesus' use of
this title is seen as a direct claim to be the Messiah. Some identified Jesus
as the Messiah, his opponents accused him of such a claim, and he is recorded
at least twice as asserting it himself directly. Christians believe the
Messianic prophecies were fulfilled in the mission, death, and resurrection of
Jesus, and seeks to spread throughout the world its interpretation that the
Messiah (Jesus) is the only God, and that Jesus will return to fulfill the rest
of Messianic prophecy. Islam. The Qur'an states Jesus the Son of Mary (Arabic:
"Isa ibn Maryum") is the Messiah or "Prophet" sent to the Jews, and Muslims
believe Jesus is alive in Heaven and will return to Earth to defeat the
Antichrist ("Arabic: Dajjal"). In Islam, Isa is believed to hold the task of
killing the false messiah (al-Dajjal, a figure similar to the Antichrist in
Christianity), who will emerge shortly before him during "Qiyamah" (Armageddon
in Islamic belief). After he has destroyed al-Dajjal, his final task will be to
become leader of the Muslims. Isa will unify the Muslim Ummah (the followers of
Islam) under the common purpose of worshipping Allah alone in pure Islam,
thereby ending divisions and deviations by adherents. Mainstream Muslims
believe that at that time Isa will dispel Christian and Jewish claims about
him. Narrated Abu Hurayrah: The Prophet said: There is no prophet between me
and him, that is, Jesus. He will descend (to the earth). When you see him,
recognise him: a man of medium height, reddish hair, wearing two light yellow
garments, looking as if drops were falling down from his head though it will
not be wet. He will fight for the cause of Islam. He will break the cross, kill
the swine, and put an end to war (in another Tradition, there is the word
Jizyah instead of "Harb" (war), meaning that he will abolish jizyah); God will
perish all religions except Islam. He will destroy the Antichrist who will live
on the earth for forty days and then he will die. The Muslims will pray behind
him. Both Sunni and Shia Muslims agree al-Mahdi will arrive first, and after
him, Jesus. Jesus will proclaim that the true leader is al-Mahdi. A war,
literally Jihad (Jihade Asghar) will be fought‚Äîthe Dajjal (evil) against al-
Mahdi and Jesus (good). This war will mark the approach of the coming of the
Last Day. After Jesus slays al-DajjƒÅl at the Gate of Lud, he will bear witness
and reveal that Islam is indeed the true and last word from God to humanity as
Yusuf Ali's translation reads: "And there is none of the People of the Book but
must believe in him before his death; and on the Day of Judgment He will be a
witness against them." He will live for several years, marry, have children and
will be buried in Medina. Very few scholars outside of mainstream Islam reject
all the quotes (Hadith) attributed to Prophet Muhammad that mention the second
return of Jesus, the Dajjal and Imam Mahdi, believing that they have no
Qur'anic basis. However, Quran emphatically rejects the implication of
termination of Jesus‚Äô life when he was allegedly crucified. Yusuf Ali‚Äôs
translation reads "That they said (in boast), "We killed Christ Jesus the son
of Mary, the Messenger of Allah";‚Äï but they killed him not, nor crucified
him, but so it was made to appear to them and those who differ therein are full
of doubts, with no (certain) knowledge, but only conjecture to follow, for of a
surety they killed him not.‚Äï (157) Nay, Allah raised him up unto Himself; and
Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise. (158) Verses imply that Jesus was not killed
physically but it was made to appear so. Verse "So Peace is on me the day I was
born, the day that I die and the day that I shall be raised up to life
(again)"! implies that Jesus will die someday. The unified opinion of Islam
maintains that the bodily death of Jesus will happen after his second coming.
Many classical commentators such as Ibn Kathir, At-Tabari, al-Qurtubi, Suyuti,
al-Undlusi (Bahr al-Muhit), Abu al-Fadl al-Alusi (Ruh al-Maani) clearly mention
that verse of the Qur'an refers to the descent of Jesus before the Day of
Resurrection, indicating that Jesus would be the Sign that the Hour is close.
Ahmadiyya. In Ahmadiyya, the terms "Messiah" and "Mahdi" are synonymous terms
for one and the same person. The term "Mahdi" means "guided" by God, thus
implying a direct ordainment by God of a divinely chosen individual. According
to Ahmadiyya thought, Messiahship is a phenomenon through which a special
emphasis is given on the transformation of a people by way of offering
suffering for the sake of God instead of giving suffering (i.e. refraining from
revenge). Ahmadis believe that this special emphasis was given through the
person of Jesus and Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835‚Äì1908). among others. Ahmadis
hold that the prophesied eschatological figures of Christianity and Islam, the
Messiah and Mahdi, were in fact to be fulfilled in one person who was to
represent all previous prophets. The prophecies concerning the Mahdi or the
Second Coming of Jesus are seen by Ahmadis as metaphorical and subject to
interpretation. It is argued that one was to be born and rise within the
dispensation of Muhammad, who by virtue of his similarity and affinity with
Jesus, and the similarity in nature, temperament and disposition of the people
of Jesus' time and the people of the time of the promised one (the Mahdi) is
called by the same name. Numerous hadith are presented by the Ahmadis in
support of their view, such as one from Sunan Ibn Majah which says, "There is
No Mahdi but Jesus son of Mary". Ahmadis believe that the prophecies concerning
the Mahdi and the second coming of Jesus have been fulfilled in Mirza Ghulam
Ahmad (1835‚Äì1908), the founder of the Ahmadiyya Movement. Contrary to
mainstream Islam, the Ahmadis do not believe that Jesus is alive in heaven, but
that he survived the crucifixion and migrated towards the east where he died a
natural death and that Ghulam Ahmad was only the promised spiritual second
coming and likeness of Jesus, the promised Messiah and Mahdi.
