Mikveh Mikveh (sometimes spelled as mikvah, or either way without the ending -
"h") (; plural: "mikva'ot" or "mikves" (Yiddish) ) is a bath used for the
purpose of ritual immersion in Judaism. The word "mikveh", as used in the
Hebrew Bible, literally means a "collection" â€“ generally, a collection of
water. Several biblical regulations specify that full immersion in water is
required to regain ritual purity after ritually impure incidents have occurred.
Most forms of impurity can be nullified through immersion in any natural
collection of water. Some, such as a Zav, however require "living water," such
as springs or groundwater wells. Living water has the further advantage of
being able to purify even while flowing, as opposed to rainwater which must be
stationary in order to purify. The "mikveh" is designed to simplify this
requirement, by providing a bathing facility that remains in ritual contact
with a natural source of water. In Orthodox Judaism, these regulations are
steadfastly adhered to, and consequently the mikveh is central to an Orthodox
Jewish community, and they formally hold in Conservative Judaism as well. The
existence of a mikveh is considered so important in Orthodox Judaism, that an
Orthodox community is required to construct a mikveh before building a
synagogue, and must go to the extreme of selling Torah scrolls or even a
synagogue if necessary, to provide funding for the construction. Reform Judaism
and Reconstructionist Judaism regard the biblical regulations as anachronistic
to some degree, and consequently do not put much importance on the existence of
a mikveh. Some opinions within Conservative Judaism have sought to retain the
ritual requirements of a mikveh while recharacterizing the theological basis of
the ritual in concepts other than ritual purity. Ancient mikvehs dating from
before the late first century can be found throughout the land of Israel as
well as in historic communities of the Jewish diaspora. In modern times,
mikvehs can be found in most communities in Orthodox Judaism. Jewish funeral
homes may have a mikveh for immersing a body during the purification procedure
("tahara") before burial. Requirements of a mikveh. The traditional rules
regarding the construction of a mikveh are based on those specified in
classical rabbinical literature. According to these rules, a mikveh must be
connected to a natural spring or well of naturally occurring water, and thus
can be supplied by rivers and lakes which have natural springs as their source.
A cistern filled by the rain is also permitted to act as a mikveh's water
supply. Similarly snow, ice and hail are allowed to act as the supply of water
to a mikveh, as long as it melts in a certain manner. A river that dries up on
a regular basis cannot be used because it is presumed to be mainly rainwater,
which cannot purify while flowing. Oceans for the most part have the status of
natural springs. A mikveh must, according to the classical regulations, contain
enough water to cover the entire body of an average-sized person; based on a
mikveh with the dimensions of 3 cubits long, 1 cubit wide, and 1 cubit deep,
the necessary volume of water was "estimated" as being 40 "seah" of water. The
exact volume referred to by a "seah" is debated, and classical rabbinical
literature specifies only that it is enough to fit 144 eggs; most Orthodox Jews
use the stringent ruling of the Avrohom Yeshaya Karelitz, according to which
one "seah" is 14.3 litres, and therefore a mikveh must contain approximately
575 litres. This volume of water could be topped up with water from any source,
but if there were less than 40 seahs of water in the mikveh, then the addition
of 3 or more pints of water from an unnatural source would render the mikveh
unfit for use, regardless of whether water from a natural source was then added
to make up 40 seahs from a natural source; a mikveh rendered unfit for use in
this way would need to be completely drained away and refilled from scratch.
There are also classical requirements for the manner in which the water can be
stored and transported to the pool; the water must flow naturally to the mikveh
from the source, which essentially means that it must be supplied by gravity or
a natural pressure gradient, and the water cannot be pumped there by hand or
carried. It was also forbidden for the water to pass through any vessel which
could hold water within it (however pipes open to the air at both ends are
fine) As a result, tap water could not be used as the primary water source for
a mikveh, although it can be used to top the water up to a suitable level. To
avoid issues with these rules in large cities, various methods are employed to
establish a valid mikveh. One is that tap water is made to flow over the top of
a kosher mikveh, and through a conduit into a larger pool. A second method is
to create a mikveh in a deep pool, place a floor with holes over that and then
fill the upper pool with tap water. In this way, the person dipping is actually
"in" the pool of rain water. Most contemporary mikvehs are indoor
constructions, involving rain water collected from a cistern, and passed
through a duct by gravity into an ordinary bathing pool; the mikveh can be
heated, taking into account certain rules, often resulting in an environment
not unlike a spa. Reasons for immersion in a Mikveh. Historic reasons.
Traditionally, the mikveh was used by both men and women to regain ritual
purity after various events, according to regulations laid down in the Torah
and in classical rabbinical literature. The Torah requires full immersion
Classical rabbinical writers conflated the rules for zavah and niddah. It also
became customary for priests to fully immerse themselves before Jewish
holidays, and the laity of many communities subsequently adopted this practice.
Converts to Judaism are required to undergo full immersion in water. R' Aryeh
Kaplan in Waters of Life connects the laws of impurity to the narrative in the
beginning of Genesis. According to Genesis, by eating of the fruit, Adam and
Eve had brought death into the world. Kaplan points out that most of the laws
of impurity relate to some form of death (or in the case of Niddah the loss of
a potential life). One who comes into contact with one of the forms of death
must then immerse in water which is described in Genesis as flowing out of the
Garden of Eden (the source of life) in order to cleanse oneself of this contact
with death (and by extension of sin). Orthodox Judaism. Orthodox Judaism
generally adheres to the classical regulations and traditions, and consequently
Orthodox Jewish women are obligated to immerse in a mikveh between Niddah and
sexual relations with their husbands. This includes brides before their
marriage, and married women after their menstruation period or childbirth. In
accordance with Orthodox rules concerning modesty, men and women are required
to immerse in separate mikveh facilities in separate locations, or to use the
mikveh at different designated times. Converts to Orthodox Judaism, regardless
of gender, are also required to immerse in a mikveh. It is customary for
Orthodox Jews to immerse before Yom Kippur, and married women sometimes do so
as well. In the customs of certain Jewish communities, men also use a mikveh
before Jewish holidays; the men in certain communities, especially hasidic and
haredi groups, also practice immersion before each Shabbat, and some immerse in
a mikveh every single day. Although the Temple Mount is treated by many
Orthodox Jewish authorities as being forbidden territory, a small number of
groups permit access, but require immersion before ascending the Mount as a
precaution. Orthodox Judaism requires that vessels and utensils must be
immersed in a mikveh before being used for food, if they had been purchased
from a non-Jew. Customary immersion in Orthodox Judaism. Immersion for men is
more common in Hasidic communities, and non-existent in others, like Yekke
communities. Conservative Judaism. In a series of responsa on the subject of
Niddah in December 2006, the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards of
Conservative Judaism reaffirmed a requirement that Conservative women use a
mikveh monthly following the end of the niddah period following menstruation,
while adapting certain leniencies including reducing the length of the period.
The three responsa adapted permit a range of approaches from an opinion
reaffirming the traditional ritual to an opinion declaring the concept of
ritual purity does not apply outside the Temple in Jerusalem, proposing a new
theological basis for the ritual, adapting new terminology including renaming
the observances related to menstruation from "taharat hamishpacha" family
purity to "kedushat hamishpaha" holiness to reflect the view that the concept
of ritual purity is no longer considered applicable, and adopting certain
leniencies including reducing the length of the niddah period. Isaac Klein's "A
Guide to Jewish Religious Practice", a comprehensive guide frequently used
within Conservative Judaism also addresses Conservative views on other uses of
a mikveh, but because it predates the 2006 opinions it describes an approach
more closely resembling the Orthodox one and does not address the leniencies
and views those opinions reflected. Rabbi Miriam Berkowitz's recent book
"Taking the Plunge: A Practical and Spiritual Guide to the Mikveh" (Jerusalem:
Schechter Institute, 2007) offers a comprehensive discussion of contemporary
issues and new mikveh uses along with traditional reasons for observance,
details of how to prepare and what to expect, and how the laws developed.
Conservative Judaism encourages but does not require immersion before Jewish
Holidays (including Yom Kippur), nor the immersion of utensils purchased from
non-Jews. New uses are being developed throughout the liberal world for healing
(after rape, incest, divorce etc.) or celebration (milestone birthdays,
anniversaries, ordination, or reading Torah for the first time). Although
monthly immersion is formally required of Conservative Jewish women, the
practice is not widely adhered to within the Conservative laity. However more
and more congregations are building their own mikvaot, and observance is
becoming more popular. Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism. Reform and
Reconstructionist Judaism do not hold the halachic requirements of mikveh the
way orthodox Judaism does. However, there are growing trends toward using
mikveh for conversions, wedding preparation, and even before holidays. While
most Reform Jews will probably never see the inside of a mikveh, there are many
(particularly converts) who will fulfill the mitzvah at least once in their
lives. Requirements during use of a mikveh. The classical requirement for full
immersion was traditionally interpreted as requiring water to literally touch
every part of the body, and for this reason all clothing, jewellery, and even
bandages must be removed; in a contemporary mikveh used by women, there is
usually an experienced attendant, commonly called the "mikveh lady", to watch
the immersion and ensure that the woman has been entirely covered in water.
According to rabbinical tradition, the hair counts as part of the body, and
therefore water is required to touch all parts of it, thus meaning that braids
cannot be worn during immersion; this has resulted in debate between the
different ethnic groups within Judaism, about whether hair combing is necessary
before immersion. The Ashkenazi community generally supports the view that hair
must be combed straight so that there are no knots, but some Black Jews take
issue with this stance, particularly when it comes to dreadlocks. A number of
rabbinical rulings argue in support of dreadlocks, on the basis that
Allegorical uses of the term Mikveh. In the Mishnah, following on from a
discussion about Yom Kippur, immersion in a Mikveh is compared by Rabbi Akiva
with the relationship between God and Israel. Akiva refers to the description
of God in the Book of Jeremiah as the "Mikveh of Israel", and suggests that
"just as a mikveh purifies the contaminated, so does the Holy One, blessed is
he, purify Israel". A different allegory is used by many Jews adhering to a
belief in resurrection as one of the Thirteen Principles of Faith. Since
"living water" in a lifeless frozen state (as ice) is still likely to again
become living water (after melting), it became customary in traditional Jewish
bereavement rituals to read the seventh chapter of the Mikvaot tractate in the
Mishnah, following a funeral; the Mikvaot tractate covers the laws of the
mikveh, and the seventh chapter starts with a discussion of substances which
can be used as valid water sources for a mikveh - snow, hail, frost, ice, salt,
and pourable mud.
