Moravian Church The Moravian Church (, meaning "Unity of the Brethren") is a
Protestant denomination. This church was formed in Moravia (original Morava),
but its religious heritage began in 1457 in Kunvald, Bohemia, autonomy region
of Holy Roman Empire. It places a high premium on Christian unity, personal
piety, missions, and music. The church's emblem is the Lamb of God "(right)"
with the flag of victory, surrounded by the Latin inscription: "Vicit agnus
noster, eum sequamur", or in English: "Our Lamb has conquered, let us follow
Him". History. The movement that was to become the Moravian Church was started
by Jan Hus () in the late 14th century. Hus objected to some of the practices
of the Roman Catholic Church and wanted to return the church in Bohemia and
Moravia to what were the practices in these territories when it had been
Eastern Orthodox: liturgy in the language of the people (i.e. Czech), having
lay people receive communion in both kinds (bread "and" wine - that is, in
Latin, communio sub utraque specie), married priests, and eliminating
indulgences and the idea of Purgatory. Evidence of their roots in Eastern
Orthodoxy can be seen today in their form of the Nicene Creed, which like
Orthodox Churches, does not include the filioque clause. In rejecting
indulgences, Jan Hus can be said to have adopted a doctrine of justification by
grace through faith alone; in doing so, the Moravians arguably became the first
Protestant church. The movement gained royal support and a certain independence
for a while, but was eventually forced to be subject to Rome. Hus was tried by
the Council of Constance, declared a heretic, and burned at the stake on 6 July
1415. Within fifty years of Hus's death, a contingent of his followers had
become independently organised as the "Bohemian Brethren" ("ƒåe≈°t√≠ brat≈ôi")
or Unity of the Brethren ("Jednota bratrsk√°"), which was founded in Kunvald,
Bohemia, in 1457. They received episcopal ordination through the Waldensians in
1467. These were some of the earliest Protestants, rebelling against Rome some
fifty years before Martin Luther. By the middle of the 16th century as many as
90 per cent of the inhabitants of the Czech Crown lands were Protestant. The
majority of nobility was Protestant, the schools and printing-shops established
by the Moravian Church were flourishing. The Protestant Hussites were working
for the provision of universal education, which was a particular challenge for
the Catholics. By the middle of the 16th century there was not a single town
without a Protestant school in the Czech lands, and many had more than one,
mostly with two to six teachers each. In Jihlava, a principal Protestant center
in Moravia, there were six schools: two Czech, two German, one for girls and
one teaching in Latin, which was at the level of a high / grammar school,
lecturing on Latin, Greek and Hebrew, Rhetorics, Dialectics, fundamentals of
Philosophy and fine arts, as well as religion according to the Lutheran
Augustana. With the University of Prague also firmly in hands of Protestants,
the local Catholic church was unable to compete in the field of education.
Therefore the Jesuits were invited, with the backing of the Catholic Habsburg
rulers, to come to the Czech lands and establish a number of Catholic
educational institutions, foremost the Academy in Prague and the Academy in
Olomouc, Moravian capital. Emperor Matthias sought to install the fiercely
Catholic Ferdinand of Styria on the Bohemian throne (which was conjoined with
that of the March of Moravia), but in 1618 the Protestant Bohemian noblemen,
who feared losing religious freedom (two of the Protestant churches being
already forcibly closed), started the Bohemian Revolt. The Revolt was defeated
in 1620 in the Battle of White Mountain. As consequence the local Protestant
noblemen were either executed or expelled from the country while the Habsburgs
placed Catholic (and mostly German speaking) nobility into their place. The
war, plague, and subsequent disruption led to a decline in the population from
over 3 million to some 800,000 people. By 1622 the entire education system of
the Czech lands was in the hands of Jesuits and all Protestant schools were
closed. The Habsburgs not only suppressed Protestantism but also the Czech
language: books written in Czech were burned and any publication in Czech was
considered to be heresy by the Jesuits. The Czech language was gradually
reduced to a means of communication between peasants, who were often
illiterate. The Brethren were forced to operate underground and eventually
dispersed across Northern Europe as far as the Low Countries, where Bishop John
Amos Comenius attempted to direct a resurgence. The largest remaining
communities of the Brethren were located in Leszno () in Poland, which had
historically strong ties with the Czechs, and small, isolated groups in
Moravia. These latter are referred to as "the Hidden Seed" which John Amos
Comenius had prayed would preserve the evangelical faith in the land of the
fathers. Today, the Czechoslovak Hussite Church claims also to be a modern
successor of the Hussite tradition. Herrnhuter Br√ºdergemeine, 18th-century
renewal. In 1722, a small group of Bohemian Brethren (the so-called "Hidden
Seed") who had been living in northern Moravia as an illegal underground
remnant surviving in Catholic setting of the Habsburg Empire for nearly 100
years, arrived at the Berthelsdorf estate of Nikolaus Ludwig von Zinzendorf, a
nobleman who had been brought up in the traditions of Pietism. Out of a
personal commitment to helping the poor and needy, he agreed to a request from
their leader (Christian David, an itinerant carpenter) that they be allowed to
settle on his lands in Upper Lusatia, which is in present-day Saxony in the
eastern part of modern-day Germany. The refugees established a new village
called Herrnhut, about 2 miles (3¬ km) from Berthelsdorf. The town initially
grew steadily, but major religious disagreements emerged and by 1727 the
community was divided into warring factions. Count Zinzendorf worked to bring
about unity in the town and the "Brotherly Agreement" was adopted by the
community on 12 May 1727. This is considered the beginning of the renewal.
Then, on 13 August 1727 the community underwent a dramatic transformation when
the inhabitants of Herrnhut "learned to love one another", following an
experience that they attributed to a visitation of the Holy Spirit, similar to
that recorded in the Bible on the day of Pentecost. Missions. Along with the
Royal Danish Mission College, the Moravian missionaries were the first large-
scale Protestant missionary movement. They sent out the first missionaries when
there were only 300 inhabitants in Herrnhut. Within 30 years, the church sent
hundreds of Christian missionaries to many parts of the world, including the
Caribbean, North and South America (see Christian Munsee), the Arctic, Africa,
and the Far East. They were the first to send lay people (rather than clergy)
as missionaries, the first Protestant denomination to minister to slaves, and
the first Protestant presence in many countries. Owing to Zinzendorf's personal
contacts with their royalty, the first Moravian missions were directed to the
Dano-Norwegian Empire. While attending the coronation of Christian VI of
Denmark, he was profoundly struck by two Inuit converts of Hans Egede's mission
in Greenland and also by an African from the West Indies. The first Moravian
mission was established on the Caribbean island of St Thomas in 1732 by a
potter named Johann Leonhard Dober and a carpenter named David Nitschmann, who
later became the first bishop of the Renewed Unity in 1735. and two others
founded the first Moravian mission in Greenland in 1733 at Neu-Herrnhut on
Baal's River, which became the nucleus of the modern capital Nuuk. Moravians
founded missions with Algonquian-speaking Mohican in the British colony of New
York in British North America. For instance, they founded one in 1740 at the
Mohican village of "Shekomeko" in present-day Dutchess County, New York. The
converted Mohican people formed the first native Christian congregation in the
present-day United States. Because of local hostility to the Mohican, the
Moravian support of the Mohican led to rumors of their being secret Jesuits,
trying to ally the Mohican with France in the on-going French and Indian Wars.
Although supporters defended their work, at the end of 1744, the colonial
government based at Poughkeepsie expelled the Moravians from New York. In 1741,
David Nitschmann and Count Zinzendorf led a small community to found a mission
in the colony of Pennsylvania. The mission was established on Christmas Eve,
and was named "Bethlehem", after the Biblical town in Judea. There, they
ministered to the Algonquian Lenape. Bethlehem, Pennsylvania is today the sixth
largest city in Pennsylvania. Later, colonies were also founded in North
Carolina, where Moravians led by Bishop August Gottlieb Spangenberg purchased
98,985 acres (400.58 km2) from John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville. This large
tract of land was named "die Wachau", or Wachovia, after one of Zinzendorf's
ancestral estates on the Danube River in Austria. Other early settlements
included Bethabara (1753), Bethania (1759) and Salem (now referred to as Old
Salem in Winston-Salem North Carolina) (1766). In 1801 the Moravians
established a mission to the Cherokee Nation in present day Murray County
Georgia that remained until the forced removal of the Cherokees to Oklahoma,
and remained active there through the end of the American Civil War in 1865.
The mission was transferred to the Danish Lutheran Church and continues now as
the Oaks Mission School in Oklahoma. The start of far-flung missionary work
necessitated the setting up of independently administered Provinces. So, from
c1732, the history of the church becomes the history of its provinces.
Eventually, the Moravian missions in Australia and Greenland were transferred
to the local Presbyterian and Lutheran Churches respectively. Present. The
modern "Unitas Fratrum" (or Moravian Church) with about 825,000 members
worldwide, continues to draw on traditions established during the 18th-century
renewal. In many places it observes the convention of the lovefeast, originally
started in 1727. It uses older and traditional music in worship. Brass music,
congregational singing and choral music continue to be very important in
Moravian congregations. In addition, in some older congregations, Moravians are
buried in a traditional God's Acre, a graveyard with only flat gravestones,
signifying the equality of the dead before God and organized by gender, age and
marital status rather than family. The Moravians continue their long tradition
of missionary work, for example in the Caribbean, where the Jamaican Moravian
Church has begun work in Cuba and in West Africa where the Moravian Church in
Tanzania has missions in Zaire and Uganda. This is reflected in their broad
global distribution. The Moravians in Germany, whose central settlement remains
at Herrnhut, are highly active in education and social work. The American
Moravian Church sponsors the Moravian College and Seminary. The largest
concentration of Moravians today is in Tanzania. The motto of the Moravian
church is: "In essentials, unity; in nonessentials, liberty; and in all things,
love". Some Moravian scholars point to a different formula as a guide to
constructive debate about faith. This formula was first advanced by Luke of
Prague (1460‚Äì1528), one of the bishops of the ancient Unitas Fratrum. Luke
taught that one must distinguish between things that are essential, ministerial
or incidental to salvation. The essentials are God's work of creation,
redemption and sanctification, as well as the response of the believer through
faith, hope and love. Things ministerial are such items as the Bible, church,
sacraments, doctrine and priesthood. These mediate the sacred and should thus
be treated with respect, but they are not considered essential. Finally,
incidentals include things such as vestments or names of services that may
reasonably vary from place to place. Organization. Provinces. For its global
work, the Church is organised into Unity Provinces, Mission Provinces and
Mission Areas. This categorisation is based on the level of independence of the
Province. Unity Province implies a total level of independence, Mission
Province implies a partial level of supervision from a Unity Province, and
Mission Area implies full supervision by a Unity Province. (The links below
connect to articles about the history of the Church in specific provinces after
1732, where written.) Mission Areas. Tanzania is divided into five provinces
because of the size of country and the numbers of people in the church. "The
Moravian Church in Tanzania" co-ordinates the work in the nation. The lists
above, except for some details given under 'Other areas', can be found in "The
Moravian Almanac". Each Province is governed by a synod, made up of
representatives from each congregation plus "ex officio" members. The Synod
elects the Provincial Board (aka Provincial Elders' Conference or PEC) to be
responsible for the work of the Province and its international links between
Synods. Districts. Many, but not all, of the Provinces are divided into
Districts. "District Conferences need a mention". Congregations. Each
congregation belongs to a district and has spiritual and financial
responsibilities for work in its own area as well as provincially. The
Congregation Council (all the members of a congregation) usually meets twice a
year and annually elects the Joint Board of Elders and Trustees that acts as an
executive. In some provinces two or more congregations may be grouped into
circuits, under the care of one minister. Unity Synod and Board. The Unity
Synod meets every 7 years and is attended by delegates from the different Unity
Provinces and affiliated Provinces.. The Unity Board is made up of one member
from each Provincial Board, and acts as an executive committee between Unity
Synods. It meets three times between Synods but much of its work is done by
correspondence and postal voting. There is no "Head Office". The President of
the Unity Board (who is elected by the Board for two years and not allowed to
serve for more than two terms) works from his/her own Provincial office. Orders
of Ministry. Ordained ministry in the Moravian Church emphasizes the pastoral
role. A candidate for ministry who has been approved by their home province and
has completed the prescribed course of study (usually a Master of Divinity
degree in the US and Europe) may be ordained a Deacon upon acceptance of a
call. Deacons may serve in a pastoral office and administer sacraments. A
deacon is normally supervised by a presbyter who serves as mentor. After
several years of satisfactory service, the Deacon may be consecrated as a
Presbyter. Presbyters function in the local congregation in the same manner as
deacons, but may also serve to mentor deacons and may be assigned to other
leadership roles in a particular province. An Acolyte is a layperson who has
received approval to assist the pastor in a specific local congregation. The
acolyte may assist in the serving of Holy Communion but may not consecrate the
elements. The highest order of ministry is that of a Bishop. Bishops are
elected by Provincial Synods usually through ecclesiastical ballot without
nomination. In the Moravian Church, bishops do not have an administrative role
but rather serve as spiritual leaders and pastors to the pastors. Bishops serve
the worldwide Unity. The Moravian Church is reputed to have received the
Apostolic Succession through the Waldensian Church, but the historicity of this
is disputed. Beliefs. These tenets of classical Christianity are not unique to
the Moravian Church. The emphasis in both the Ancient Unity and the Renewed
Unity is on Christian living and the fellowship of believers as a true witness
to a vibrant Christian Faith. Spirit of the Moravian Church. An account of the
ethos of the Moravian Church is given by one of its British bishops, Clarence
H. Shawe. In a lecture series delivered at the Moravian Theological Seminary in
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, Shawe described the Spirit of the Moravian Church as
having five characteristics: simplicity, happiness, unintrusiveness,
fellowship, and the ideal of service. Simplicity is a focus on the essentials
of faith and a lack of interest in the niceties of doctrinal definition. Shawe
quotes Zinzendorf's remark that "The Apostles say: 'We believe we have
salvation through the grace of Jesus Christ...' If I can only teach a person
that catechism I have made him a divinity scholar for all time" (Shawe, 1977,
p. 9). From this simplicity flow secondary qualities of genuineness and
practicality. Happiness is the natural and spontaneous response to God's free
and gracious gift of salvation. Again Shawe quotes Zinzendorf: "There is a
difference between a genuine Pietist and a genuine Moravian. The Pietist has
his sin in the foreground and looks at the wounds of Jesus; the Moravian has
the wounds in the forefront and looks from them upon his sin. The Pietist in
his timidity is comforted by the wounds; the Moravian in his happiness is
shamed by his sin" (p. 13). Unintrusiveness is based on the Moravian belief
that God positively wills the existence of a variety of churches to cater for
different spiritual needs. There is no need to win converts from other
churches. The source of Christian unity is not legal form but everyone's heart-
relationship with the Saviour. Fellowship is based on this heart-relationship.
Shawe says: "The Moravian ideal has been to gather together kindred hearts...
Where there are 'Christian hearts in love united', there fellowship is possible
in spite of differences of intellect and intelligence, of thought, opinion,
taste and outlook. ... Fellowship Zinzendorf's time meant not only a bridging
of theological differences but also of social differences; the artisan and
aristocrat were brought together as brothers and sat as equal members on the
same committee" (pp. 21,22). The ideal of service entails happily having the
attitude of a servant. This shows itself partly in faithful service in various
roles within congregations but more importantly in service of the world "by the
extension of the Kingdom of God". Historically, this has been evident in
educational and especially missionary work. Shawe remarks that "none could give
themselves more freely to the spread of the gospel than those Moravian
emigrants who, by settling in Herrnhut on Zinzendorf's estate, had gained
release from suppression and persecution." (p. 26). Ecumenical relations. The
Moravian Church provinces are members individually of the World Council of
Churches and the Lutheran World Federation. Most provinces are also members of
their national councils of churches, such as the Evangelische Kirche in
Deutschland (EKD) in Germany and the National Council of Churches of Christ in
the US. The American Southern Province was instrumental in the founding the
North Carolina Council of Churches. The British Province is of the Churches
Together in Britain and Ireland (formerly the British council of Churches) and
has an interim Communion agreement with the Church of England. The two North
American provinces are in full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church
in America (ELCA). The Northern Province of the Moravian Church voted June 18,
2010 to enter into full communion with the Episcopal Church. The Moravian
Church's Southern Province also voted to enter into full communion with the
Episcopal Church during its synod in September 2010. Each province can
independently enter into full communion relationships. In the 1980s there were
discussions in England by which an agreement was created that would have
created full communion between the Moravians, Presbyterians, Methodists, and
the Church of England. The Presbyterians and Methodists would have accepted the
Historic Episcopate, but since the Moravians already had this, they would have
changed nothing. This agreement fell through because the Church of England
synod did not give approval. One aspect of Moravian history and mission is the
so-called "Diaspora" work in Germany and Eastern Europe, seeking to deepen and
encourage the Christian life among members of the territorial churches,
particularly in Poland and the Baltic states, but also throughout the German-
speaking lands. Count Zinzendorf's ideal was a fellowship of all Christians,
regardless of denominational names, and the Moravian Brethren sought in the
Diaspora not to convert people to the Moravian Church but to awaken the hearts
of believers and make them better members of the churches to which they already
belonged. At first the object of suspicion, in the course of time the Moravian
Diaspora workers became valued co-workers in eastern Europe. This Diaspora work
suffered almost total destruction in World War II, but is still carried on
within the territorial churches of Germany. With the independence of the Baltic
republics of Estonia and Latvia, it was revealed that much of the Diaspora Work
there had been kept alive in spite of domination by the former Soviet Union and
had even borne fruit.
