Multisensory worship Multisensory worship or multi-sensory worship is a form of
alternative worship, often associated with the emerging church. Multisensory
worship is usually corporate worship that is designed to engage the senses.
Proponents of multisensory worship often contend that in the postmodern world
people don't simply want to hear about God or sing about God, but instead want
to feel and experience the presence of God. It frequently involves the use of
video and onscreen graphics which are designed to speak to people through the
power of the image. Audio-visual elements are often added to supplement sermons
and teaching. Thus multisensory worship involves a great deal of
experimentation and variety in crafting a more holistic worship experience.
Spaces designed for multisensory worship often feature floral arrangements,
paintings, and creative lighting to enhance the experience of participants.
Multisensory worship is part prayer, part worship, sometimes using prayer
stations to evoke the physical senses. As opposed to just reading a book or
hearing a sermon, a room is set up for participants to have an experience that
involves the physical body in the act of worship. An early pioneer of
multisensory worship, Leonard Sweet, has a theory that worship should be EPIC
in nature: experiential, participatory, image-rich and connective. Another
early proponent, Bob Rognlien, wrote in his book "Experiential Worship" that
worship should engage the heart, soul, mind and strength. See also the books
"Handbook for MultiSensory Worship Volumes I and II" and "Redesigning Worship",
all by Kim Miller of Ginghamsburg Church in Tipp City, Ohio, and the works of
Greg Atkinson who also speaks and writes on multisensory worship.
