Paganism (contemporary) [[File:pagan religions
symbols.png|thumb|250px|right|Symbols of several contemporary Pagan faiths:
Slavic • Celtic • Germanic Hellenism • Wicca • Roman Goddess Worship
(Wicca) • Kemetism • Semitic]] Contemporary Paganism, Modern Paganism, or
Neopaganism, is an umbrella term referring to a variety of contemporary
religious movements, particularly those influenced by or claiming to be derived
from the various historical pagan beliefs of pre-modern Europe. Although they
do share commonalities, contemporary Pagan religious movements are diverse and
no single set of beliefs, practices, or texts are shared by them all.
Contemporary Paganism has been characterized as "a synthesis of historical
inspiration and present-day creativity", in this manner drawing influences from
pre-Christian, folkloric and ethnographic sources in order to fashion new
religious movements. The extent to which contemporary Pagans use these sources
differs; many follow a spirituality which they accept is entirely modern,
whilst others attempt to reconstruct or revive indigenous, ethnic religions as
found in historical and folkloric sources as accurately as possible. Neopagan
movements emerged in Europe during the 19th and early 20th centuries,
influenced by the wider occult movement; these included Thelema, Wicca and
Adonism. With the rise of the counterculture during the 1960s, Paganism
continued to adapt and spread, particularly throughout the U.S., where radical
new approaches emerged that dealt with contemporary social issues and
interests, such as Neoshamanism, the Goddess movement and the Radical Faeries.
At the same time, some ethnic nationalist groups began to adopt pagan religions
during the 20th century, leading to the rise of forms of Heathenry and Slavic
neopaganism, which were centered primarily in Scandinavia and Eastern Europe.
Today, there are active Pagan groups in the United States, the United Kingdom,
Continental Europe and other parts of the world. Although the Pagan movement is
extremely disparate in its beliefs and practices, a number of sociologists and
religious studies scholars involved in Pagan studies have highlighted
commonalities shared within many, if not all, pagan groups. Most modern Pagan
groups hold to a theology that embraces such beliefs as polytheism, animism,
and pantheism, although there are groups who have instead advocated forms of
Goddess-centred monotheism, agnosticism or atheism. Similarly, beliefs about an
afterlife vary widely, as do conceptions on ethics and morality. Ritual plays a
prominent part in pagan religious movements, where it is typically employed to
induce an altered state of consciousness in the participants. The choice of
festivals and days of special commemoration again differs widely among Pagans,
although a majority adhere to a set of eight seasonal-based festivals, which
are collectively referred to as the Wheel of the Year. Terminology and
definition. The term "neo-pagan" was coined in the 19th century in reference to
Renaissance and Romanticist Hellenophile classical revivalism. "Pagan" as a
self-designation appeared in 1964 and 1965, in the publications of the
Witchcraft Research Association; at that time, the term was in use by
"revivalist Witches" in the United States and the United Kingdom, but
unconnected to the broader, counter-culture Pagan movement. The modern
popularisation of the terms "pagan" and "neopagan", as they are currently
understood, is largely traced to Oberon Zell-Ravenheart, co-founder of "the 1st
Neo-Pagan Church of All Worlds" who, beginning in 1967 with the early issues of
"Green Egg", used both terms for the growing movement. This usage has been
common since the pagan revival in the 1970s, and is now used by academics and
adherents alike to identify new religious movements that emphasize pantheism or
nature-worship, or that revive or reconstruct aspects of historical polytheism.
Increasingly, scholarly writers prefer the term "contemporary paganism" to
cover all new polytheistic religious movements, a usage favoured by "The
Pomegranate: The International Journal of Pagan Studies", the leading peer-
reviewed journal in the field. The term "neopagan" provides a means of
distinguishing between historical pagans of ancient cultures and the adherents
of modern religious movements. This category of religions includes syncretic or
eclectic approaches like Wicca, Neo-druidism, and neoshamanism at one end of
the spectrum, as well as culturally specific traditions, such as the many
varieties of polytheistic reconstructionism, at the other. Some
Reconstructionists reject the term "neopagan" because they wish to set their
historically oriented approach apart from generic "neopagan" eclecticism.
"Heathen", "Heathenism" or "Heathenry" as a self-designation of adherents of
Germanic neopaganism (Theodism in particular) appeared in the late 1990s. The
American scholar of religious studies Michael F. Strmiska argued that the
modern adoption of the term "Pagan" was "a deliberate act of defiance" against
traditional, Christian-dominated society, comparing it to the adoption of the
surname "X" amongst African-Americans or the term "queer" amongst LGBT people.
The term "Neopagan" is often deemed offensive and not used by many contemporary
Pagans, who claim that the inclusion of the term "neo" disconnects them from
their ancient polytheistic ancestors. Beliefs. Beliefs and practices vary
widely among different Pagan groups, however there are a series of core
principles common to most, if not all, forms of contemporary Paganism. The
English academic Graham Harvey noted that Pagans "rarely indulge in theology."
Polytheism. One of the "most important principles" of the Pagan movement is
polytheism, the belief in, and veneration of, more than one god and/or goddess.
Polytheism was a trait common to the pre-Christian religions of Europe, and is
also common to a wide variety of religions around the world, from which
contemporary Pagans draw on. One view in the Pagan community is that these
polytheistic deities are not viewed as literal entities, but as Jungian
archetypes that exist in the human psyche. It has been noted that many Pagans
argue that the adoption of a polytheistic worldview would be beneficial for
western society, replacing the dominant monotheism that they believe is by its
very nature politically and socially repressive. Adler remarked that many
Pagans informed her of how they had adopted polytheism because it allowed a
greater freedom, diversity and tolerance of worship amongst the community than
that permitted in monotheistic religions. Adler noted that it was this belief
in polytheism that had allowed the "multitude" of different Pagan religions to
"exist more or less in harmony", as in enabled them to accept the existence and
worship of one another's deities. Indeed, most Pagans adopt an ethos of "unity
in diversity" regarding their religious beliefs. In Wicca, (especially Dianic
Wicca) the concept of an Earth or Mother Goddess, similar to the Greek Gaia, is
emphasized. Male counterparts, such as the Green Man and the Horned God, are
usually also evoked. These Duotheistic philosophies tend to emphasize the God
and Goddess' (or Lord and Lady's) genders as being complementary opposites
analogous to that of yin and yang in ancient Chinese philosophy. Many Oriental
philosophies equate weakness with femininity and strength with masculinity;
this is not the prevailing attitude in paganism and Wicca. Among many pagans,
there is a strong desire to incorporate the female aspects of the divine in
their worship and within their lives, which can partially explain the attitude
which sometimes manifests as the veneration of women. Other neopagans reject
the concept of binary gender roles. Animism and pantheism. A key part of most
Pagan worldviews is the holistic concept of a universe that is interconnected.
This is connected with a belief in either pantheism or panentheism, both
beliefs that divinity and the material and/or spiritual universe are one and
the same. For pagans, it means that "divinity is inseperable from nature and
that deity is immanent in nature." Dennis D. Carpenter noted that the belief in
a pantheistic or panentheistic deity has led to the idea of interconnectedness
playing a key part in pagans' worldviews. The prominent Wiccan priestess
Starhawk related that a core part of goddess-centred pagan witchcraft was "the
understanding that all being is interrelated, that we are all linked with the
cosmos as parts of one living organism. What affects one of us affects us all."
Another pivotal belief in the contemporary Pagan movement is that of animism.
This has been interpreted in two distinct ways among the Pagan community.
First, it can refer to a belief that everything in the universe is imbued with
a life force or spiritual energy. In contrast, some contemporary Pagans believe
that there are specific spirits which inhabit various features in the natural
world, and that these can be actively communicated with. Some Pagans have
reported experiencing communication with spirits dwelling in rocks, plants,
trees and animals, as well as power animals or animal spirits who can act as
spiritual helpers or guides. Animism was also a concept common to many pre-
Christian European religions, and in adopting it, contemporary Pagans are
attempting to "reenter the primeval worldview" and participate in a view of
cosmology "that is not possible for most Westerners after childhood." Such
views have also led many pagans to revere the planet Earth as Mother Earth, who
is often referred to as Gaia after the ancient Greek goddess of the Earth.
Afterlife and the soul. A number of pagan religions purport the existence of a
spirit or soul that inhabits the human body and which survives bodily
destruction. Ethics and morality. Views of ethics and morality differ widely
throughout the pagan movement. The most prominent and widespread moral code to
be found in the contemporary pagan movement is the Wiccan Rede, which states
that those who follow it should "do as you will, as long as you harm none".
First developing in the Gardnerian tradition of Wicca, the Rede spread
throughout much of the pagan movement in the 1960s. Alternative ethical codes
can also be found within the pagan movement. The religious philosophy of
Thelema, founded in 1904 by the English ceremonial magician and occultist
Aleister Crowley, instead advocated the law of "Do What Thou Wilt", arguing
that Thelemites should attune themselves to follow their own True Will, and
therefore the Cosmic Will of the universe. Practices. Ritual. Contemporary
pagan ritual is typically geared towards "facilitating altered states of
awareness or shifting mind-sets." In order to induce such altered states of
consciousness, pagans utilise such elements as drumming, visualization,
chanting, singing, dancing, and meditation. American folklorist Sabina
Magliocco came to the conclusion, based upon her ethnographic fieldwork in
California, that certain pagan beliefs "arise from what they experience during
religious ecstasy". Sociologist Margot Adler highlighted how several pagan
groups, like the Reformed Druids of North America and the Erisian movement
refuse to take their rituals seriously, instead incorporating into them a great
deal of play. She noted that there are those who would argue that "the Pagan
community is one of the only spiritual communities that is exploring humor,
joy, abandonment, even silliness and outrageousness as valid parts of spiritual
experience." Festival. Most modern pagan religions celebrate the cycles and
seasons of nature through a festival calendar that honours these changes. The
timing of festivals, and the rites celebrated, may vary from climate to
climate, and will also vary (sometimes widely) depending upon which particular
pagan religion the adherent subscribes to (see Wheel of the Year). Magic and
witchcraft. The belief in magic and the practice of magical rituals are
followed by a "significant number" of contemporary Pagans. Among those who do
believe in it, there are a variety of different views as to what magic is, but
many Pagans adhere to the definition of magic provided by the founder of
Thelema, Aleister Crowley, who defined it as "the Science and Art of causing
change to occur in conformity with Will." Another related definition accepted
by many Pagans is that purported by the ceremonial magician Dion Fortune, who
declared that "Magic is the art and science of changing consciousness according
to the Will." Among these are Wicca, Neoshamanism, Neo-Druidism, and other
pagan belief systems, the rituals of which were at least initially partially
based upon those of ceremonial magic. History. Renaissance and Romanticism. The
roots of contemporary paganism begin with the Renaissance, and the
reintroduction of Classicism and the resurgence of interest in Graeco-Roman
polytheism in the wake of works like the "Theologia mythologica" of 1532 as
well as a revived interest in Greco-Roman magic, studied systematically in
Renaissance magic. Although apart from the practice of magic, this was not a
revival of pagan cultic practice, the Renaissance was a "rebirth" of the
philosophy of pagan antiquity especially Platonism (or Neo-Platonism,
Plotinism), but also Epicureanism, re-introduced by Baroque philosopher Pierre
Gassendi, described as a "new paganism" in the history of philosophy. The
Romantic movement of the 18th century led to the re-discovery of Old Gaelic and
Old Norse literature and poetry. Neo-druidism can be taken to have its origins
as early as 1717 with the foundation of The Druid Order. The 19th century saw a
surge of interest in Germanic paganism with the Viking revival in Victorian
Britain and Scandinavia. In Germany the Völkisch movement was in full swing.
These pagan currents coincided with Romanticist interest in folklore and
occultism, the widespread emergence of pagan themes in popular literature, and
the rise of nationalism. 19th century. During this resurgence in the United
Kingdom, Neo-druidism and various Western occult groups emerged, such as the
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn and the Ordo Templi Orientis, who attempted
to syncretize "exotic" elements like Egyptian cosmology and Kabbalah into their
belief systems, although not necessarily for purely religious purposes.
Influenced by the anthropologist Sir James George Frazer's "The Golden Bough",
several prominent writers and artists were involved in these organizations,
including William Butler Yeats, Maud Gonne, Arthur Edward Waite, and Aleister
Crowley. Along with these early occult organizations, there were other social
phenomena such as the interest in mediumship, magic, and other supernatural
beliefs which was at an all time high in the late 19th century and early 20th
century. Another important influence during this period was the Romantic
aesthetic movement, which venerated the natural world and frequently made
reference to the deities of antiquity. The Romantic poets, essayists, artists
and authors who employed these themes in their work were later associated with
socially progressive attitudes towards sexuality, feminism, pacifism and
similar issues. Early 20th century. In the 1920s Margaret Murray theorized that
a Witchcraft religion existed underground and in secret, and had survived
through the witchcraft prosecutions that had been enacted by the ecclesiastical
and secular courts. Most historians now reject Murray's theory, as she based it
partially upon the similarities of the accounts given by those accused of
witchcraft; such similarity is now thought to actually derive from there having
been a standard set of questions laid out in the witch-hunting manuals used by
interrogators. Murray's ideas nevertheless exerted great influence on certain
pagan currents; in the 1940s, Englishman Gerald Gardner claimed to have been
initiated into a New Forest coven. "Gardnerian Wicca" is used to refer to the
traditions of neopaganism that adhere closely to Gardner's teachings,
differentiating it from similar traditions, such as Alexandrian Wicca or more
recent Wiccan offshoots. In the meantime, Germanic mysticism in Germany and
Switzerland had developed into baroque forms such as Guido von List's
"Armanism", from the 1900s merging into antisemitic and national mysticist
("völkisch") currents, notably with Lanz von Liebenfels' "Guido von List
Society" and "Ostara" magazine, which with the rise of Nazism were partially
absorbed into Nazi occultism. Such distortions of Germanic mythology were
denounced by J. R. R. Tolkien, e.g. in a 1941 letter where he speaks of
Hitler's corruption of "...that noble northern spirit, a supreme contribution
to Europe, which I have ever loved and tried to present in its true light."
Because of such connections with Nazism, interest in neopaganism was virtually
eclipsed for about two decades following World War II. Other Germanic mysticist
groups, such as the "Germanische Glaubens-Gemeinschaft" of Ludwig Fahrenkrog
were disendorsed by the Nazi regime. Another of these German neopagan groups
was Adonism, founded in the nineteenth century. Late 20th century. The 1960s
and 1970s saw a resurgence in Neodruidism as well as the rise of Germanic
neopaganism and Ásatrú in the United States and in Iceland. In the 1970s,
Wicca was notably influenced by feminism, leading to the creation of an
eclectic, Goddess-worshipping movement known as Dianic Wicca. The 1979
publication of Margot Adler's "Drawing Down the Moon" and Starhawk's "The
Spiral Dance" opened a new chapter in public awareness of paganism. With the
growth and spread of large, pagan gatherings and festivals in the 1980s, public
varieties of Neo-Wicca continued to further diversify into additional, eclectic
sub-denominations, often heavily influenced by the New Age and counter-culture
movements. These open, unstructured or loosely structured traditions contrast
with British Traditional Wicca, which emphasizes secrecy and initiatory
lineage. The 1980s and 1990s also saw an increasing interest in serious
academic research and reconstructionist pagan traditions. The establishment and
growth of the Internet in the 1990s brought rapid growth to these, and other
pagan movements. Historicity. Many pagans and pagan traditions attempt to
incorporate elements of historical religions, cultures and mythologies into
their beliefs and practices, often emphasizing the age of their sources. Thus,
Wicca in particular is sometimes referred to by its proponents as ""The Old
Religion"", a term popularised by Margaret Murray in the 1920s, while Germanic
neopaganism is referred to in some of its varieties as "Forn Sed" ("Old
Custom"). Such emphasis on the antiquity of religious tradition is not
exclusive to modern paganism, and is found in many other religions. For example
the terms "Purana", "Sanatana Dharma", and the emphasis on the antiquity of the
Ancient Egyptian sources of the Hellenistic Mystery religions. Some claims of
continuity between contemporary paganism and older forms of paganism have been
shown to be spurious, or outright false, as in the case of Iolo Morganwg's
Druid's Prayer. Wiccan beliefs of an ancient monotheistic Goddess were inspired
by Marija Gimbutas's description of Neolithic Europe. The factual historical
validity of her theories has been disputed by many scholars, including
historian Ronald Hutton. While most pagans draw from old religious traditions,
they also adapt them. The mythologies of the ancient traditions are not
generally considered to be literally factual by pagans, in the sense that the
Bible and other Abrahamic texts are often thought of by their followers.
Eclectic pagans in particular are resistant to the concept of scripture or
excessive structure, considering personal freedom to be one of the primary
goals of their spirituality. In contrast, some Reconstructionist movements,
like those who practise Theodism, take a stricter religious approach, and only
recognize certain historical texts and sources as being relevant to their
belief system, intentionally focusing on one culture to the exclusion of
others, and having a general disdain for the eclectic mentality. The
mythological sources of the various pagan traditions are similarly varied,
including Celtic, Norse, Greek, Roman, Sumerian, Egyptian and others. Some
groups focus solely on one cultural tradition, while others draw from several.
For example, Doreen Valiente's text "The Charge of the Goddess" used materials
from "The Gospel of Aradia" by Charles G. Leland (1899), as well as material
from Aleister Crowley's writings. Some pagans also draw inspiration from modern
traditions, including Christianity, Buddhism and others, creating syncretisms
like "Christian Witchcraft" or "Buddheo-Paganism". Since many pagan beliefs do
not require exclusivity, some pagans practise other faiths in parallel.
Eclectic pagans take an undogmatic religious stance, and therefore potentially
see no one as having authority to deem a source "apocryphal". Contemporary
paganism has therefore been prone to fakelore, especially in recent years as
information and misinformation alike have been spread on the Internet and in
print media. A number of Wiccan, pagan and even some "Traditionalist" or
"Tribalist" groups have a history of "Grandmother Stories" – typically
involving initiation by a Grandmother, Grandfather, or other elderly relative
who is said to have instructed them in the secret, millennia-old traditions of
their ancestors. As this "secret wisdom" can almost always be traced to recent
sources, tellers of these stories have often later admitted they made them up.
It is the belief of modern Pagans that the religious beliefs of pre-Christian
Europe "possess continuing value for us in our own time, even after centuries
of suppression and neglect." Strmiska asserted that contemporary Paganism could
be viewed as a part of the "much larger phenomenon" of efforts to revive
"traditional, indigenous, or native religions" that were occurring across the
globe. Encompassed religions and movements. Contemporary Paganism encompasses a
very broad range of groups and beliefs. Syncretic or approaches are sometimes
inspired by historical traditions, but are not bound by any strict
identification with a historical religion or culture; eclectic and syncretic
movements freely combine elements of multiple religious traditions. At the
other end of the spectrum are the ethnic reconstructionist traditions, which
focus on historicity, folklore, and the revival of culturally-specific rites
and beliefs. Gardnerian and Alexandrian Wicca, British Traditional Wicca, and
variations such as Dianic Wicca are examples of eclectic traditions, as are
Neo-druid groups like Ár nDraíocht Féin. These contrast with the culturally-
focused, polytheistic reconstructionst traditions like Germanic, Celtic, or
Greek Reconstructionism. Goddess movement. Goddess Spirituality, which is also
known as the Goddess movement, is a Pagan religion in which a singular,
monotheistic Goddess is given predominance. Designed primarily for women,
Goddess Spirituality revolves around the sacredness of the female form, and of
aspects of women's lives which have been traditionally neglected in western
society, such as menstruation, sexuality and maternity. Adherents of the
Goddess Spirituality movement typically envision a history - or "herstory" - of
the world that is different from traditional narratives about the past,
emphasising the role of women rather than that of men. According to this view,
human society was formerly a matriarchy, with communities being egalitarian,
pacifistic and focused on the worship of the Goddess; such a society was
subsequently overthrown by violent patriarchal hordes who worshiped male sky
gods and who continued to rule through the form of Christianity. Adherents look
for elements of this mythological history in "theological, anthropological,
archaeological, historical, folkloric and hagiographic writings", particularly
the writings of Lithuanian-American archaeologist Marija Gimbutas. Heathenry.
Heathenism, also known as Germanic Neopaganism, refers to a series of
contemporary Pagan traditions that are based upon the historical religions,
culture and literature of Germanic-speaking Europe. Heathenry is spread out
across north-western Europe, and also North America and Australasia, where the
descendants of historic Germanic-speaking people now live. Many Heathen groups
adopt variants of Norse mythology as a basis to their beliefs, conceiving of
the Earth as being situated on a great world tree called Yggdrasil. Heathens
believe in multiple polytheistic deities, all adopted from historical Germanic
mythologies; the majority of Heathens are "polytheistic realists", believing
that the deities are real entities, whilst others view them as Jungian
archetypes. Forms of Heathenism have also been adopted by white separatist and
white supremacist groups. In the 1990s, Swedish historian Mattias Gardell
studied the white separatist Heathen community in the United States, noting
that it had become one of the "most dynamic trends" within the "radical-racist
milieu" of the U.S., surpassing more traditional white separatist groups like
the Ku Klux Klan in "terms of numbers and influence". Neo-Druidism. Neo-
Druidism forms the second largest pagan religion after Wicca, and like Wicca in
turn shows significant heterogeneity. It draws several beliefs and inspirations
from the Druids, the priest caste of the ancient pagan Celts. With the first
"Druid Order" founded as early as 1717, the history of Neo-Druidism reaches
back to the earliest origins of modern paganism. The Ancient Order of Druids
founded in 1781 had many aspects of freemasonry, and have practised rituals at
Stonehenge since 1905. The Order of Bards, Ovates and Druids was established in
1964 by Ross Nichols. In the United States, the Ancient Order of Druids in
America (AODA) was founded in 1912, the Reformed Druids of North America (RDNA)
was established in 1963 and Ár nDraíocht Féin (ADF) in 1983 by Isaac
Bonewits. New Age syncretism and eco-paganism. Contemporary paganism emerged as
part of the counter-culture, New Age and Hippie movements in the 1960s to
1970s. Reconstructionism rose to prominence in the 1980s and 1990s. The
majority of pagans are not committed to a single defined tradition, but
understand paganism as encompassing a wide range of non-institutionalized
spirituality, as promoted by the Church of All Worlds, the Feri Tradition and
other movements. Notably, Wicca in the United States since the 1970s has
largely moved away from its Gardnerian roots and diversified into eclectic
variants. Paganism generally emphasizes the sanctity of the Earth and Nature.
Pagans often feel a duty to protect the Earth through activism, and support
causes such as rainforest protection, organic farming, permaculture, animal
rights and so on. Some pagans are influenced by Animist traditions of the
indigenous Native Americans and Africans and other indigenous or shamanic
traditions. Eco-paganism and Eco-magic, which are off-shoots of direct action
environmental groups, have a strong emphasis on fairy imagery and a belief in
the possibility of intercession by the fae (fairies, pixies, gnomes, elves, and
other spirits of nature and the Otherworlds). Some Unitarian Universalists are
eclectic pagans. Unitarian Universalists look for spiritual inspiration in a
wide variety of religious beliefs. The Covenant of Unitarian Universalist
Pagans, or CUUPs, encourages their member chapters to ""use practices familiar
to members who attend for worship services but not to follow only one tradition
of paganism."" Occultism and ethnic mysticism. Historically the earliest self-
identified revivalist pagans were inspired by Renaissance occultism. Notably in
early 20th century Germany with Germanic mysticism, which branched into
Ariosophy and related currents of Nazi occultism. Outside Germany, occultist
neopaganism was inspired by Crowleyan Thelema and Left-Hand Paths, a recent
example being the "Dark Paganism" of John J. Coughlin. In 1925, the Czech
esotericist Franz Sättler founded a pagan religion known as Adonism, devoted
to the ancient Greek god Adonis, whom Sättler equated with the Christian
Satan, and which purported that the end of the world would come in the year
2000. Adonism largely died out in the 1930s, but remained an influence on the
German occult scene. In the United States, ethnic mysticist approaches are
advocated in the form of anti-racist Asatru Folk Assembly founder Stephen
McNallen's "metagenetics" and by David Lane's openly white supremacist
Wotanism. According to historian Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke, occultist currents
persist in "neo-völkisch movements", such as neo-fascist and national
mysticist neopaganism, since the 1990s revived in the European "Nouvelle
Droite" in the context of the Traditionalist School of Julius Evola and others
(Alain de Benoist, Werkgroep Traditie; see Neopaganism and the New Right).
Queer paganism. In the western world, distinct forms of paganism have developed
for members of the LGBT community. Margot Adler noted how there were many pagan
groups whose practices revolved around the inclusion and celebration of male
homosexuality, such as the Minoan Brotherhood, a Wiccan group that combines the
iconography from ancient Minoan religion with a Wiccan theology and an emphasis
on "men-loving-men", and the eclectic pagan group known as the Radical Faeries.
Similarly, there are also groups for lesbians, like certain forms of Dianic
Wicca and the Minoan Sisterhood. When Adler asked one gay pagan what the pagan
community offered members of the LGBT community, the reply was "A place to
belong. Community. Acceptance. And a way to connect with all kinds of people,
gay, bi, straight, celibate, transgender, in a way that is hard to do in the
greater society". Other forms of Wicca have also attracted queer people, for
instance, the theologian Jone Salomonsen noted that there was an unusually high
number of LGBT, and particularly bisexual individuals within the Reclaiming
tradition of San Francisco when she was doing her fieldwork there in the 1980s
and 1990s. Reconstructionism. In contrast to the eclectic traditions,
Polytheistic Reconstructionists practice culturally-specific, ethnic
traditions, basing their practices on the surviving folklore, traditional songs
and prayers, as well as reconstructions from the historical record. Thus,
Hellenic, Roman, Kemetic, Celtic, Germanic, Baltic and Slavic
Reconstructionists aim for the preservation and revival of historical practices
and beliefs of Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome, Ancient Egypt, the Celts, the
Germanic peoples, the Balts and the Slavs, respectively. Wicca and Pagan
Witchcraft. Pagan Witchcraft is the largest contemporary pagan religion, having
originally developed in the United Kingdom and since spread across the world.
It is commonly called "Wicca", a term that came to be adopted in the early
1960s, although in the late 1970s and 1980s certain Pagan Witches began to
instead use that term purely in reference to specific traditions of the Pagan
Craft, and in the contemporary pagan community both definitions are now
employed, causing some confusion. The Wiccan religion revolves around the
veneration of a Horned God and a Goddess, elements of a variety of ancient
mythologies, a belief in and practice of magic and sometimes the belief in
reincarnation and karma. The scholar of Religious Studies Graham Harvey noted
that a poem known as the Charge of the Goddess remains central to the liturgy
of most Wiccan groups. Originally written by Wiccan High Priestess Doreen
Valiente in the mid-1950s, Harvey noted that the recitation of the Charge in
the midst of ritual allows Wiccans to gain wisdom and experience deity in "the
ordinary things in life". The historian Ronald Hutton identified a wide variety
of different sources that influenced the development of Wicca. These included
ceremonial magic, folk magic, Romanticist literature, Freemasonry, and the
historical theories of the English archaeologist Margaret Murray. The figure at
the forefront of the burgeoning Wiccan movement was the English esotericist
Gerald Gardner, who claimed to have been initiated by the New Forest coven in
1939. Gardner claimed that the religion which he discovered was a modern
survival of the old Witch-Cult described in the works of Murray, which had
originated in the pre-Christian paganism of Europe. He claimed it was revealed
to him by a coven of witches in the New Forest area of southern England.
Various forms of Wicca have since evolved or been adapted from Gardner's
British Traditional Wicca or Gardnerian Wicca such as Alexandrian Wicca. Other
forms loosely based on Gardner's teachings are Faery Wicca, Kemetic Wicca,
Judeo-Paganism or "jewitchery", Dianic Wicca or "Feminist Wicca" – which
emphasizes the divine feminine, often creating women-only or lesbian-only
groups. In the 1990s, Wiccan beliefs and practices were used as a partial basis
for a number of U.S. films and television series, such as "The Craft",
"Charmed" and "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", leading to a dramatic upsurge in
teenagers and young adults becoming interested and involved in the religion.
Jewish Wicca. Some Jewish Pagans have returned to their own Semitic traditions
for inspiration. Surveys have shown that people with Jewish backgrounds are
twice as likely to become Neopagans in comparison to Gentiles (non-Jews). Beit
Asherah ("the house of the Goddess Asherah") was one of the first Neopagan
synagogues, founded in the early 1990s by Stephanie Fox, Steven Posch, and
Magenta Griffiths (Lady Magenta). Magenta Griffiths is High Priestess of the
Beit Asherah coven, and a former board member of the Covenant of the Goddess.
Paganism in society. Propagation. Based upon her study of the pagan community
in the United States, the sociologist Margot Adler noted that it is rare for
Pagan groups to proselytize in order to gain new converts to their faiths.
Instead, she argued that "in most cases", converts first become interested in
the movement through "word of mouth, a discussion between friends, a lecture, a
book, an article or a Web site." She went on to put forward the idea that this
typically confirmed "some original, private experience, so that the most common
experience of those who have named themselves pagan is something like 'I
finally found a group that has the same religious perceptions I always had'." A
practicing Wiccan herself, Adler used her own conversion to paganism as a case
study, remarking that as a child she had taken a great interest in the gods and
goddesses of ancient Greece, and had performed her own devised rituals in
dedication to them. When she eventually came across the Wiccan religion many
years later, she then found that it confirmed her earlier childhood
experiences, and that "I never converted in the accepted sense. I simply
accepted, reaffirmed, and extended a very old experience." Folklorist Sabina
Magliocco supported this idea, noting that a great many of those Californian
Pagans whom she interviewed claimed that they had been greatly interested in
mythology and folklore as children, imagining a world of "enchanted nature and
magical transformations, filled with lords and ladies, witches and wizards, and
humble but often wise peasants." Magliocco noted that it was this world which
pagans "strive to re-create in some measure." Further support for Adler's idea
came from American Wiccan priestess Judy Harrow, who noted that amongst her
comrades, there was a feeling that "you don't "become" pagan, you discover that
you always were." They have also been supported by Pagan studies scholar Graham
Harvey. Many pagans in North America encounter the movement through their
involvement in other hobbies; particularly popular with U.S. Pagans are "golden
age"-type pastimes such as the Society for Creative Anachronism (SCA), "Star
Trek" fandom, "Doctor Who" fandom and comic book fandom. Other manners in which
many North American pagans have got involved with the movement are through
political and/or ecological activism, such as "vegetarian groups, health food
stores" or feminist university courses. Adler went on to note that from those
she interviewed and surveyed in the U.S., she could identify a number of common
factors that led to people getting involved in Paganism: the beauty, vision and
imagination that was found within their beliefs and rituals, a sense of
intellectual satisfaction and personal growth that they imparted, their support
for environmentalism and/or feminism, and a sense of freedom. Class, gender and
ethnicity. Based upon her work in the United States, sociologist Margot Adler
found that the pagan movement was "very diverse" in its class and ethnic
background. She went on to remark that she had encountered pagans in jobs that
ranged from "fireman to Ph.D. chemist" but that the one thing that she thought
made them into an "elite" was as avid readers, something that she found to be
very common within the pagan community despite the fact that avid readers
constituted less than 20% of the general population of the United States at the
time. The folklorist Sabina Magliocco came to a somewhat different conclusion
based upon her ethnographic research of pagans in California, remarking that
the majority were "white, middle-class, well-educated urbanites" but that they
were united in finding "artistic inspiration" within "folk and indigenous
spiritual traditions." The sociologist Regina Oboler examined the role of
gender in the U.S. Pagan community, arguing that although the movement had been
constant in its support for the equality of men and women ever since its
foundation, there was still an essentialist view of gender engrained within it,
with female deities being accorded traditional western feminine traits and male
deities being similarly accorded what western society saw as masculine traits.
Demographics. Adherents.com estimates that there are roughly one million pagans
worldwide (as of 2000), including "Wicca, Magick, Druidism, Asatru, neo-Native
American religion and others". High estimates by pagan authors may reach
several times that number. A precise number is impossible to establish, because
of the largely uninstitutionalised nature of the religion and the secrecy
observed by some traditions, – sometimes explained by fear of religious
discrimination. North America. In the United States, the ARIS 2001 study, based
on a poll conducted by The Graduate Center at The City University of New York
found that an estimated 140,000 people self-identified as pagans; 134,000 self-
identified as Wiccans; and 33,000 self-identified as Druids. This would bring
the total of groups largely accepted under the modern popular western
definition of pagan to 307,000. Europe. A study by Ronald Hutton compared a
number of different sources (including membership lists of major UK
organizations, attendance at major events, subscriptions to magazines, etc.)
and used standard models for extrapolating likely numbers. This estimate
accounted for multiple membership overlaps as well as the number of adherents
represented by each attendee of a pagan gathering. Hutton estimated that there
are 250,000 neopagan adherents in the United Kingdom, roughly equivalent to the
national Hindu community. A smaller number is suggested by the results of the
2001 Census, in which a question about religious affiliation was asked for the
first time. Respondents were able to write in an affiliation not covered by the
checklist of common religions, and a total of 42,262 people from England,
Scotland and Wales declared themselves to be Pagans by this method. These
figures were not released as a matter of course by the Office of National
Statistics, but were released after an application by the Pagan Federation of
Scotland. From a British population of 59 million this gives a rough proportion
of 7 Pagans per 100,000 population. This is more than many well known
traditions such as Rastafarian, Bahá'í and Zoroastrian groups, but fewer than
the 'Big Six' of Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Sikhism, Judaism and Buddhism.
It is also fewer than the adherents Jediism, whose campaign made them the
fourth largest religion after Christianity, Islam and Hinduism. The UK Census
figures do not allow an accurate breakdown of traditions within the pagan
heading, as a campaign by the Pagan Federation before the census encouraged
Wiccans, Heathens, Druids and others all to use the same write-in term 'Pagan'
in order to maximise the numbers reported. The PaganDASH campaign actively
worked with the ONS to amend the rules for The 2011 UK Census, allowing pagans
to write their denomination in the form "PAGAN — path". This was to reduce
problems as encountered in the 2001 Census such as a range of neopagan paths
being counted under atheist. Census figures in Ireland do not provide a
breakdown of religions outside of the major Christian denominations and other
major world religions. A total of 22,497 people stated 'Other religion' in the
2006 census; and a rough estimate is that there are 2,000–3,000 practicing
pagans in Ireland as of 2009. Numerous pagan groups – primarily Wiccan and
Druidic – exist in Ireland though none is officially recognised by the
Government. Irish Paganism is often strongly concerned with issues of place and
language. Paganism in Scandinavia is dominated by Ásatrú (Forn Sed,
Folketro). The "Swedish AsatruSociety" formed in 1994, and in Norway the
Åsatrufellesskapet Bifrost formed in 1996 and Foreningen Forn Sed formed in
1999. They have been recognized by the Norwegian government as a religious
society, allowing them to perform "legally binding civil ceremonies" (i.e.
marriages). In Denmark Forn Siðr also formed in 1999, recognized in 2003 and
in Sweden "Nätverket Gimle" formed in 2001, as an informal community for
individual Heathens. "Nätverket Forn Sed" formed in 2004, and has a network
consisting of local groups ("") from all over Sweden. In German-speaking
Europe, Germanic and Celtic paganism co-exist with Wicca and neoshamanism.
Paganism in Latin Europe (France, Italy, Spain) focuses on Neo-Druidism and
Esotericism based on megalith culture. Paganism in Eastern Europe and parts of
Northern Europe is dominated by Baltic and Slavic movements, rising to
visibility after the fall of the Soviet Union (except for Latvian Dievturība
which has been active since 1925). Since the 1990s, there have been organized
Hellenic groups practising in Greece. The Church of the Guanche People is a
pagan sect founded in 2001 in the city of San Cristobal de La Laguna (Tenerife,
Canary Islands, Spain). According to its followers this organisation aims to
revive and spread the Pagan religion of the Guanche people. It was founded by a
group of Canarian citizens, devotees of the goddess Chaxiraxi. The Church of
the Guanche People performs baptisms and weddings according to aboriginal
Guanche forms. On December 14, 2003, the first wedding for more than 500 years
was held according to the aboriginal Guanche rite on the island of Tenerife. In
2008 the group had approximately 300 members. Recognition of Wicca in Spain. On
December 23, 2011, the Spanish Government officially acknowledges for the first
time to Wicca as a religion, Wicca Tradition Celtiberian register in the
Register of religious bodies with the reference 2560-GS / A, being the first
country for Spain Europe and the second in the world after U.S., to recognize
her. Celtiberian tradition of Wicca, consisting of Fernando Gonzalez (source)
in the 80's of the twentieth century from the Hispanic Traditional Witchcraft
to which he belongs, is a structured religion through the symbiosis between
"traditionalism wizard" (inciatic and mystery), the historical
reconstructionist (cultural and archaeological) and "adaptationism" liturgical
(conditioning ceremonial) of Hispanic Traditional Witchcraft, paganism,
religious worship pre-Christian Celtic and Iberian mainly and those that were
previously formed (shamanism, Neolithic and Paleolithic cults). Recognition of
Wicca in Portugal. Following the line of visibility that the Wiccan Religious
Confession, Celtiberian Tradition, imposed throughout the institution, this
Tradition Wicca also established in Portugal has taken the first step and once
applied for registration in the relevant Register, has just been registered and
is therefore has become the first Confession Pagan recognized as religion in
the history of Portugal (source). Thus, the Portuguese Public Administration
has been entered in the Register of Religious Entities Religious Confession to
Wicca, Celtiberian Tradition with the nomenclature: Data of Criação: 26/6/12
Confissão Wiccan Religious Celtiberian. Permanent Representação. NIPC:
980474531 - CAE / P: 94910. This milestone is also clear that Portugal is de
facto the second country in Europe and third in the world after the U.S. and
Spain, to legalize a Wiccan Religious Worship. Australia. In Australia, the
PAGANdash campaign was started to help government and community get a correct
representation of the number of Pagans currently in Australia. Originating from
the Pagan Community Projects in Queensland in 2005, the Pagan Alliance Network
(PAN) also ran a comprehensive PAGANDash program prior to the 2011 census in
Australia. All Pagans were asked to fill in their religion as "Pagan-
(religion)", for example a Wiccan would write "Pagan-Wiccan" as their religion.
The results are expected mid 2012. Pagan studies. The earliest academic studies
of contemporary Paganism were published in the late 1970s and 1980s by scholars
like Margot Adler, Marcello Truzzi and Tanya Luhrmann, although it would not be
until the 1990s that the actual multidisciplinary academic field of Pagan
studies properly developed, pioneered by academics such as Graham Harvey and
Chas S. Clifton. Increasing academic interest in Paganism has been attributed
to the new religious movement's increasing public visibility, as it began
interacting with the interfaith movement and holding large public celebrations
at sites like Stonehenge. The first international academic conference on the
subject of Pagan studies was held at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne,
North-East England in 1993. It had been organised by two British religious
studies scholars, Graham Harvey and Charlotte Hardman. In April 1996 a larger
conference dealing with contemporary Paganism then took place at Ambleside in
the Lake District. Organised by the Department of Religious Studies at the
University of Lancaster, North-West England, it was entitled "Nature Religion
Today: Western Paganism, Shamanism and Esotericism in the 1990s", and led to
the publication of an academic anthology, entitled "Nature Religion Today:
Paganism in the Modern World". In 2004, the first peer-reviewed, academic
journal devoted to Pagan studies began publication. "The Pomegranate: The
International Journal of Pagan Studies" was edited by Clifton, while the
academic publishers AltaMira Press began release of the Pagan Studies Series.
One of the books AltaMira released was "Researching Paganisms", an anthology
edited by Jenny Blain, Douglas Ezzy and Graham Harvey in which different Pagan
studies scholars discussed their involvement with the subject and the
opposition that they've faced. The relationship between Pagan studies scholars
and some practicing Pagans has at times been strained. The Australian academic
and practicing Pagan Caroline Jane Tully argued that many Pagans can react
negatively to new scholarship regarding historical pre-Christian societies,
believing that it is a threat to the structure of their beliefs and "sense of
identity." She furthermore argued that some of those dissatisfied Pagans lashed
out against academics as a result, particularly on the internet.
