Omen An omen (also called "portent" or "presage") is a phenomenon that is
believed to foretell the future, often signifying the advent of change. Though
the word "omen" is usually devoid of reference to the change's nature, hence
being possibly either "good" or "bad," the term is more often used in a
foreboding sense, as with the word "ominous". The origin of the word is
unknown, although it may be connected with the Latin word audire, meaning "to
hear." Ancient Rome. Ancient Roman religion employed two distinct types of
professional omen readers. Augurs interpreted the flights of birds, while
haruspices employed animal sacrifice to obtain the entrails necessary for
divination. Astrology. In the field of astrology, solar and lunar eclipses
(along with the appearance of comets and to some extent the full moon) have
often been considered omens of notable births, deaths, or other significant
events throughout history in many societies. One biblical example is the Magi
in the Gospel of Matthew who predicted the birth of Jesus after seeing the Star
of Bethlehem. Good or bad. Omens may be considered either good or bad depending
on their interpretation. The same sign may be interpreted differently by
different people or different cultures. For example, a superstition in the
United States and other countries across Europe indicates that a black cat is
an omen of bad luck. Comets also have been considered to be both good and bad
omens. The best-known example is probably Halley's Comet, which was a "bad
omen" for King Harold II of England but a "good omen" for William the
Conqueror. Indian astrology. "Nimmita" or "shukuna shastra" is the
identification and interpretation of omens in Hindu astrology. Omens seen,
heard, or even visualized at the initiation of an activity are said to foretell
the outcome of the activity. "Shakun & Utpaats"is a branch of Indian astrology
dealing with; interpretation of dreams, status of living & non-living items in
the environment, sounds produced by human & animals, analysis of portents, and
modes of pacification of adverse omens and portents. It acts as a guide in
horary astrology when there is a stalemate. In Nimmita it is thought that
coming events reveal their results prior to them actually occurring in a means
similar to foreshadowing in stories. According to Nimmita, omens observed at
the start of an action foretell its outcome. As a result when an adverse omen
occurs some practitioners of Nimmita will say the activity should not be
initiated. The treatises on Hindu astrology have discussed omens in detail in
regards to "travel elections". On seeing an inauspicious omen the treatises
state the person should halt their journey and return to the starting point.
Upon reaching the starting point the traveler is advised to recite Pranayam (a
specific Mantraâ€™s recitation) eleven times and then start the journey once
more. If an inauspicious omen is again seen during the trip the traveler should
return to the starting point once more and recite Pranayam 16 times, restarting
the journey once more. Should an inauspicious omen be observed a third time the
treatises state the journey should be abandoned. Interpretation. In Nimmita
numerous different aspects of the omen come into play in interpreting what the
omen means. The severity of an omen is assessed based on its position with
respect to the observer, its direction in respect to the observer, the time of
its observation, the speed of the omen, the sounds heard during the omen, and
the place where an omen is observed.
