Order of the Solar Temple The Order of the Solar Temple also known as Ordre du
Temple Solaire (OTS) in French, and the International Chivalric Organization of
the Solar Tradition or simply as The Solar Temple was a secret society based
upon the modern myth of the continuing existence of the Knights Templar (see
"Origins of the Solar Temple" below). OTS was started by Joseph Di Mambro and
Luc Jouret in 1984 in Geneva as "l'Ordre International Chevaleresque de
Tradition Solaire" (OICTS) and renamed "Ordre du Temple Solaire". Some
historians allege that the Solar Temple originates with French author Jacques
Breyer who established a "Sovereign Order of the Solar Temple" in 1952. In
1968, a schismatic order was renamed the "Renewed Order of the Solar Temple"
(ROTS) under the leadership of French right-wing political activist Julien
Origas. Some reports have claimed that Origas was a Nazi SS member during World
War II. Beliefs. According to "Peronnik" (a pseudonym of temple member Robert
Chabrier) in his book, ""Pourquoi la RÃ©surgence de l'Ordre du Temple? Tome
Premier: Le Corps"" (""Why a Revival of the Order of the Solar Temple? Vol.
One: The Body"") 1975, pp.Â 147â€“149, the aims of the Order of the Solar
Temple included: establishing "correct notions of authority and power in the
world"; an affirmation of the primacy of the spiritual over the temporal;
assisting humanity through a great "transition"; preparing for the Second
Coming of Jesus as a solar god-king; and furthering a unification of all
Christian churches and Islam. The group reportedly drew some inspiration for
its teachings from British occultist Aleister Crowley, who headed the Order of
Eastern Temple from 1923 until his death in 1947, and the Hermetic Order of the
Golden Dawn, a 19th century Rosicrucian Order Crowley belonged to briefly. Both
occult groups had a grade system somewhat similar to the Solar Temple. Another
Rosicrucian group, the Rosicrucian Fellowship headed by Max Heindel, also
mentioned Rosicrucians worship Christ as "The Solar Logos" (Rays from the Cross
Magazine, June, 1933), although this is not traditional Christian doctrine.
There were Solar Temple lodges in Morin Heights and Sainte-Anne-de-la-PÃ©rade,
Quebec, Canada, as well as in Australia, Switzerland, Martinique and other
countries. The Temple's activities were a mix of early Protestant Christianity
and New Age philosophy using variously adapted Freemason rituals. Jouret was
interested in attractive, wealthy and influential members, and it was reputed
that several affluent Europeans were secret members of the group. Structure.
According to the literature of the OTS, the central authority was the "Synarchy
of the Temple", whose membership was secret. Its top 33 members were known as
the "Elder Brothers of the Rosy Cross" (an alternative name for the
Rosicrucians), and were headquartered in ZÃ¼rich, Switzerland. The Council of
the Order formed Lodges which were run by a Regional Commander and three
Elders. Progression in the Order was by levels and grades, with three grades
per level â€“ the levels being "The Brothers of Parvis", "The Knights of the
Alliance" and the "Brothers of the Ancient Times" in ascending order. There
were many organizations associated with the OTS including the "International
Archedia Sciences and Tradition", "Archedia Clubs", "Menta Clubs", "Agata
Clubs" and "Atlanta Clubs", all of which offered the teachings of Luc Jouret
both to the general public and privately to OTS members. The Lodges had altars,
rituals and costumes. Members were initiated at each stage of advancement in
ceremonies which included expensive purchases, jewellery, costumes, regalia,
and the payment of initiation fees. During ceremonies, members wore Crusader-
type robes and were to hold in awe a sword which Di Mambro said was an
authentic Templar artifact, given to him a thousand years ago in a previous
life. Mass murders and suicides. In October 1994 Tony Dutoit's infant son
(Emmanuel Dutoit), aged three months, was killed at the group's centre in Morin
Heights, Quebec. The baby had been stabbed repeatedly with a wooden stake. It
is believed that Di Mambro ordered the murder, because he identified the baby
as the Anti-Christ described in the Bible. He believed that the Anti-Christ was
born into the order to prevent Di Mambro from succeeding in his spiritual aim.
A few days later, Di Mambro and twelve followers performed a ritual Last
Supper. A few days after that, apparent mass suicides and murders were
conducted at Cheiry and Salvan, two villages in Western Switzerland, and at
Morin Heights â€” 15 inner circle members committed suicide with poison, 30
were killed by bullets or smothering, and 8 others were killed by other causes.
In Switzerland, many of the victims were found in a secret underground chapel
lined with mirrors and other items of Templar symbolism. The bodies were
dressed in the order's ceremonial robes and were in a circle, feet together,
heads outward, most with plastic bags tied over their heads; they had each been
shot in the head. It is believed that the plastic bags were a symbol of the
ecological disaster that would befall the human race after the OTS members
moved on to Sirius. It is also believed that these bags were used as part of
the OTS rituals, and that members would have voluntarily worn them without
being placed under duress. There was also evidence that many of the victims in
Switzerland were drugged before they were shot. Other victims were found in
three ski chalets; several dead children were lying together. The tragedy was
discovered when officers rushed to the sites to fight the fires which had been
ignited by remote-control devices. Farewell letters left by the believers
stated that they believed they were leaving to escape the "hypocrisies and
oppression of this world." A mayor, a journalist, a civil servant and a sales
manager were found among the dead in Switzerland. Records seized by the Quebec
police showed that some members had personally donated over $1 million to the
group's leader Joseph Di Mambro. There was also another attempted mass suicide
of the remaining members which was thwarted in the late 1990s. All the suicide/
murders and attempts occurred around the dates of the equinoxes and solstices
in some relation to the beliefs of the group. Another massacre related to the
OTS took place during the night between the 15 and 16 December 1995. On 23
December 1995, 16 bodies were discovered in a star-formation in the Vercors
region in France. It was found later that two of them shot the others and then
committed suicide by firearm and immolation. On the morning of March 23, 1997,
five members of the OTS took their own lives in Saint-Casimir, Quebec. A small
house exploded into flames, leaving behind five charred bodies for the police
to pull from the rubble. Three teenagers aged 13, 14 and 16, the children of
one of the couples that died in the fire, were discovered in a shed behind the
house, alive but heavily drugged. Michael Tabachnik, an internationally
renowned Swiss musician and conductor, was arrested as a leader of the Solar
Temple in the late 1990s. He was indicted for "participation in a criminal
organization," and murder. He came to trial in Grenoble, France during the
spring of 2001 and was acquitted. French prosecutors appealed the verdict and
an appellate court ordered a second trial beginning October 24, 2006. He was
again cleared less than two months later on December 20.
