Papal bull A papal bull is a particular type of letters patent or charter
issued by a Pope of the Catholic Church. It is named after the lead seal
(bulla) that was appended to the end in order to authenticate it. Papal bulls
were originally issued by the pope for many kinds of communication of a public
nature, but by the thirteenth century, papal bulls were only used for the most
formal or solemn of occasions. From the twelfth century, papal bulls have
carried a lead seal with the heads of the apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul
on one side and the popeâ€™s signature on the other. Modern scholars have
retroactively used the term "Bull" to describe any elaborate papal document
issued in the form of a decree or privilege (solemn or simple), and to some
less elaborate ones issued in the form of a letter. Popularly, the name is used
for any papal document that contains a metal seal. Papal bulls have been in use
at least since the sixth century, but the term was not first used until around
the middle of the thirteenth century and then only for internal un-official
papal record keeping purposes; the term had become official by the fifteenth
century, when one of the offices of the Papal chancery was named the "register
of bulls" ("registrum bullarum"). Today, the bull is the only written
communication in which the Pope will refer to himself as "episcopus servus
servorum Dei", meaning "Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God." For instance,
Benedict XVI, when he issues a decree in bull form, will begin the document
with "Benedictus, Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei". While it used to always bear
a metal seal, it now does so only on the most solemn occasions. It is today the
most formal type of letters patent issued by the Vatican Chancery in the name
of the Pope. Format. A bull's format began with one line in tall elongated
letters containing three elements: the Pope's name, the Papal title "episcopus
servus servorum Dei," meaning 'bishop, servant of the servants of God', and the
few Latin words that constituted the incipit from which the bull would also
take its name for record keeping purposes, but which might not be directly
indicative of the bull's purpose. The body of the text had no specific
conventions for its formatting; it was often very simple in layout. The closing
section consisted of a short "datum", mentioning the place it was issued, the
day of the month and the year of the pope's pontificate and signatures, near
which was attached the seal. For the most solemn bulls, the Pope would sign the
document himself, in which case he used the formula "Ego N. Catholicae
Ecclesiae Episcopus" (I, N., Bishop of the Catholic Church). Following the
signature in this case would be an elaborate monogram, the signatures of any
witnesses, and then the seal. Nowadays, a member of the Roman Curia signs the
document on behalf of the Pope, usually the Cardinal Secretary of State, and
thus the monogram is omitted. Seal. The most distinctive characteristic of a
bull was the metal seal, which was usually made of lead, but on very solemn
occasions was made of gold (as Byzantine imperial deeds often were). It
depicted the founders of the Church of Rome, the apostles Peter and Paul,
identified by the letters Sanctus PAulus and Sanctus PEtrus. The name of the
issuing pope is on the reverse side. This was then attached to the document
either by cords of hemp (in the case of letters of justice, and executory) or
by red and yellow silk (in the case of letters of grace) that was looped
through slits in the vellum of the document. "Bulla" is the name of this seal,
because whether of wax, lead, or gold, the material making the seal had to be
melted to soften it and take on an impression: Latin "bullire", "to boil".
Since the late eighteenth century, the lead bulla has been replaced with a red
ink stamp of Saints Peter and Paul with the reigning Pope's name encircling the
picture, though very formal letters, e.g. the bull of Pope John XXIII convoking
the Second Vatican Council, still receive the lead seal. Original papal bulls
exist in quantity only after the eleventh century onward when the transition
from fragile papyrus to the more durable parchment was made. None survives in
entirety from before 819. Some original leaden seals, however, still survive
from as early as the 6th century. Content. In terms of content, the bull is
simply the format in which a decree of the Pope appears. Any subject may be
treated in a bull, and many were and are, including statutory decrees,
episcopal appointments, dispensations, excommunications, apostolic
constitutions, canonizations and convocations. The bull was the exclusive
letter format from the Vatican until the fourteenth century, when the papal
brief began to appear. The brief is the less formal form of papal communication
and is authenticated with a wax impression (now a red ink impression) of the
Ring of the Fisherman. There has never been an exact distinction of usage
between a bull and a brief, but nowadays most letters, including encyclicals,
are issued as briefs.
