Parentalia In ancient Rome, the Parentalia or dies parentales ("ancestral
days") was a nine-day festival held in honor of family ancestors, beginning
February 13. Although the Parentalia was a holiday on the Roman religious
calendar, its observances were mainly domestic and familial. The importance of
the family to the Roman state, however, was expressed by public ceremonies on
the opening day, the Ides of February, when a Vestal conducted a rite for the
collective "di parentes" of Rome at the tomb of Tarpeia. Ovid describes sacred
offerings ("sacrificia") of flower-garlands, wheat, salt, wine-soaked bread and
violets to the "shades of the dead" ("Manes" or "Di manes") at family tombs,
which were located outside Rome's sacred boundary "(pomerium)". These
observances were meant to strengthen the mutual obligations and protective ties
between the living and the dead, and were a lawful duty of the "paterfamilias"
(head of the family). Parentalia concluded February 21 in the midnight rites of
Feralia, when the "paterfamilias" addressed the malevolent, destructive aspects
of his Manes. Feralia was a placation and exorcism: Ovid thought it a more
rustic, primitive and ancient affair than the Parentalia itself. It appears to
have functioned as a cleansing ritual for Caristia on the following day, when
the family held an informal banquet to celebrate the amity between themselves
and their benevolent ancestral dead ("Lares"). The emphasis on collective cult
for the Manes and early "di parentes" implies their afterlife as vague and
lacking individuation. In later cult they are vested with personal qualities,
and in Imperial cult, they acquire divine "numen" and become "divi", divine
entities. From Parentalia to Caristia all temples were closed, marriages were
forbidden, and "magistrates appeared without their insignia," an indication
that no official business was conducted. William Warde Fowler describes the
Parentalia as "practically a yearly renewal of the rite of burial". Individuals
might also commemorated on their birthday "(dies natalis)". Some would be
commemorated throughout the year on marked days of the month, such as the
Kalends, Nones or Ides, when lamps might be lit at the tomb. The Lemuria on May
9, 11, and 13 was aimed at appeasing "kinless and hungry" spirits of the dead.
