Patron saint A patron saint or a patron hallow is a saint who, in Eastern
Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Anglican, Roman Catholic, and Eastern Catholic
Christian practice, is regarded as the intercessor and advocate in heaven of a
nation, place, craft, activity, class, clan, family, or person. Patron saints,
because they have already transcended to the metaphysical, are believed to be
able to intercede effectively for the needs of their special charges. Saints
often become the patron saints of places where they were born or had been
active. However, there were cases in Medieval Europe where a city which grew to
prominence and transferred to its cathedral the remains of a famous saint who
had lived and was buried elsewhere, and made him or her the city's patron saint
– such a practice conferring considerable prestige on the city concerned. In
Latin America, Spanish and Portuguese explorers often named location for the
saint on whose day the place was first visited – that Saint naturally
becoming the patron saint of a town or city which developed there. Professions
sometimes get a patron saint who was himself or herself involved in that
profession. Lacking such a saint, a profession would get a saint whose
conspicuous acts or miracles in some way recall the profession. For example,
when the hitherto unknown profession of photography appeared in the 19th
Century and needed a patron saint, this role was assigned to Saint Veronica.
According to Christian tradition, Veronica gave Jesus her veil to wipe his
forehead as he was being taken to Golgotha and the image of his face became
miraculously impressed upon it. The veneration and recognition of patron saints
is generally discouraged in Protestantism, especially Calvinism, as a form of
idolatry.
