Paul the Apostle Paul the Apostle ( AD 5¬ ‚Äì AD 67; variously referred to as
"the Apostle Paul" or "Saint Paul"), also known as Saul of Tarsus, is perhaps
the most influential early Christian missionary. The writings ascribed to him
by the church (the Pauline epistles) form a considerable portion of the New
Testament. The influence on Christian thinking of the epistles ascribed to him
has been significant, due in part to his association as a prominent apostle of
Christianity during the spreading of the Gospel through early Christian
communities across the Roman Empire. According to the writings in the New
Testament, Paul was known as Saul prior to his conversion, and was dedicated to
the persecution of the early disciples of Jesus in the area of Jerusalem. In
the narrative of the book of Acts, while traveling on the road from Jerusalem
to Damascus on a mission to "bring them which were there bound unto Jerusalem",
the resurrected Jesus appeared to him in a great light. He was struck blind,
but after three days his sight was restored by Ananias of Damascus, and Paul
began to preach that Jesus of Nazareth is the Jewish Messiah and the Son of
God.Acts 9:21 But all that heard "him" were amazed, and said; Is not this he
that destroyed them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for
that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests? Along with
Simon Peter and James the Just he was one of the most prominent early Christian
leaders. Fourteen epistles in the New Testament are traditionally attributed to
Paul, although his authorship of seven of the fourteen is questioned by modern
scholars. Augustine of Hippo developed Paul's idea that salvation is based on
faith and not "works of the law". Martin Luther's interpretation of Paul's
writings heavily influenced Luther's doctrine of sola fide. Paul's conversion
dramatically changed the course of his life. Through his missionary activity
and writings he eventually transformed religious belief and philosophy around
the Mediterranean Basin. His leadership, influence and legacy led to the
formation of communities dominated by Gentile groups that worshiped the God of
Israel, adhered to the "Judaic moral code", but relaxed or abandoned the ritual
and dietary teachings of the Law of Moses, that these laws and rituals had
either been fulfilled in the life of Christ or were symbolic precursors of
Christ, all on the basis of Paul's teachings of the life and works of Jesus
Christ and his teaching of a New Covenant (or "new testament") established
through Jesus' death and resurrection. The Bible does not record Paul's death.
Sources. The main source for historical information about Paul's life is the
material found in his epistles and the Book of Acts. However, these epistles
contain comparatively little information about Paul's past. The Book of Acts
also recounts Paul's career but leaves several parts of Paul's life out of its
narrative, such as his (alleged) execution in Rome. Scholars such as Hans
Conzelmann and 20th century theologian John Knox dispute the historical
reliability of the Acts of the Apostles. Paul's own account of his background
is found particularly in Galatians. According to some scholars, the "Acts"
account of Paul visiting Jerusalem contradicts the account in Paul's letters.
Some scholars consider Paul's accounts to be more reliable than those found in
Acts. Roman citizenship. The idea that Paul is a Roman citizen derives from the
Book of Acts in which Luke records Paul claiming his Roman citizenship on two
separate occasions, both in relation to punishment under Roman law. In , he is
recorded as stating that, in contrast to those who paid a large sum of money to
acquire citizenship, he was a Roman by birth. In the letters of Paul, such a
claim is never made. Marcus J. Borg and John Dominic Crossan wrote "Luke
insists that Paul was a Roman citizen, but Paul himself does not mention the
claim, he in fact seems to negate it." Paul appears to negate such a claim by
stating that he had suffered three beatings by the rod, which was a punishment
forbidden upon Roman citizens. However, the fact that he is able to appeal to
Caesar, recorded in , for his final sentencing leads many scholars to believe
that he was indeed a Roman citizen. Without Roman citizenship, Paul would not
have had this right. Names. His given name was Saul (), perhaps after the
biblical king Saul, a fellow Benjamite and the first king of Israel. In
biblical Greek: Œ£Œ±ŒøœçŒª ("Saul"), Œ£Œ±·ø¶ŒªŒøœÇ ("Saulos"), and
Œ Œ±·ø¶ŒªŒøœÇ ("Paulos").Greek lexicon G3972 Œ Œ±œçŒªŒøœÇ (Paul)Hebrew lexicon
H7586 ◊©◊Å◊ê◊ï÷º◊ú (Shaul/Saul) And in Latin: Saul, Saulus and Paulus. In the
book of Acts, when he had the vision that led to his conversion on the Road to
Damascus, Jesus called him "Saul, Saul", in the Hebrew tongue, and later, in a
vision to Ananias of Damascus, "the Lord" referred to him as "Saul, of Tarsus".
When Ananias came to restore his sight, he called him "Brother Saul". In Acts
13:9, the author indicates a name change by saying "...Saul, (who also is
called Paul,)..." and thereafter refers to him as Paul. He is called Paul in
all other Bible books where he is mentioned. Prior to conversion. Paul claimed
to be "of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of the
Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee." But the Bible reveals very little
about Paul's family. Paul's "sister's son" is mentioned in . "Acts" also quotes
Paul indirectly referring to his father by saying he was "a Pharisee, the son
of a Pharisee". Paul refers to his mother in as among those at Rome. "Acts"
identifies Paul as from the Mediterranean city of Tarsus (in present-day south-
central Turkey), well known for its intellectual environment. Although born in
Tarsus, Paul was raised in Jerusalem "at the feet of Gamaliel", a leading
authority in the Sanhedrin in the mid 1st century AD. Gamaliel once gave some
advice to the Sanhedrin in , to "refrain" from slaying the disciples of Jesus.
This is in great contrast to the rashness of his student Saul, who zealously
persecuted the "saints". Paul confesses that "beyond measure" he persecuted the
"church of God" prior to his conversion. () As a young man, he cooperated in
the killing of the proto-martyr, Stephen, standing by and guarding the clothes
of the witnesses while Stephen was stoned. () Conversion and mission. Paul's
conversion can be dated to 31‚Äì36 by his reference to it in one of his
letters. According to the Acts of the Apostles, his conversion (or metanoia)
took place on the road to Damascus, where he claimed to have experienced a
vision of the resurrected Jesus, after which he was temporarily blinded. Luke,
the author of Acts of the Apostles, likely learned of his conversion from Paul,
from the church in Jerusalem, or from the church in Antioch. Post-conversion
testimony. Paul's writings give some insight into his thinking regarding his
relationship with Judaism. He is strongly critical both theologically and
empirically of claims of moral or lineal superiority of Jews while conversely
strongly sustaining the notion of a special place for the Children of Israel.
Paul asserted that he received the Gospel not from any man, but by "the
revelation of Jesus Christ". Paul claimed independence from the Jerusalem
community (possibly in the Cenacle), but was just as quick to claim agreement
with it on the nature and content of the gospel. What is remarkable about such
a conversion is the changes in the thinking that had to take place. He had to
change his concept of who the messiah was, particularly what he'd perceived as
the absurdity of accepting a crucified messiah. Perhaps more challenging was
changing his conception of the ethnic superiority of the Jewish people. There
are debates as to whether Paul understood himself as commissioned to take the
gospel to the Gentiles at the moment of his conversion. Early ministry. After
his conversion, Paul went to Damascus, where Acts states he was healed of his
blindness and baptized by Ananias of Damascus. Paul says that it was in
Damascus that he barely escaped death . Paul also says that he then went first
to Arabia, and then came back to Damascus. Paul's trip to Arabia is not
mentioned anywhere else in the Bible, and some suppose he actually travelled to
Mt. Sinai for meditations in the desert. He describes in Galatians how three
years after his conversion he went to Jerusalem. There he met James and stayed
with Simon Peter for 15 days. Paul asserted that he received the Gospel not
from an apostle, but directly by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Paul claimed
almost total independence from the Jerusalem community and yet appeared eager
to bring material support to Jerusalem from the various budding Gentile
churches that he planted. In his writings, Paul persistently used the
persecutions he claimed to have endured, in terms of physical beatings and
verbal assaults, to claim proximity and union with Jesus and as a validation of
his teaching. Paul's narrative in Galatians states that 14 years after his
conversion he went again to Jerusalem. It is not completely known what happened
during these 'unknown years', but both Acts and Galatians provide some partial
details. At the end of this time, Barnabas went to find Paul and brought him
back to Antioch. When a famine occurred in Judea, around 45‚Äì46, Paul and
Barnabas journeyed to Jerusalem to deliver financial support from the Antioch
community. According to Acts, Antioch had become an alternative center for
Christians following the dispersion of the believers after the death of
Stephen. It was in Antioch that the followers of Jesus were first called
"Christians." First missionary journey. The author of the Acts arranges Paul's
travels into three separate journeys. The first journey, led initially by
Barnabas, takes Paul from Antioch to Cyprus then southern Asia Minor
(Anatolia), and back to Antioch. In Cyprus, Paul rebukes and blinds Elymas the
magician who was criticizing their teachings. From this point on, Paul is
described as the leader of the group. They sail to Perga in Pamphylia. John
Mark leaves them and returns to Jerusalem. Paul and Barnabas go on to Pisidian
Antioch. On Sabbath they go to the synagogue. The leaders invite them to speak.
Paul reviews Israelite history from life in Egypt to King David. He introduces
Jesus as a descendant of David brought to Israel by God. He said that his team
came to town to bring the message of salvation. He recounts the story of Jesus'
death and resurrection. He quotes from the Septuagint to assert that Jesus was
the promised Christos who brought them forgiveness for their sins. Both the
Jews and the 'God-fearing' Gentiles invited them to talk more next Sabbath. At
that time almost the whole city gathered. This upset some influential Jews who
spoke against them. Paul used the occasion to announce a change in his mission
which from then on would be to the Gentiles. Antioch served as a major
Christian center for Paul's evangelizing. Second missionary journey. Paul
leaves for his second missionary journey from Jerusalem, in late Autumn 49,
after the meeting of the Council of Jerusalem where the circumcision question
was debated. On their trip around the Mediterranean sea, Paul and his companion
Barnabas stopped in Antioch where they had a sharp argument about taking John
Mark with them on their trips. The book of Acts said that John Mark had left
them in a previous trip and gone home. Unable to resolve the dispute, Paul and
Barnabas decided to separate; Barnabas took John Mark with him, while Silas
joined Paul. Paul and Silas initially visited Tarsus (Paul's birthplace), Derbe
and Lystra. In Lystra, they met Timothy, a disciple who was spoken well of, and
decided to take him with them. The Church kept growing, adding believers, and
strengthening their faith daily. In Philippi, certain men were not happy about
the liberation of their soothsaying servant girl, who had been possessed with a
spirit of divination, and they turned the city against the missionaries and
Paul and Silas were put in jail. After a miraculous earthquake, the gates of
the prison fell apart and Paul and Silas were able to escape but remained; this
event led to the conversion of the jailor. They continued traveling, going by
Berea and then to Athens where Paul preached to the Jews and God-fearing Greeks
in the synagogue and to the Greek intellectuals in the Areopagus. Around
50‚Äì52, Paul spent 18 months in Corinth. The reference in Acts to proconsul
Gallio helps ascertain this date (cf. Gallio inscription). Paul met Aquila and
Priscilla in Corinth who became faithful believers and helped Paul through his
other missionary journeys. The couple followed Paul and his companions to
Ephesus, and stayed there to start one of the strongest and most faithful
churches at that time. In 52, the missionaries sailed to Caesarea to greet the
Church there and then traveled north to Antioch where they stayed for about a
year before leaving again on their third missionary journey. Third missionary
journey. Paul began his third missionary journey by traveling all around the
region of Galatia and Phrygia to strengthen, teach and rebuke the believers.
Paul then traveled to Ephesus, an important center of early Christianity, and
stayed there for almost three years. He performed numerous miracles, healing
people and casting out demons, and he apparently organized missionary activity
into the hinterlands. Paul left Ephesus after an attack from a local
silversmith resulted in a pro-Artemis riot involving most of the city. During
his stay in Ephesus, Paul wrote four letters to the church in Corinth
admonishing them for their pagan behavior. Then Paul went through Macedonia
into Achaea and made ready to continue on to Syria, but he changed his plans
and traveled back through Macedonia because of Jews who had made a plot against
him. At this time (56‚Äì57), it is likely that Paul visited Corinth for three
months. In Paul wrote that he visited Illyricum, but he may have meant what
would now be called Illyria Graeca, which lay in the northern part of modern
Albania, but was at that time a division of the Roman province of Macedonia.
Paul and his companions visited other cities on their way back to Jerusalem
such as Philippi, Troas, Miletus, Rhodes, and Tyre. Paul finished his trip with
a stop in Caesarea where he and his companions stayed with Philip the
Evangelist before finally arriving at Jerusalem. Journey to Rome and beyond.
After Paul's arrival in Jerusalem at the end of his third missionary journey,
he became involved in a serious conflict with some "Asian Jews" (most likely
from Roman Asia). The conflict eventually led to Paul's arrest and imprisonment
in Caesarea for about a year and a half. Finally, Paul and his companions
sailed for Rome where Paul was to stand trial for his alleged crimes. "Acts"
states that Paul preached in Rome for two years from his rented home while
awaiting trial. It does not state what happened after this time, but some
sources claim that Paul was freed by Nero and continued to preach in Rome even
though that seems unlikely based on Nero's historical relationship with Early
Christians. It is possible that Paul also traveled to other countries like
Spain and Britain. See the "Arrest and death" section below. Among the writings
of early Christians, Clement of Rome said that Paul was "Herald (of the Gospel
of Christ) in the West," and that "he had gone to the extremity of the
west."1Clem 5:5 "By reason of jealousy and strife Paul by his example pointed
out the prize of patient endurance. After that he had been seven times in
bonds, had been driven into exile, had been stoned, had preached in the East
and in the West, he won the noble renown which was the reward of his faith,
having taught righteousness unto the whole world and having reached the
farthest bounds of the West; and when he had borne his testimony before the
rulers, so he departed from the world and went unto the holy place, having been
found a notable pattern of patient endurance."Where Lightfoot has "had
preached" above, the [http://www.earlychristianwritings.com/text/1clement-
hoole.html Hoole translation has "having become a herald".See also the endnote
(#3) by Arthur Cleveland Coxe on the last page of regarding Paul's preaching in
Britain.  Chrysostom indicated that Paul preached in Spain: "For after he had
been in Rome, he returned to Spain, but whether he came thence again into these
parts, we know not." Cyril of Jerusalem said that Paul, "fully preached the
Gospel, and instructed even imperial Rome, and carried the earnestness of his
preaching as far as Spain, undergoing conflicts innumerable, and performing
Signs and wonders". The Muratorian fragment mentions "the departure of Paul
from the city Rome (39) when he journeyed to Spain." Council of Jerusalem. Most
scholars agree that a vital meeting between Paul and the Jerusalem church took
place some time in the years 48 to 50, described in and usually seen as the
same event mentioned by Paul in . The key question raised was whether Gentile
converts needed to be circumcised. At this meeting, Paul claims in his letter
to the Galatians that Peter, James, and John accepted Paul's mission to the
Gentiles. Jerusalem meetings are mentioned in Acts, in Paul's letters, and some
appear in both. For example, the Jerusalem visit for famine relief apparently
corresponds to the "first visit" (to Cephas and James only). F. F. Bruce
suggested that the "fourteen years" could be from Paul's conversion rather than
the first visit to Jerusalem. Incident at Antioch. Despite the agreement
achieved at the Council of Jerusalem, as understood by Paul, Paul recounts how
he later publicly confronted Peter, in a dispute sometimes called the "Incident
at Antioch," over Peter's reluctance to share a meal with Gentile Christians in
Antioch. Writing later of the incident, Paul recounts, "I opposed to his face,
because he was clearly in the wrong," and says he told Peter, "You are a Jew,
yet you live like a Gentile and not like a Jew. How is it, then, that you force
Gentiles to follow Jewish customs?" Paul also mentions that even Barnabas, his
traveling companion and fellow apostle until that time, sided with Peter. The
final outcome of the incident remains uncertain. The Catholic Encyclopedia
suggests that Paul won the argument, because "Paul's account of the incident
leaves no doubt that Peter saw the justice of the rebuke." L. Michael White's
"From Jesus to Christianity" draws the opposite conclusion: "The blowup with
Peter was a total failure of political bravado, and Paul soon left Antioch as
persona non grata, never again to return." The primary source account of the
Incident at Antioch is Paul's letter to the Galatians. Visits to Jerusalem in
Acts and the epistles. This table is adapted from White, "From Jesus to
Christianity." Note that the matching of Paul's travels in the Acts and the
travels in his Epistles is done for the reader's convenience and is not
approved of by all scholars. Arrest and death. Paul arrived in Jerusalem in 57
with a collection of money for the community there. Acts reports that he was
warmly received. But Acts goes on to recount how Paul was warned by James and
the elders that he was gaining a reputation for being against the Law,
'teaching all the Jews living among the gentiles to forsake Moses, and that you
tell them not to circumcise their children or observe the customs'. Paul
underwent a purification ritual in order to give the Jews no grounds to bring
accusations against him for not following their law. Paul caused a stir when he
appeared at the Temple, and he escaped being killed by the crowd by being taken
into Roman custody. When a plot to kill Paul on his way to an appearance before
the Jews was discovered, he was transported by night to Caesarea. He was held
as a prisoner there for two years, until a new governor reopened his case in
59. When the governor suggested that he be sent back to Jerusalem for further
trial, Paul was constrained to "appeal unto Caesar", as was his right as a
Roman. Acts recounts that on the way to Rome Paul was shipwrecked on "Melita"
(Malta), where he was met by Publius and the islanders, who showed him "unusual
kindness". He arrived in Rome c. 60 and spent two years under house arrest.
Irenaeus of Lyons in the 2nd century believed that Peter and Paul had been the
founders of the Church in Rome and had appointed Linus as succeeding bishop.
Paul was not a bishop of Rome nor did he bring Christianity to Rome since there
were already Christians in Rome when he arrived there (Acts 28:14‚Äì15). Also
Paul wrote his letter to the church at Rome before he had visited Rome (Romans
1:1,7,11-13; 15:23‚Äì29). However, Paul would have played an important role in
the life of the early church at Rome. Neither the Bible nor other sources say
how or when Paul died, but Ignatius, probably around 110, writes that he was
martyred. According to Christian tradition, Paul was beheaded in Rome during
the reign of Nero around the mid-60s at "Tre Fontane Abbey" (English: Three
Fountains Abbey). By comparison, tradition states that Peter, who was not a
Roman citizen, was given the more painful death of being crucified upside-down.
In June 2009, Pope Benedict announced excavation results concerning the tomb of
Paul at the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls. The sarcophagus was not
opened but was examined by means of a probe, which revealed pieces of incense,
purple and blue linen, and small bone fragments. The bone was radiocarbon dated
to the 1st or 2nd century. According to the Vatican, these findings are
consistent with the traditional claim that the tomb is Paul's. Writings.
Fourteen epistles in the New Testament are attributed to Paul. Seven of
these¬ ‚Äì Romans, 1st Corinthians, 2nd Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians,
1st Thessalonians and Philemon¬ ‚Äì are almost universally accepted as being
actually written by Paul. Scholars generally agree that four others were not
written by Paul, those being 1st Timothy, 2nd Timothy, Titus, and Hebrews. As
to the remaining three¬ ‚Äì Ephesians, Colossians and 2nd Thessalonians¬ ‚Äì
scholars are almost evenly divided. Of those written by Paul, all except
Galatians appear to have been dictated through a secretary, who would
paraphrase the message, as was the practice among 1st-century scribes. The
epistles were circulated in the Christian community and read aloud by church
members along with other works. Paul's epistles were viewed from early times as
scripture and later established as Canon of Scripture. Critical scholars regard
Paul's epistles, which were written between 50 and 62 AD, to be the earliest
books of the New Testament. They are referenced as early as c. 96 by Clement of
Rome. Authorship. Paul's letters are largely written to churches which he had
visited; he was a great traveler, visiting Cyprus, Asia Minor (modern Turkey),
mainland Greece, Crete, and Rome. His letters are full of expositions of what
Christians should believe and how they should live. He does not tell his
correspondents (or the modern reader) much about the life of Jesus; his most
explicit references are to the Last Supper and the crucifixion and
resurrection. His specific references to Jesus' teaching are likewise sparse,
raising the question, still disputed, as to how consistent his account of the
faith is with that of the four canonical Gospels, Acts, and the Epistle of
James. The view that Paul's Christ is very different from the historical Jesus
has been expounded by Adolf Harnack among many others. Nevertheless, he
provides the first written account of what it is to be a Christian and thus of
Christian spirituality. Of the fourteen letters attributed to Paul and included
in the Western New Testament canon, there is little or no dispute that Paul
actually wrote at least seven, those being Romans, First Corinthians, Second
Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, First Thessalonians, and Philemon. Hebrews
(no relation to the Gospel according to the Hebrews), which was ascribed to him
in antiquity, was questioned even then, never having an ancient attribution,
and in modern times is considered by most experts as not by Paul (see also
Antilegomena). The authorship of the remaining six Pauline epistles is disputed
to varying degrees. The authenticity of Colossians has been questioned on the
grounds that it contains an otherwise unparalleled description (among his
writings) of Jesus as 'the image of the invisible God,' a Christology found
elsewhere only in John's gospel. On the other hand, the personal notes in the
letter connect it to Philemon, unquestionably the work of Paul. Internal
evidence shows close connection with Philippians. Ephesians is a very similar
letter to Colossians, but is almost entirely lacking in personal reminiscences.
Its style is unique. It lacks the emphasis on the cross to be found in other
Pauline writings, reference to the Second Coming is missing, and Christian
marriage is exalted in a way which contrasts with the reference in . Finally,
according to R.E. Brown, it exalts the Church in a way suggestive of a second
generation of Christians, 'built upon the foundation of the apostles and
prophets' now past. The defenders of its Pauline authorship argue that it was
intended to be read by a number of different churches and that it marks the
final stage of the development of Paul of Tarsus's thinking. It has to be
noted, too, that the moral portion of the Epistle, consisting of the last two
chapters has the closest affinity with similar portions of other Epistles,
while the whole admirably fits in with the known details of Paul's life, and
throws considerable light upon them. The Pastoral Epistles, 1 and 2¬ Timothy,
and Titus have likewise been put in question as Pauline works. Three main
reasons are advanced: first, their difference in vocabulary, style, and
theology from Paul's acknowledged writings; Defenders of the authenticity note,
that they were then probably written in the name and with the authority of the
Apostle by one of his companions, to whom he distinctly explained what had to
be written, or to whom he gave a written summary of the points to be developed,
and that when the letters were finished, Paul read them through, approved them,
and signed them. Secondly, the difficulty in fitting them into Paul's biography
as we have it. They, like Colossians and Ephesians, were written from prison
but suppose Paul's release and travel thereafter. However, according to Roman
law there was nothing deserving of death against him. Finally, the concerns
expressed are very much the practical ones as to how a church should function.
They are more about maintenance than about mission. 2¬ Thessalonians, like
Colossians, is questioned on stylistic grounds, with some noting, among other
peculiarities, a dependence on 1¬ Thessalonians yet a distinctiveness in
language from the Pauline corpus. This, again, is explainable by the
possibility of Paul requesting one of his companions to write the letter for
him under his instructions. Atonement. Paul wrote down much of the theology of
atonement. Paul taught that Christians are redeemed from the Law (see
Supersessionism) and from sin by Jesus' death and resurrection. His death was
an expiation as well as a propitiation, and by Christ's blood peace is made
between God and man. By baptism, a Christian shares in Jesus' death and in his
victory over death, gaining as a free gift a new, justified status of sonship.
Relationship with Judaism. Some scholars see Paul (or Saul) as completely in
line with 1st-century Judaism (a Pharisee and student of Gamaliel), others see
him as opposed to 1st-century Judaism (see Marcionism), while still others see
him as somewhere in between these two extremes, opposed to "Ritual Laws" (for
example the circumcision controversy in early Christianity) but in full
agreement on "Divine Law". These views of Paul are paralleled by the views of
Biblical law in Christianity. Paul's theology of the gospel accelerated the
separation of the messianic sect of Christians from Judaism, a development
contrary to Paul's own intent. He wrote that the faith of Christ was alone
decisive in salvation for Jews and Gentiles alike, making the schism between
the followers of Christ and mainstream Jews inevitable and permanent. He argued
that Gentile converts did not need to become Jews, get circumcised, follow
Jewish dietary restrictions, or otherwise observe Mosaic laws. Nevertheless, in
Romans he insisted on the positive value of the Law, as a moral guide. E. P.
Sanders' publications have since been taken up by Professor James Dunn who
coined the phrase "The New Perspective on Paul" and N.T. Wright, the Anglican
Bishop of Durham. Wright, noting a difference between Galatians and Romans, the
latter being much more positive about the continuing covenant between God and
his ancient people than the former, contends that works are not insignificant
but rather proof of attaining the redemption of Jesus Christ by grace (free
gift received by faith) and that Paul distinguishes between works which are
signs of ethnic identity and those which are a sign of obedience to Christ.
World to come. According to Ehrman, Paul believed that Jesus would return
within his lifetime. He states that Paul expected that Christians who had died
in the mean time would be resurrected to share in God's kingdom, and he
believed that the saved would be transformed, assuming supernatural bodies.
Paul's teaching about the end of the world is expressed most clearly in his
letters to the Christians at Thessalonica. Heavily persecuted, it appears that
they had written asking him first about those who had died already, and,
secondly, when they should expect the end. He assures them that the dead will
rise first and be followed by those left alive. This suggests an imminence of
the end but he is unspecific about times and seasons, and encourages his
hearers to expect a delay. The form of the end will be a battle between Jesus
and the man of lawlessness whose conclusion is the triumph of Christ. Role of
women. A verse in the first letter to Timothy, , traditionally attributed to
Paul, is often used as the main biblical authority for prohibiting women from
becoming ordained clergy and or holding certain other positions of ministry and
leadership in Christianity, though Paul's authorship of this letter is debated.
The Letter to Timothy is also often used by many churches to deny women a vote
in church affairs, reject women from serving as teachers of adult Bible
classes, prevent them from serving as missionaries, and generally
disenfranchise women from the duties and privileges of church leadership. The
KJV translation of this passage seems to be saying that women in the churches
are to have no leadership roles vis-√ -vis men. Whether it also forbids women
from teaching children and women is dubious as even those Catholic churches
that prohibit female priests, permit female abbesses to teach and exercise
authority over other females. Any interpretation of this portion of Scripture
must wrestle with the theological, contextual, syntactical, and lexical
difficulties embedded within these few words. Fuller Seminary theologian J. R.
Daniel Kirk finds evidence in Paul‚Äôs letters of a much more inclusive view of
women. He writes that is a tremendously important witness to the important role
of women in the early church. Paul praises Phoebe for her work as a deaconess
and Junia who was (according to some scholars) an Apostle. Kirk points to
recent studies that have led "many scholars" to conclude that the passage in
ordering women to "be silent" during worship was a later addition, apparently
by a different author, and not part of Paul‚Äôs original letter to the
Corinthians. Other scholars such as Giancarlo Biguzzi, claim that Paul's
restriction on women speaking in is genuine to Paul but applies to a particular
case of prohibiting asking questions or chatting and is not a general
prohibition on any woman speaking since in Paul affirms the right of women to
prophesy. Kirk's third example of a more inclusive view is : "There is neither
Jew nor Greek, slave nor free, "male nor female", for you are all one in Christ
Jesus (italics added). In pronouncing an end within the church to the divisions
which are common in the world around it, he concludes by highlighting the fact
that "...there were New Testament women who taught and had authority in the
early churches, that this teaching and authority was sanctioned by Paul, and
that Paul himself offers a theological paradigm within which overcoming the
subjugation of women is an anticipated outcome." Homosexuality. All three of
the verses in the New Testament that purportedly contain explicit references to
homosexuality are contained within letters attributed to Paul (, , and ): it is
argued that his statements condemn homosexual behavior. "Porneia" appears a
number of times in Paul's letters, always with "arsenokoitais". Yale University
professor and maverick John Boswell argues in his book "Christianity, Social
Tolerance and Homosexuality" that 'arsenokoitai' in 1 Corinthians 6:9 and 1
Timothy 1:10 refers specifically to male prostitution; although nearly all
biblical experts disagree. Paul's writings draw their context and conviction
from the numerous writings in the old testament that condemn homosexuality.
Proposed ambiguity in the Bible's stance on homosexuality is unfounded when
compared to the clearly stated position of both Biblical texts and early
christian church fathers. The official Catholic Church position can be viewed
in Vatican writings such as, "Letter to the Bishops of the Catholic Church on
the pastoral care of homosexual persons" Influence on Christianity. Paul's
influence on Christian thinking arguably has been more significant than any
other New Testament author. Paul declared that faith in Christ made the Torah
unnecessary for salvation, exalted the Christian church as the body of Christ,
and depicted the world outside the Church as under judgment. Lord's Supper.
Paul's writings include the earliest reference to the Lord's supper, a rite
traditionally identified as the Christian Eucharist. Eastern tradition. In the
East, church fathers reduced the element of election in Romans 9 to divine
foreknowledge. The themes of predestination found in Western Christianity do
not appear in Eastern theology. Western tradition. Augustine's foundational
work on the gospel as a gift (grace), on morality as life in the Spirit, on
predestination, and on original sin all derives from Paul, especially Romans.
In the Reformation, Martin Luther expressed Paul's doctrine of faith most
strongly as justification by faith alone. John Calvin developed Augustine's
predestination into double predestination. Modern theology. In his commentary
"The Epistle to the Romans" (Ger. "Der R√∂merbrief"; particularly in the
thoroughly re-written second edition of 1922) Karl Barth argued that the God
who is revealed in the cross of Jesus challenges and overthrows any attempt to
ally God with human cultures, achievements, or possessions. Some theologians
believe this work to be the most important theological treatise since Friedrich
Schleiermacher's "On Religion: Speeches to its Cultured Despisers". As in the
Eastern tradition in general, Western humanists interpret the reference to
election in Romans 9 as reflecting divine foreknowledge. Church tradition.
Various Christian writers have suggested more details about Paul's life. "By
reason of jealousy and strife Paul by his example pointed out the prize of
patient endurance. After that he had been seven times in bonds, had been driven
into exile, had been stoned, had preached in the East and in the West, he won
the noble renown which was the reward of his faith, having taught righteousness
unto the whole world and having reached the farthest bounds of the West; and
when he had borne his testimony before the rulers, so he departed from the
world and went unto the holy place, having been found a notable pattern of
patient endurance." Commenting on this passage, Raymond Brown writes that while
it "does not explicitly say" that Paul was martyred in Rome, "such a martyrdom
is the most reasonable interpretation." Eusebius of Caesarea, who wrote in the
4th century, states that Paul was beheaded in the reign of the Roman Emperor
Nero. This event has been dated either to the year 64, when Rome was devastated
by a fire, or a few years later, to 67. The San Paolo alle Tre Fontane church
was built on the location where the execution was believed to have taken place.
A Roman Catholic liturgical solemnity of Peter and Paul, celebrated on June 29,
may reflect the day of his martyrdom, other sources have articulated the
tradition that Peter and Paul died on the same day (and possibly the same
year). The apocryphal Acts of Paul, the apocryphal Acts of Peter suggest that
Paul survived Rome and traveled further west. Some hold the view that he could
have revisited Greece and Asia Minor after his trip to Spain, and might then
have been arrested in Troas, and taken to Rome and executed. A tradition holds
that Paul was interred with Saint Peter "ad Catacumbas" by the via Appia until
moved to what is now the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls in Rome.
Bede, in his "Ecclesiastical History", writes that Pope Vitalian in 665 gave
Paul's relics (including a cross made from his prison chains) from the crypts
of Lucina to King Oswy of Northumbria, northern Britain. However, Bede's use of
the word "relic" was not limited to corporal remains. Paul, who was quite
possibly martyred in Rome, has long been associated with that city and its
church. Paul is the patron saint of London. The Feast of the Conversion of
Saint Paul is celebrated on January 25. Literary analysis. British Jewish
scholar Hyam Maccoby contended that the Paul as described in the Book of Acts
and the view of Paul gleaned from his own writings are very different people.
Some difficulties have been noted in the account of his life. Paul as described
in the Book of Acts is much more interested in factual history, less in
theology; ideas such as justification by faith are absent as are references to
the Spirit, according to Maccoby. He also pointed out that there are no
references to John the Baptist in the Pauline Epistles, although Paul mentions
him several times in the Book of Acts. Others have objected that the language
of the speeches is too Lukan in style to reflect anyone else's words. Moreover,
George Shillington writes that the author of Acts most likely created the
speeches accordingly and they bear his literary and theological marks.
Conversely, Howard Marshall writes that the speeches were not entirely the
inventions of the author and while they may not be accurate word-for-word, the
author nevertheless records the general idea of them. F. C. Baur (1792‚Äì1860),
professor of theology at T√ºbingen in Germany, the first scholar to critique
Acts and the Pauline Epistles, and founder of the T√ºbingen School of theology,
argued that Paul, as the "Apostle to the Gentiles", was in violent opposition
to the original 12 Apostles. Baur considers the Acts of the Apostles were late
and unreliable. This debate has continued ever since, with Adolf Deissmann
(1866‚Äì1937) and Richard Reitzenstein (1861‚Äì1931) emphasising Paul's Greek
inheritance and Albert Schweitzer stressing his dependence on Judaism. Elaine
Pagels, professor of religion at Princeton University and an authority on
Gnosticism, argues that Paul was a Gnostic and that the anti-Gnostic Pastoral
Epistles were "pseudo-Pauline" forgeries written to rebut this. Maccoby
theorized that Paul synthesized Judaism, Gnosticism, and mysticism to create
Christianity as a cosmic savior religion. According to Maccoby, Paul's
Pharisaism was his own invention, though actually he was probably associated
with the Sadducees. Maccoby attributed the origins of Christian antisemitism to
Paul and claims that Paul's view of women, though inconsistent, reflects his
Gnosticism in its misogynist aspects. Professor Robert Eisenman of California
State University, Long Beach argues that Paul was a member of the family of
Herod the Great. Professor Eisenman makes a connection between Paul and an
individual identified by Josephus as "Saulus," a "kinsman of Agrippa." Another
oft-cited element of the case for Paul as a member of Herod's family is found
in where Paul writes, "Greet Herodion, my kinsman." Alan Segal, Daniel Boyarin,
Christopher R. A. Jones regard Paul's accounts of his conversion experience and
his ascent to the heavens as the earliest first person accounts we have of the
visionary experiences of a Merkabah mystic in Jewish or Christian literature.
Conversely, Timothy Churchill has argued that Paul's Damascus road encounter
does not fit the pattern of Merkabah. Among the critics of Paul the Apostle was
Thomas Jefferson who wrote that Paul was the "first corrupter of the doctrines
of Jesus." Christian anarchists, such as Leo Tolstoy and Ammon Hennacy, take a
similar view. F.F. Powell argues that Paul, in his epistles, made use of many
of the ideas of the Greek philosopher Plato, sometimes even using the same
metaphors and language. For example, in "Phaedrus", Plato has Socrates saying
that the heavenly ideals are perceived as though "through a glass dimly." These
words are echoed by Paul in . Howard Brenton's 2005 play "Paul" takes a
skeptical view of his conversion.
