Peace Peace is a state of harmony characterized by the lack of violent conflict
and the freedom from fear of violence. Commonly understood as the absence of
hostility, peace also suggests the existence of healthy or newly healed
interpersonal or international relationships, prosperity in matters of social
or economic welfare, the establishment of equality, and a working political
order that serves the true interests of all. In international relations,
peacetime is not only the absence of war or violent conflict, but also the
presence of positive and respectful cultural and economic relationships.
Etymology. From the Latin pax, meaning "freedom from civil disorder," the
English word came into use in various personal greetings from c.1300 as a
translation of the Hebrew shalom. Such a translation is, however, imprecise, as
Shalom, which is also cognate with the Arabic "salaam", has multiple other
meanings in addition to peace, including justice, good health, safety, well-
being, prosperity, equity, security, good fortune, and friendliness. At a
personal level, peaceful behaviors are kind, considerate, respectful, just, and
tolerant of others' beliefs and behaviors‚Äîtending to manifest goodwill. This
latter understanding of peace can also pertain to an individual's introspective
sense or concept of her/himself, as in being "at peace" in one's own mind, as
found in European references from c.1200. The early English term is also used
in the sense of "quiet", reflecting calm, serene, and meditative approaches to
family or group relationships that avoid quarreling and seek tranquility ‚Äî an
absence of disturbance or agitation. In many languages the word for peace is
also used a greeting or a farewell, for example the Hawaiian word Aloha, as
well as the Arabic word salaam. In English the word peace is occasionally used
as a farewell, especially for the dead, as in the phrase 'Rest In Peace' RIP.
Buddhists believe that peace can be attained once all suffering ends. They
regard all suffering as stemming from cravings (in the extreme, greed),
aversions (fears), or delusions. To eliminate such suffering and achieve
personal peace, followers in the path of the Buddha adhere to a set of
teachings called the Four Noble Truths ‚Äî a central tenet in Buddhist
philosophy. Islam means submission. The title "Muslim"‚Äîetymologically
directly related to salaam and the name Islam‚Äîmeans a person who submits to
Allah in salaam. The submission to Allah (the Arabic proper noun for "The God",
One and Only) is based on humility. An attitude of humility within one's own
self cannot be accomplished without total rejection of violence, and a personal
attitude and alignment toward peace. Religious beliefs and peace. Religious
beliefs often seek to identify and address the basic problems of human life,
including the conflicts between, among, and within persons and societies. Many
Christians call their prophet Jesus of Nazareth the "Prince of Peace", and see
him as a messiah (savior or deliverer), the "Christ", who manifested as the Son
of God on Earth to establish God's Kingdom of Peace, wherein persons,
societies, and all of Creation are to be healed of evil. For persons to enter
this Kingdom and experience peace, Christians believe that one must develop a
personal relationship with Jesus Christ, who stated: "Come to me, all you who
labor and are burdened, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and
learn from me, for I am meek and humble of heart; and you will find rest for
your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden light." () According to Pope
Benedict XVI, "Peace is achieved by consciences that are open to the truth and
to love". Elsewhere Benedict links peace to ecology: "humanity, if it truly
desires peace, must be increasingly conscious of the links between natural
ecology, or respect for nature, and human ecology. Experience shows that
disregard for the environment always harms human coexistence, and vice versa.
It becomes more and more evident that there is an inseparable link between
peace with creation and peace among men. Both of these presuppose peace with
God. The poem-prayer of Saint Francis, known as "the Canticle of Brother Sun",
is a wonderful and ever timely example of this multifaceted ecology of peace".
Buddhists believe that peace can be attained once all suffering ends. They
regard all suffering as stemming from cravings (in the extreme, greed),
aversions (fears), or delusions. To eliminate such suffering and achieve
personal peace, followers in the path of the Buddha adhere to a set of
teachings called the Four Noble Truths ‚Äî a central tenet in Buddhist
philosophy. Islam means submission. The title "Muslim"‚Äîetymologically
directly related to salaam and the name Islam‚Äîmeans a person who submits to
Allah in salaam. The submission to Allah (the Arabic proper noun for "The God",
One and Only) is based on humility. An attitude of humility within one's own
self cannot be accomplished without total rejection of violence, and a personal
attitude and alignment toward peace. Inner peace. Inner peace (or peace of
mind) refers to a state of being mentally and spiritually at peace, with enough
knowledge and understanding to keep oneself strong in the face of discord or
stress. Being "at peace" is considered by many to be healthy homeostasis and
the opposite of being stressed or anxious. Peace of mind is generally
associated with bliss and happiness. Peace of mind, serenity, and calmness are
descriptions of a disposition free from the effects of stress. In some
cultures, inner peace is considered a state of consciousness or enlightenment
that may be cultivated by various forms of training, such as prayer,
meditation, t'ai chi ch'uan (Â§™ÊûÅÊã≥, t√ ij√≠qu√°n) or yoga, for example.
Many spiritual practices refer to this peace as an experience of knowing
oneself. Finding inner peace is often associated with traditions such as
Buddhism and Hinduism as well as the New Age movement. Inner peace is also the
first of four concepts to living life in the rave culture acronym PLUR.
Satyagraha. Satyagraha ( ) is a philosophy and practice of nonviolent
resistance developed by Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (also known as "Mahatma"
Gandhi). He deployed satyagraha techniques in campaigns for Indian independence
and also during his earlier struggles in South Africa. The word satyagraha
itself was coined through a public contest that Gandhi sponsored through the
newspaper he published in South Africa, 'Indian Opinion', when he realized that
neither the common, contemporary Hindu language nor the English language
contained a word which fully expressed his own meanings and intentions when he
talked about his nonviolent approaches to conflict. According to Gandhi's
autobiography, the contest winner was Maganlal Gandhi (presumably no relation),
who submitted the entry 'sadagraha', which Gandhi then modified to
'satyagraha'. Etymologically, this Hindic word means 'truth-firmness', and is
commonly translated as 'steadfastness in the truth' or 'truth-force'.
Satyagraha theory also influenced Martin Luther King, Jr. during the campaigns
he led during the civil rights movement in the United States. The theory of
satyagraha sees means and ends as inseparable. Therefore, it is contradictory
to try to use violence to obtain peace. As Gandhi wrote: ‚ÄúThey say, 'means
are, after all, means'. I would say, 'means are, after all, everything'. As the
means so the end...‚Äù A contemporary quote sometimes attributed to Gandhi, but
also to A. J. Muste, sums it up: 'There is no way to peace; peace is the way.'
Justice and injustice. Since classical times, it has been noted that peace has
sometimes been achieved by the victor over the vanquished by the imposition of
ruthless measures. In his book "Agricola" the Roman historian Tacitus includes
eloquent and vicious polemics against the rapacity and greed of Rome. One, that
Tacitus says is by the Caledonian chieftain Calgacus, ends "Auferre trucidare
rapere falsis nominibus imperium, atque ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem
appellant." (To ravage, to slaughter, to usurp under false titles, they call
empire; and where they make a desert, they call it peace. ‚Äî Oxford Revised
Translation). More recently, advocates for radical reform in justice systems
have called for a public policy adoption of non-punitive, non-violent
Restorative Justice methods, and many of those studying the success of these
methods, including a United Nations working group on Restorative Justice, have
attempted to re-define justice in terms related to peace. From the late 2000s
on, a Theory of Active Peace has been proposed which conceptually integrates
justice into a larger peace theory. Movements and activism. Peace movement.
peace movement is a social movement that seeks to achieve ideals such as the
ending of a particular war (or all wars), or minimizing inter-human violence in
a particular place or type of situation, often linked to the goal of achieving
world peace. Means to achieve these ends usually include advocacy of pacifism,
non-violent resistance, diplomacy, boycotts, moral purchasing, supporting anti-
war political candidates, demonstrations, and lobbying to create legislation.
Pacifism. Pacifism is the categorical opposition to any forms of war or
violence as a means of settling disputes or gaining advantage. Pacifism covers
a spectrum of views ranging from the belief that international disputes can and
should be peacefully resolved; to calls for the abolition of the institutions
of the military and war; to opposition to any organization of society through
governmental force (anarchist or libertarian pacifism); to rejection of the use
of physical violence to obtain political, economic or social goals; to
opposition to violence under any circumstance, including defense of self and
others. Pacifism may be based on moral principles (a deontological view) or
pragmatism (a consequentialist view). Principled pacifism holds that violence
of any form is an inappropriate response to conflict, and is morally wrong.
Pragmatic pacifism holds that the costs of war and inter-personal violence are
so substantial that better ways of resolving disputes must be found. Pacifists
in general reject theories of Just War. Organizations. United Nations. The
United Nations (UN) is an international organization whose stated aims are to
facilitate cooperation in international law, international security, economic
development, social progress, human rights, and achieving world peace. The UN
was founded in 1945 after World War II to replace the League of Nations, to
stop wars between countries, and to provide a platform for dialogue. The UN,
after approval by the Security Council, sends peacekeepers to regions where
armed conflict has recently ceased or paused to enforce the terms of peace
agreements and to discourage combatants from resuming hostilities. Since the UN
does not maintain its own military, peacekeeping forces are voluntarily
provided by member states of the UN. The forces, also called the "Blue
Helmets", who enforce UN accords are awarded United Nations Medals, which are
considered international decorations instead of military decorations. The
peacekeeping force as a whole received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1988. Nobel
Peace Prize. The highest honor awarded to peace maker is the Nobel Prize in
Peace, awarded since 1901 by the Norwegian Nobel Committee. It is awarded
annually to internationally notable persons following the prize's creation in
the will of Alfred Nobel. According to Nobel's will, the Peace Prize shall be
awarded to the person who Rhodes Scholarships and other fellowships. In
creating the Rhodes Scholarships for outstanding students from the United
States, Germany and much of the British Empire, Cecil Rhodes wrote in 1901 that
'the object is that an understanding between the three great powers will render
war impossible and educational relations make the strongest tie'. This peace
purpose of the Rhodes Scholarships was very prominent in the first half of the
20th century, and has become prominent again under Warden of the Rhodes House
Donald Markwell. This vision greatly influenced Senator J. William Fulbright in
the goal of the Fulbright fellowships to promote international understanding
and peace, and has guided many other international fellowship programs. Gandhi
Peace Prize. The International Gandhi Peace Prize, named after Mahatma Gandhi,
is awarded annually by the Government of India. It is launched as a tribute to
the ideals espoused by Gandhi in 1995 on the occasion of the 125th anniversary
of his birth. This is an annual award given to individuals and institutions for
their contributions towards social, economic and political transformation
through non-violence and other Gandhian methods. The award carries Rs. 10
million in cash, convertible in any currency in the world, a plaque and a
citation. It is open to all persons regardless of nationality, race, creed or
sex. Paul Bartlett R√© Peace Prize. The Paul Bartlett R√© Peace Prize, named
after the artist Paul R√©, is awarded bi-annually by the University of New
Mexico (UNM). Student Peace Prize. The Student Peace Prize is awarded
biennially to a student or a student organization that has made a significant
contribution to promoting peace and human rights. Other. A peace museum is a
museum that documents historical peace initiatives. Many peace museums also
provide advocacy programs for nonviolent conflict resolution. This may include
conflicts at the personal, regional or international level. Theories. Many
different theories of "peace" exist in the world of peace studies, which
involves the study of conflict transformation, disarmament, and cessation of
violence. The definition of "peace" can vary with religion, culture, or subject
of study. One definition is that peace is a state of balance and understanding
in yourself and between others, where respect is gained by the acceptance of
differences, tolerance persists, conflicts are resolved through dialog,
people's rights are respected and their voices are heard, and everyone is at
their highest point of serenity without social tension. Game theory. The Peace
War Game is a game theory approach to peace and conflict studies. An iterated
game originally played in academic groups and by computer simulation for years
to study possible strategies of cooperation and aggression. As peace makers
became richer over time, it became clear that making war had greater costs than
initially anticipated. The only strategy that acquired wealth more rapidly was
a "Genghis Khan", a constant aggressor making war continually to gain
resources. This led to the development of the "provokable nice guy" strategy, a
peace-maker until attacked, improved upon merely to win by occasional
forgiveness even when attacked. Multiple players continue to gain wealth
cooperating with each other while bleeding the constant aggressor. Such actions
led in essence to the development of the Hanseatic League for trade and mutual
defense following centuries of Viking depredation. Democratic peace theory. The
democratic peace theory holds that democracies will never go to war with one
another. Theory of 'Active Peace'. Borrowing from the teachings of Norwegian
theorist Johan Galtung, one of the pioneers of the field of Peace Research, on
'Positive Peace', and on the writings of Maine Quaker Gray Cox, a consortium of
theorists, activists, and practitioners in the experimental John Woolman
College initiative have arrived at a theory of Active Peace. This theory posits
in part that Peace is part of a triad, which also includes justice and
wholeness (or well-being), an interpretation consonant with scriptural
scholarly interpretations of the meaning of the early Hebrew word S-L-M or
'Shalom', called by some the Bible's word for salvation, justice, and peace.
Furthermore, the consortium have integrated Galtung's teaching of the meanings
of the terms peacemaking, peacekeeping, and peacebuilding, to also fit into a
triadic and interdependent formulation or structure. Vermont Quaker John V.
Wilmerding, Jr., convener of this 'John Woolman College of Active Peace',
posits five stages of growth applicable to individuals, communities, and
societies, whereby one transcends first the 'surface' awareness that most
people have of these kinds of issues, emerging successively into acquiescence,
pacifism, passive resistance, active resistance, and finally into Active Peace,
dedicating themselves to peacemaking, peacekeeping, and/or peace building. Many
Peaces. Following Wolfgang Dietrich,Wolfgang S√ºtzl and the Innsbruck School of
Peace Studies, some peace thinkers have abandoned any single and all-
encompassing definition of peace. Rather, they promote the idea of Many Peaces.
They argue that since no singular, correct definition of peace can exist, peace
should be perceived as a plurality. This post-modern understanding of peace(s)
was based on the philosophy of Jean Francois Lyotard. It served as a fundament
for the more recent concept of trans-rational peace(s) and elicitive conflict
transformation. Trans-rational Peaces. In 2008 Wolfgang Dietrich enlarged his
earlier approach of the Many Peaces to the so-called "five families" of peace
interpretations: the energetic, moral, modern, post-modern and trans-rational
approach. Trans-rationality unites the rational and mechanistic understanding
of modern peace in a relational and culture-based manner with spiritual
narratives and energetic interpretations. The systemic understanding of trans-
rational peaces advocates a client-centred method of conflict transformation,
the so-called elicitive approach. Peace and conflict studies. Peace and
conflict studies is an academic field which identifies and analyses violent and
nonviolent behaviours, as well as the structural mechanisms attending violent
and non violent social conflicts. This is to better understand the processes
leading to a more desirable human condition. One variation, Peace studies
(irenology), is an interdisciplinary effort aiming at the prevention, de-
escalation, and solution of conflicts. This contrasts with war studies
(polemology), directed at the efficient attainment of victory in conflicts.
Disciplines involved may include political science, geography, economics,
psychology, sociology, international relations, history, anthropology,
religious studies, and gender studies, as well as a variety of others.
Measuring and Ranking Peace. Although peace is widely perceived as something
intangible, various organizations have been making efforts to quantify and
measure it. The Global Peace Index produced by the Institute for Economics and
Peace is a known effort to evaluate peacefulness in countries based on 23
indicators of the presence/absence of violence. The last edition of the Index
ranks 158 countries on their internal and external levels of peace. According
to the 2012 Global Peace Index, Iceland is the most peaceful country in the
world while Somalia is the least peaceful one. The Failed State Index created
by the Fund for Peace focuses on risk for instability or violence in 177
nations. This index measures how fragile a state is by 12 indicators and
subindicators that evaluate aspects of politics, social economy, and military
facets in countries. The 2012 Failed State Index reports that the most fragile
nation is Somalia, and the least fragile one is Finland. University of Maryland
publishes the Peace and Conflict Instability Ledger in order to measure peace.
It grades 163 countries with 5 indicators, and pays the most attention to risk
of political instability or armed conflict over a three-year period. The most
recent ledger shows that the most peaceful country is Slovenia on the contrary
Afghanistan is the most conflicted nation. Besides indicated above reports from
the Institute for Economics and Peace, Fund for Peace, and University of
Maryland, other organizations like the Economist Intelligence Unit and George
Mason University release indexes that rank countries in terms of peacefulness.
