Presbyterianism Presbyterianism is a branch of Protestant Christianity that
adheres to the Calvinist theological tradition and whose congregations are
organized according to a Presbyterian polity. Presbyterian theology typically
emphasizes the sovereignty of God, the authority of the Scriptures, and the
necessity of grace through faith in Christ. Presbyterianism originated
primarily in Scotland. Scotland ensured Presbyterian "church government" in the
Acts of Union in 1708 which created the kingdom of Great Britain. In fact, most
Presbyterians found in England can trace a Scottish connection, and the
Presbyterian denomination was also taken to North America mostly by Scots and
Scots-Irish immigrants. The Presbyterian denominations in Scotland hold to the
theology of Calvin and his immediate successors, although there is a range of
theological views within contemporary Presbyterianism. Modern Presbyterianism
traces its institutional roots back to the Scottish Reformation. Local
congregations are governed by Sessions made up of representatives of the
congregation, a conciliar approach which is found at other levels of decision-
making (Presbytery, Synod and General Assembly). Theoretically, there are no
bishops in Presbyterianism; however, some groups in Eastern Europe, and in
ecumenical groups, do have bishops. The office of elder is another distinctive
mark of Presbyterianism: these are specially ordained non-clergy called ruling
elders and ministers of Word and Sacrament called teaching elders who take part
in local pastoral care and decision making at all levels. The office of deacon
is geared toward the care of members, their families, and the surrounding
community. In some congregations active elders and deacons serve a three-year
term that is renewable for a second three-year term and then rotate off for at
least a year. The offices of pastor, elder, and deacon all commence with
ordination; once a person is ordained, he holds that title for the rest of his
life. An individual may serve as both an elder and a deacon. The roots of
Presbyterianism lie in the European Reformation of the 16th century, with the
example of John Calvin's Geneva being particularly influential. Most Reformed
churches who trace their history back to Scotland are either Presbyterian or
Congregationalist in government. In the twentieth century, some Presbyterians
played an important role in the Ecumenical Movement, including the World
Council of Churches. Many Presbyterian denominations have found ways of working
together with other Reformed denominations and Christians of other traditions,
especially in the World Communion of Reformed Churches. Some Presbyterian
churches have entered into unions with other churches, such as
Congregationalists, Lutherans, Anglicans, and Methodists. History. Presbyterian
denominations derive their name from the Greek word "presb√Ωteros" (), "elder."
(Presbyterian church in Acts 14:23, 20:17, Titus 1:5). The earliest Christian
church consisted of Jews in the first century who had known Jesus Christ and
heard his teachings. It gradually grew and spread from the Middle East to other
parts of the world, though not without controversy and hardship among its
supporters. During the 4th century, after more than 300 years of repression and
sometimes fierce persecution under various Roman emperors, the church became
established as a political as well as a spiritual power under the Emperor
Constantine. Theological and political disagreements, however, served to widen
the rift between members of the eastern (Greek-speaking) and western (Latin-
speaking) branches of the church. Eventually the western portions of Europe
came under the religious and political authority of the Roman Catholic Church.
Eastern Europe and parts of Asia came under the authority of the Eastern
Orthodox Church. In western Europe, the authority of the Roman Catholic Church
remained largely unquestioned until the Renaissance in the 15th century. The
invention of the printing press in Germany around 1440 made it possible for
common people to have access to printed materials including the Bible. The
public availability of the Bible encouraged private devotion away from the
structure of the Roman Catholic Church. Printed materials also served to expose
the populace to religious thinkers who had begun to question the authority and
integrity of the Church. One such figure, Martin Luther, a German Augustinian
friar and professor, enumerated this dissent in his 95 Theses. In 1517, Luther
famously posted his grievances on a church door in Wittenberg, Germany. This
moment is said to have marked the beginning of the Protestant Reformation, a
theological movement intended to reform the Church. As the Catholic Church
resisted the reformers, the Church split and different theological movements
bore different denominations. Presbyterianism was especially influenced by the
French/Swiss theologian, John Calvin, who is credited with the development of
Reformed theology and the work of John Knox, a Scotsman who studied with Calvin
in Geneva, Switzerland and brought his teachings back to Scotland. The
Presbyterian church traces its ancestry back primarily to England and Scotland.
In August 1560 the Scottish Parliament adopted the Protestant Confession of
Faith as the creed of the Scottish Kingdom. In December of that year, the First
Book of Discipline was published, outlining important doctrinal issues but also
establishing regulations for church government, including the creation of ten
ecclesiastical districts with pointed superintendents which later became known
as presbyteries. Among the early church fathers, it was noted that the offices
of elder and bishop were identical, and were not differentiated until later,
and that plurality of elders was the norm for church government. St. Jerome
(347-420) "In Epistle Titus", vol. iv, said, "Elder is identical with bishop;
and before the urging of the devil gave rise to factionalism in religion, so
much that it was being said among the people, 'I am of Paul, I of Apollos, I of
Cephas', the churches were governed by a joint council of elders. After it
was... decreed throughout the world that one chosen from among the presbyters
should be placed over the others." This observation was also made by Chrysostom
(349-407) in "Homilia i, in Phil. i, 1" and Theodoret (393-457) in "Interpret
ad. Phil. iii", 445. Presbyterianism was first described in detail by Martin
Bucer of Strasbourg, who believed that the early Christian church implemented
presbyterian polity. The first modern implementation was by the Geneva church
under the leadership of John Calvin in 1541. Characteristics. Presbyterians
distinguish themselves from other denominations by doctrine, institutional
organization (or "church order") and worship; often using a "Book of Order" to
regulate common practice and order. The origins of the Presbyterian churches
were in Calvinism, which is no longer emphasized in some contemporary branches.
Many branches of Presbyterianism are remnants of previous splits from larger
groups. Some of the splits have been due to doctrinal controversy, while some
have been caused by disagreement concerning the degree to which those ordained
to church office should be required to agree with the Westminster Confession of
Faith, which historically serves as an important confessional document - second
only to the Bible, yet directing particularities in the standardization and
translation of the Bible - in Presbyterian churches. Presbyterians place great
importance upon education and lifelong learning. Continuous study of the
scriptures, theological writings, and understanding and interpretation of
church doctrine are embodied in several statements of faith and catechisms
formally adopted by various branches of the church, often referred to as
'subordinate standards'. It is generally considered that the point of such
learning is to enable one to put one's faith into practice; some Presbyterians
generally exhibit their faith in action as well as words, by generosity,
hospitality, and the constant pursuit of social justice and reform, as well as
proclaiming the gospel of Christ. Governance. Presbyterian government is by
councils (known as "courts") of elders. Teaching and ruling elders are ordained
and convene in the lowest council known as a "session" or "consistory"
responsible for the discipline, nurture, and mission of the local . Teaching
elders (pastors) have responsibility for teaching, worship, and performing
sacraments. Pastors are called by individual congregations. A congregation
issues a call for the pastor's service, but this call must be ratified by the
local presbytery. Ruling elders are usually laymen (and laywomen in some
denominations) who are elected by the congregation and ordained to serve with
the teaching elders, assuming responsibility for nurture and leadership of the
congregation. Often, especially in larger congregations, the elders delegate
the practicalities of buildings, finance, and temporal ministry to the needy in
the congregation to a distinct group of officers (sometimes called deacons,
which are ordained in some denominations). This group may variously be known as
a 'Deacon Board', 'Board of Deacons' 'Diaconate', or 'Deacons' Court'. These
are sometimes known as "presbyters" to the full congregation. Above the
sessions exist presbyteries, which have area responsibilities. These are
composed of teaching elders and ruling elders from each of the constituent
congregations. The presbytery sends representatives to a broader regional or
national assembly, generally known as the General Assembly, although an
intermediate level of a "synod" sometimes exists. This congregation /
presbytery / synod / general assembly schema is based on the historical
structure of the larger Presbyterian churches, such as the Church of Scotland
or the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.); some bodies, such as the Presbyterian
Church in America and the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, skip one of the steps
between congregation and General Assembly, and usually the step skipped is the
Synod. The Church of Scotland has now abolished the Synod. Presbyterian
governance is practised by Presbyterian denominations and also by many other
Reformed churches. Doctrine. Presbyterianism is historically a confessional
tradition. This has two implications. The obvious one is that confessional
churches express their faith in the form of "confessions of faith," which have
some level of authoritative status. However this is based on a more subtle
point: In confessional churches, theology is not solely an individual matter.
While individuals are encouraged to understand Scripture, and may challenge the
current institutional understanding, theology is carried out by the community
as whole. It is this community understanding of theology that is expressed in
confessions. However, there has arisen a spectrum of approaches to
"confessionalism". The manner of "subscription", or the degree to which the
official standards establish the actual doctrine of the church, turns out to be
a practical matter. That is, the decisions rendered in ordination and in the
courts of the church largely determine what the church means, representing the
whole, by its adherence to the doctrinal standard. Some Presbyterian traditions
adopt only the Westminster Confession of Faith as the doctrinal standard to
which teaching elders are required to subscribe, in contrast to the Larger and
Shorter catechisms, which are approved for use in instruction. Many
Presbyterian denominations, especially in North America, have adopted all of
the Westminster Standards as their standard of doctrine which is subordinate to
the Bible. These documents are Calvinistic in their doctrinal orientation,
although some versions of the "Confession" and the catechisms are more overtly
Calvinist than some other, later American revisions. The Presbyterian Church in
Canada retains the Westminster Confession of Faith in its original form, while
admitting the historical period in which it was written should be understood
when it is read. The Westminster Confession is 'The principal subordinate
standard of the Church of Scotland' but 'with due regard to liberty of opinion
in points which do not enter into the substance of the Faith' (V). This
formulation represents many years of struggle over the extent to which the
confession reflects the Word of God and the struggle of conscience of those who
came to believe it did not fully do so ("e.g.", William Robertson Smith). Some
Presbyterian Churches, such as the Free Church of Scotland, have no such
'conscience clause'. The Presbyterian Church USA has adopted the Book of
Confessions, which reflects the inclusion of other Reformed confessions in
addition to the "Westminster" documents. These other documents include ancient
creedal statements (the Nicene Creed, the Apostles' Creed), 16th century
Reformed confessions (the Scots Confession, the Heidelberg Catechism, the
Second Helvetic Confession, all of which were written before Calvinism had
developed as a particular strand of Reformed doctrine), and 20th century
documents (The Theological Declaration of Barmen, Confession of 1967 and A
Brief Statement of Faith). The Presbyterian Church in Canada developed the
confessional document "Living Faith" and retains it as a subordinate standard
of the denomination. It is confessional in format, yet like the Westminster
Confession, draws attention back to original Bible text. Presbyterians in
Ireland who rejected Calvinism and the Westminster Confessions formed the Non-
subscribing Presbyterian Church of Ireland. Worship. Presbyterian Denominations
who trace their heritage to the British Isles usually organise their church
services inspired by the principles in the Directory of Public Worship,
developed by the Westminster Assembly in the 1640s. This directory documented
Reformed worship practices and theology adopted and developed over the
preceding century by British Puritans, initially guided by John Calvin and John
Knox. It was enacted as law by the Scottish Parliament, and became one of the
foundational documents of Presbyterian church legislation elsewhere.
Historically, the driving principle in the development of the standards of
Presbyterian worship is the Regulative principle of worship, which specifies
that (in worship), what is not commanded is forbidden. Over subsequent
centuries, many Presbyterian churches modified these prescriptions by
introducing non-biblical hymns, instrumental accompaniment and ceremonial
vestments in worship. Still, there is not one fixed "Presbyterian" worship
style. Although there are set services for the "Lord's Day", one can find a
service to be evangelical and even revivalist in tone (especially in some
conservative denominations), or strongly liturgical, approximating the
practices of Lutheranism or Anglicanism (especially where Scottish tradition is
esteemed), or semi-formal, allowing for a balance of hymns, preaching, and
congregational participation (favored by probably most American Presbyterians).
Among the Paleo-orthodoxy and emerging church movements in Protestant and
evangelical churches, which includes many Presbyterians, clergy are moving away
from the traditional black Geneva gown and reclaiming not only the more ancient
Eucharist vestments of alb and chasuble, but also cassock and surplice
(typically a full length Old English style surplice which resembles the Celtic
alb, an ungirdled liturgical tunic of the old Gallican Rite). Architecture.
Early Presbyterians were careful to distinguish between the "church," which
referred the "members", and the "meeting house," which was the building in
which the church met. Until the late 19th century, very few Presbyterians ever
referred to their buildings as "churches." Presbyterians believed that meeting-
houses (now called churches) are buildings to support the worship of God. The
decor in some instances was austere so as not to detract from worship. Early
Presbyterian meeting-houses were extremely plain. No stained glass, no
elaborate furnishings, and no images were to be found in the meeting-house. The
pulpit, often raised so as only to be accessible by a staircase, was the
centerpiece of the building. In the late 19th century a gradual shift began to
occur. Prosperous congregations built imposing churches, such as Fourth
Presbyterian in Chicago, Madison Avenue Presbyterian and Fifth Avenue
Presbyterian in New York City, Shadyside Presbyterian Church in Pittsburgh, PA,
East Liberty Presbyterian Church in Pittsburgh, PA, First Presbyterian in
Dallas, and many others. Usually a Presbyterian church will not have statues of
saints, nor the ornate altar more typical of a Roman Catholic church. In a
Presbyterian (Reformed Church) one will not usually find a Crucifix hanging
behind the Chancel. However, one may find stained glass windows that depict the
crucifixion, behind a chancel. Regions. Scotland. John Knox (1505‚Äì1572), a
Scot who had spent time studying under Calvin in Geneva, returned to Scotland
and led the Parliament of Scotland to embrace the Reformation in 1560 "(see
Scottish Reformation Parliament)". The Church of Scotland was eventually
reformed along Presbyterian lines, to become the national Church of Scotland.
The Glorious Revolution of 1688 and the Acts of Union 1707 between Scotland and
England guaranteed the Church of Scotland's form of government. However,
legislation by the United Kingdom parliament allowing patronage led to splits
in the Church, and finally the Disruption of 1843 led to the formation of the
Free Church of Scotland. Further splits took place, especially over theological
issues, but most Presbyterians in Scotland were reunited by 1929 union of the
established Church of Scotland and the United Free Church of Scotland. The
Presbyterian denominations in Scotland today are the Church of Scotland, the
Free Church of Scotland, the United Free Church of Scotland, the Free Church of
Scotland (Continuing), the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland, the Associated
Presbyterian Church (Associated Presbyterian Churches), and the Reformed
Presbyterian Church of Scotland. Within Scotland the term kirk is usually used
to refer to a local Presbyterian church. Informally the term 'The Kirk' refers
to the Church of Scotland. England. In England, Presbyterianism was established
in secret in 1592. Thomas Cartwright is thought to be the first Presbyterian in
England. Cartwright's controversial lectures at Cambridge University condemning
the episcopal hierarchy of the Elizabethan Church led to his deprivation of his
post by Archbishop John Whitgift and his emigration abroad. In 1647, by an act
of the Long Parliament under the control of Puritans, the Church of England
permitted Presbyterianism. The re-establishment of the monarchy in 1660 brought
the return of Episcopal church government in England (and in Scotland for a
short time); but the Presbyterian church in England continued in non-
conformity, outside of the established church. In 1719 a major split, the
Salter's Hall controversy, occurred; with the majority siding with
nontrinitarian views. Thomas Bradbury published several sermons bearing on the
controversy, and in 1719, "An answer to the reproaches cast on the dissenting
ministers who subscribed their belief of the Eternal Trinity.". By the 18th
century many English Presbyterian congregations had become Unitarian in
doctrine. A number of new Presbyterian Churches were founded by Scottish
immigrants to England in the 19th century and later. Following the 'Disruption'
in 1843 many of those linked to the Church of Scotland eventually joined what
became the Presbyterian Church of England in 1876. Some, that is Crown Court
(Covent Garden, London), St Andrew's (Stepney, London)) and Swallow Street
(London), did not join the English denomination, which is why there are Church
of Scotland congregations in England such as those at Crown Court, and St
Columba's, Pont Street (Knightsbridge) in London. In 1972, the Presbyterian
Church of England (PCofE) united with the Congregational Church in England and
Wales to form the United Reformed Church (URC). Among the congregations the
PCofE brought to the URC were Tunley (Lancashire), Aston Tirrold (Oxfordshire)
and John Knox Presbyterian Church, Stepney, London (now part of Stepney Meeting
House URC) - these are among the sole survivors today of the English
Presbyterian churches of the 17th century. The URC also has a presence in
Scotland, mostly of former Congregationalist Churches. Two former Presbyterian
congregations, St Columba's, Cambridge (founded in 1879), and St Columba's,
Oxford (founded as a chaplaincy by the PCofE and the Church of Scotland in 1908
and as a congregation of the PCofE in 1929), continue as congregations of the
URC and university chaplaincies of the Church of Scotland. In recent years a
number of smaller denominations adopting Presbyterian forms of church
government have organised in England, including the International Presbyterian
Church planted by evangelical theologian Francis Schaeffer of L'Abri Fellowship
in the 1970s, and the Evangelical Presbyterian Church in England and Wales
founded in the North of England in the late 1980s. Wales. In Wales
Presbyterianism is represented by the Presbyterian Church of Wales, which was
originally composed largely of Calvinistic Methodists who accepted Calvinist
theology rather than the Armininianism of the Wesleyan Methodists. They broke
off from the Church of England in 1811, ordaining their own ministers. They
were originally known as the Calvinist Methodist connexion and in the 1920s it
became alternatively known as the Presbyterian Church of Wales. Ireland.
Presbyterianism is the second largest Protestant denomination in the island of
Ireland (after the Anglican Church of Ireland), and was brought by Scottish
plantation settlers to Ulster who had been strongly encouraged to emigrate by
James VI of Scotland, later James I of England. An estimated 100,000 Scottish
Presbyterians moved to the northern counties of Ireland between 1607 and the
Battle of the Boyne in 1690. The Presbytery of Ulster was formed in 1642
separately from the established Anglican Church. Presbyterians, along with
Roman Catholics in Ulster and the rest of Ireland, suffered under the
discriminatory Penal Laws until they were revoked in the early 19th century.
Presbyterianism is represented in Ireland by the Presbyterian Church in
Ireland, the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster, the Non-subscribing
Presbyterian Church of Ireland, the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Ireland and
the Evangelical Presbyterian Church. France. In France, Presbyterianism is
represented by the Eglise Reform√©e de France, and Presbyterianism is the
largest Protestant denomination in France. There are also Lutherans and
Evangelicals. In France, people usually say "Protestant" (which is a common
term for all Reformed Christians). The word "Calviniste" may be used to
differentiate from Lutherans, but the word "Presbyterian" is not used at all.
The logo is a Huguenot Cross ("Croix Huguenote") with the burning bush. There
is also an Church of Scotland (Presbyterian) in central Paris The Scots Kirk,
Paris which is English-speaking, and is attended by many nationalities. It
maintains close links with the Church of Scotland in Scotland itself, as well
as with l'Eglise Reform√©e de France. Italy. The origins of the Waldensian
Evangelical Church lie in the medieval Waldensian movement for religious
reform. The Waldensians adopted Calvinist theology during the Reformation and
became the Italian branch of the Reformed churches. In 1975 the Waldensian
Church joined with the Italian Methodist Church to form the Union of Waldensian
and Methodist Churches, which is a member of the World Council of Churches, the
World Alliance of Reformed Churches, and the World Methodist Council. Hungary.
In the Karpathian Basin, formerly known Greater-Hungary there is a massive
three-million Hungarian speaking crowd belonging to the Hungarian Reformed
Church, which is a Calvinist strand, established in 1567, Debrecen, Hungary.
Their confessional documents are the following:The Heidelberg Catechism, The
Second Helvetian Confession. North America. Even before Presbyterianism spread
with immigrants abroad from Scotland, there were divisions in the larger
Presbyterian family. Some later rejoined only to separate again. In what some
interpret as rueful self-reproach, some Presbyterians refer to the divided
Presbyterian churches as the "Split P's". United States. In the United States,
because of past or current doctrinal differences, Presbyterian churches often
overlap, with congregations of many different Presbyterian groups in any one
place. The largest Presbyterian denomination in the United States is the
Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) or PC(USA). Other Presbyterian bodies in the
United States include the Presbyterian Church in America, the Orthodox
Presbyterian Church, the Evangelical Presbyterian Church, the Reformed
Presbyterian Church, the Bible Presbyterian Church, the Associate Reformed
Presbyterian Church (ARP Synod), the Cumberland Presbyterian Church, the
Cumberland Presbyterian Church in America, the Westminster Presbyterian Church
in the United States (WPCUS), The Evangelical Covenant Order of Presbyterians
(ECO), and the Reformed Presbyterian Church in the United States (RPCUS). The
Free Presbyterian Church of America was an anti-slavery presbyterian
denomination established through the work of Rev. John Rankin of Ripley, Ohio.
The territory within about a radius of Charlotte, North Carolina, is
historically the greatest concentration of Presbyterianism in the Southern
United States, while an almost identical geographic area around Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, contains probably the largest number of Presbyterians in the
entire nation. The PC (USA), beginning with its predecessor bodies, has, in
common with other so-called "mainline" Protestant denominations, experienced a
significant decline in members in recent years. Some estimates have placed that
loss at nearly half in the last forty years. Canada. In Canada, the largest
Presbyterian denomination ‚Äì and indeed the largest Protestant denomination
‚Äì was the Presbyterian Church in Canada, formed in 1875 with the merger of
four regional groups. In 1925, the United Church of Canada was formed with the
Methodist Church, Canada, and the Congregational Union of Canada. A sizable
minority of Canadian Presbyterians, primarily in southern Ontario but also
throughout the entire nation, withdrew, and reconstituted themselves as a non-
concurring continuing Presbyterian body. They regained use of the original name
in 1939. Latin America. Presbyterianism arrived in Latin America in the 19th
century. The biggest Presbyterian church is the National Presbyterian Church of
Mexico ("Iglesia Nacional Presbiteriana de M√©xico"), which has around
2,500,000 members and associates and 3000 congregations, but there are other
small denominations like the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church in Mexico
which was founded in 1875 by the Associate Reformed Church in North America.
The Independent Presbyterian Church and the Presbyterian Reformed Church in
Mexico, the National Conservative Presbyterian Church in Mexico are existing
churches in the Reformed tradition. In Brazil, the Presbyterian Church of
Brazil ("Igreja Presbiteriana do Brasil") totals approximately 788,553 members;
other Presbyterian churches (Independents, United, Conservatives, Renovated,
etc.) in this nation have around 350,000 members. Renewed Presbyterian Church
in Brazil was influenced by the charismatic movement and has about 131000
members as of 2011.www.iprb.org.br/inic.htm Conservative Presbyterian Church
was founded in 1940 and has eight presbyteries.www.ipcb.org.br Fundamentalist
Presbyterian church in Brazil was influenced by Karl McIntosh and The Bible
Presbyterian church USA has around 1800 members. Independent Presbyterian
Church in Brasil was founded in 1903 by Pastor Pereira, has 500 congregations
and 75000 members. United Presbyterian Church in Brazil has around 4000
members. There are also ethnic Korean Presbyterian churches in the country. The
Evangelical Reformed Church in Brazil has Dutch origin. The Reformed Churches
in Brazil was recently founded by the Canadian Reformed Churches with the
Reformed Church in the Netherlands (liberated). Congregational churches are
also present in the country which are also part of the Calvinistic tradition in
Latin America. There are probably more than four million members of
Presbyterian churches in all of Latin America. Presbyterian churches are also
present in Peru, Bolivia, Cuba, Trinidad and Tobago, Venezuela, Colombia,
Chile, Paraguay, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Argentina and others, but with few
members. The Presbyterian Church in Belize has 14 churches and church plants
and there is a Reformed Seminary founded in 2004. Some Latin Americans in North
America are active in the Presbyterian Cursillo Movement. Africa.
Presbyterianism arrived in Africa in the 19th century through the work of
Scottish missionaries and founded churches such as St Michael and All Angels
Church, Blantyre, Malawi. The church has grown extensively and now has a
presence in at least 23 countries in the region. The Presbyterian Church of
East Africa, based in Kenya, is particularly strong, with 500 clergy and 4
million members. In Malawi there is the Reformed Presbyterian Church in Malawi
has 150 congregations and 17000-20000 members.It was the mission of the Free
Presbyterian church of Scotland.The Restored Reformed Church works with
RPCM.Evangelical Presbyterian Church in Malawi is an existing small church.In
Southern Africa is a major base of Reformed and Presbyterian Churches .African
presbyterian churches often incorporate diaconal ministries, including social
services, emergency relief, and the operation of mission hospitals. A number of
partnerships exist between presbyteries in Africa and the PC(USA), including
specific connections with Lesotho, Malawi, South Africa, Ghana and Zambia. For
example, the Lackawanna Presbytery, located in Northeastern Pennsylvania, has a
partnership with a presbytery in Ghana. Also, Southminster Presbyterian Church,
located near Pittsburgh, has partnerships with churches in Malawi and Kenya.
The Presbyterian Church of Nigeria, western Africa is also healthy and strong
in mostly the southern states of this nation, strong density in the south-
eastern states of this country. Beginning from Cross River state, the nearby
coastal states, Rivers state, Lagos state to Ebonyi and Abia States. The
missionary expedition of Mary Slessor and Hope Waddel and their group in the
mid 18th century in this coastal regions of the ten British colony has brought
about the beginning and the flourishing of this church in these areas. In
addition also there are a number of Presbyterian Churches in north Africa, the
most known is the Nile Synod in Egypt and a recently founded synod for Sudan.
Asia. South Korea. Presbyterian Churches are the biggest and by far the most
influential Protestant denominations in South Korea, with close to 20,000
churches affiliated with the two largest Presbyterian denominations in the
country. Most of the Korean Presbyterian denominations share the same name in
Korean, ÎåÄÌïúÏòàÏàòÍµêÏû•Î°úÌöå (literally means the Presbyterian Church of
Korea or PCK), tracing its roots to the United Presbyterian Assembly before its
long history of disputes and schisms. And another notable Presbyterian
denomination in Korea is ÌïúÍµ≠Í∏∞ÎèÖÍµêÏû•Î°úÌöå (The Presbyterian church in
the Republic of Korea or PROK), which is one of the staunchest members of the
World Council of Churches. All major seminaries associated with each
denomination claim heritage from the Pyung Yang Theological Seminary,
therefore, not only Jangsin University and Chongsin University which are
related to PCK but also Hanshin University of PROK all celebrated the 100th
class in 2007, 100 years from the first graduates of Pyung Yang Theological
Seminary. Korean Presbyterian denominations are active in evangelism and many
of its missionaries are being sent overseas, being the second biggest
missionary sender in the world after the United States. GSM, the missionary
body of the "Hapdong" General Assembly of Presbyterian Churches of Korea, is
the single largest Presbyterian missionary organization in the Korea. In Oryu-
dong, Pyungkang Cheil is one of the largest Christian churches in South Korea.
Another congregation in Seoul, Myungsung Presbyterian Church, claims to be the
largest Presbyterian Church in the world. In addition there are many Korean-
American Presbyterians in the United States, either with their own church sites
or sharing space in pre-existing churches as is the case in Australia, New
Zealand and even Muslim countries such as Saudi Arabia with Korean immigration.
Taiwan. In Taiwan, the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan has been an important
supporter of the use of Taiwanese languages in services as a consequence of its
advocacy of vernacular scriptures and worship services. (Mandarin Chinese has
become dominant since the Nationalists fled to the island in 1949.) India. In
the mainly Christian Indian state of Mizoram, the Presbyterian denomination is
the largest denomination; it was brought to the region with missionaries from
Wales in 1894. Prior to Mizoram, the Welsh Presbyterians (missionaries) started
venturing into the north-east of India through the Khasi Hills (presently
located within the state of Meghalaya in India) and established Presbyterian
churches all over the Khasi Hills from 1840s onwards. Hence there is a strong
presence of Presbyterians in Shillong (the present capital of Meghalaya) and
the areas adjoining it. The Welsh missionaries built their first church in
Cherrapunji (aka Sohra) in 1846. Presbyterians participated in the mergers that
resulted in the Church of North India and the Church of South India. Oceania.
Australia. Australia, Presbyterianism is the fourth largest denomination of
Christianity, with nearly 600,000 Australians claiming to be Presbyterian in
the 2006 Commonwealth Census. Presbyterian churches were founded in each
colony, some with links to the Church of Scotland and others to the Free
Church, including a number founded by John Dunmore Lang. Some of these bodies
merged in the 1860s. In 1901 the churches linked to the Church of Scotland in
each state joined together forming the Presbyterian Church of Australia but
retaining their state assemblies. In 1977, two thirds of the Presbyterian
Church of Australia, along with the Congregational Union of Australia and the
Methodist Church of Australasia, combined to form the Uniting Church in
Australia. The majority of the other third did not join due to disagreement
with the Uniting Church's liberal views, though a portion remained due to
cultural attachment. For example, although the Presbyterian Church of Australia
reinstated the ban on the ordination of women to the ministry in 1991, one of
the two women ordained prior to that date has kept her position in the
denomination and is currently the Senior Minister of St Andrew's Presbyterian
Church in Canberra. New Zealand. In New Zealand, Presbyterian is the dominant
denomination in Otago and Southland due largely to the rich Scottish and to a
lesser extent Ulster-Scots heritage in the region. The area around
Christchurch, Canterbury, is dominated philosophically by the Anglican
(Episcopalian) denomination. Originally there were two branches of
Presbyterianism in New Zealand, the northern Presbyterian church which existed
in the North Island and the parts of the South Island north of the Waitaki
River, and the Synod of Otago and Southland, founded by Free Church settlers in
southern South Island. The two churches merged in 1901, forming what is now the
Presbyterian Church of Aotearoa New Zealand. Vanuatu. The Presbyterian Church
of Vanuatu is the largest denomination in the country, with approximately one-
third of the population of Vanuatu members of the church. The PCV was taken to
Vanuatu by missionaries from Scotland. The PCV (Presbyterian Church of Vanuatu)
is headed by a moderator with offices in Port Vila. The PCV is particularly
strong in the provinces of Tafea, Shefa, and Malampa. The Province of Sanma is
mainly Presbyterian with a strong Roman Catholic minority in the Francophone
areas of the province. There are some Presbyterian people, but no organised
Presbyterian churches in Penama and Torba, both of which are traditionally
Anglican. Vanuatu is the only country in the South Pacific with a significant
Presbyterian heritage and membership. The PCV is a founding member of the
Vanuatu Christian Council (VCC). The PCV runs many primary schools and Onesua
secondary school. Although the church has lost members to American
fundamentalists, the church is still strong, especially in the rural villages.
