Prevenient grace Prevenient grace is a Christian theological concept rooted in
Augustinian theology. It is divine grace that precedes human decision. It
exists prior to and without reference to anything humans may have done. As
humans are corrupted by the effects of sin, prevenient grace allows persons to
engage their God-given free will to choose the salvation offered by God in
Jesus Christ or to reject that salvific offer. Prevenient grace is embraced
primarily by Arminian Christians who are influenced by the theology of Jacob
Arminius or John Wesley. Whereas Augustine held that prevenient grace cannot be
resisted, Wesleyan Arminians believe that it enables, but does not ensure,
personal acceptance of the gift of salvation. Wesley typically referred to it
in 18th-century language as "prevenient grace". In modern English, the phrase
"preceding grace" would have a similar meaning. Definition. The "United
Methodist Book of Discipline" (2004) defines prevenient grace as "...the divine
love that surrounds all humanity and precedes any and all of our conscious
impulses. This grace prompts our first wish to please God, our first glimmer of
understanding concerning God's will, and our 'first slight transient
conviction' of having sinned against God. God's grace also awakens in us an
earnest longing for deliverance from sin and death and moves us toward
repentance and faith." We believe that the human raceâ€™s creation in
Godlikeness included ability to choose between right and wrong, and that thus
human beings were made morally responsible; that through the fall of Adam they
became depraved so that they cannot now turn and prepare themselves by their
own natural strength and works to faith and calling upon God. But we also
believe that the grace of God through Jesus Christ is freely bestowed upon all
people, enabling all who will to turn from sin to righteousness, believe on
Jesus Christ for pardon and cleansing from sin, and follow good works pleasing
and acceptable in His sight. Predecessor to the Nazarene Articles of Faith are
the Articles of Religion, which John Wesley adapted for use by American
Methodists. With very similar language between it and Article VII of the
"Manual", Article VIII states, "The condition of man after the fall of Adam is
such that he cannot turn and prepare himself, by his own natural strength and
works, to faith, and calling upon God; wherefore we have no power to do good
works, pleasant and acceptable to God, "without the grace of God by Christ
preventing us", that we may have a good will, and working with us, when we have
that good will" (emphasis added), language that was taken directly from Article
X of the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion adopted by the Church of England in
1563." Article VIII is official doctrine not only for The United Methodist
Church, and its counterpart for the Church of the Nazarene, but for many other
Wesleyan denominations as well, such as the African Methodist Episcopal Church,
African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, the British Methodist Church, and
other denominations associated with the Holiness movement. Thomas Oden of Drew
University defines prevenient grace as, "...the grace that begins to enable one
to choose further to cooperate with saving grace. By offering the will the
restored capacity to respond to grace, the person then may freely and
increasingly become an active, willing participant in receiving the conditions
for justification." Infant baptism is seen in Methodism as a celebration of
prevenient grace. Although infant baptism is important for the life journey of
the faithful disciple, it is not essential. In Arminius. Jacobus Arminius, "The
Works of James Arminius, D.D., Formerly Professor of Divinity in the University
of Leyden" (Auburn, NY: Derby and Miller, 1853), 4:472. In Wesley. In John
Wesley's sermon "On Working Out Our Own Salvation" (sermon #85), Wesley stated
that prevenient grace elicits, "...the first wish to please God, the first dawn
of light concerning His will, and the first slight transient conviction of
having sinned against Him." Wesley insisted on prevenient grace as a solution
to two great problems in Christianity: the belief of original sin and the
Protestant doctrine of salvation by grace alone. Developing the idea based upon
the witness of Scripture, Wesley thought that prevenient grace enabled the
doctrines of original sin and salvation by grace to co-exist while still
maintaining God's sovereignty and holy character as well as human freedom. In
Roman Catholic theology. The issue of prevenient grace was discussed in the
fifth chapter of the sixth session of the Council of Trent : "The Synod
furthermore declares, that in adults, the beginning of the said Justification
is to be derived from the prevenient grace of God, through Jesus Christ, that
is to say, from His vocation, whereby, without any merits existing on their
parts, they are called; that so they, who by sins were alienated from God, may
be disposed through His quickening and assisting grace, to convert themselves
to their own justification, by freely assenting to and co-operating with that
said grace". In Methodist hymnody. Most Methodist hymnals have a section with
hymns concerning prevenient grace, most recently "The United Methodist Hymnal"
(1989). One of the best known hymns written about the doctrine is Charles
Wesley's "Come, Sinners, to the Gospel Feast", which includes the lines, "Ye
need not one be left behind, "for God hath bid all humankind...the invitation
is to all"..." (emphasis added). Charles Wesley's "Sinners, Turn: Why Will You
Die" continues the theme, "Sinners, turn: why will you die? God, the Spirit,
asks you why; "he, who all your lives hath strove, wooed you to embrace his
love"" (emphasis added). His hymn "Depth of Mercy" offers a prayer to God,
""Now incline me to repent", let me now my sins lament, now my foul revolt
deplore, weep, believe, and sin no more" (emphasis added). Objections to the
doctrine. Calvinists have their own doctrine of prevenient grace, which they
identify with the act of regeneration and which is immediately and necessarily
followed by faith. Because of the necessity of salvation following this
dispensation of prevenient grace, it is called irresistible grace. Wesleyan
prevenient grace also contrasts with the Calvinist understanding of common
grace by which God shows general mercy to everyone (), restrains sin, and gives
humankind a knowledge of God and of their sinfulness and need of rescue from
sin. Common grace is thus said to leave people without excuse. Arminians object
that Calvinist common grace leaves people absolutely incapable of coming to God
(a point on which Calvinists agree) and thus do not believe it leaves them
without excuse. Calvinists further maintain that when the Bible speaks of
humanity's condition of total depravity, of spiritual death, it speaks of it as
an actuality, not a hypothetical condition that prevenient grace resolves for
everyone, as they believe the Wesleyan doctrine teaches. Calvinists see all
people as either dead in their sins or alive in Christ (), and they see the
Wesleyan doctrine of prevenient grace as creating a third state, neither dead
nor alive. Calvinists understand "dead in sin" to mean absolutely incapable of
all good, whereas Arminians understand it to mean the state of being separated
from God by sin, but capable of choosing God when enabled to by grace. Some
Calvinists (and others) derisively refer to the Wesleyan concept of prevenient
grace as "universal enablement." They characterize the Wesleyan view as
teaching that God has restored to every individual the ability to seek after
God and choose salvation and as not being justified by the Bible. They argue
that because this grace is supposedly given to all alike, the determining
factor in salvation becomes the will of man. Calvinists believe that Wesleyans
teach that God seeks all people equally, and if it weren't for the fact that
some were willing to respond to his promptings and persuasions, no one would be
saved. They see this dependence on the will and choice of the individual as a
good work required for salvation and thus an implicit rejection of salvation by
grace alone. Conversely, in Calvinism it is singularly God's own will and
pleasure that brings salvation (see monergism) lest salvation be, at least in
part, "of ourselves" in contrast to Ephesians . Wesleyans counter these
objections by claiming that God has initiated salvation through prevenient
grace, and while human beings still maintain God-given free will to respond to
that initiative, salvation is still initiated (and ultimately activated), by
God, through justifying grace. Comparison between Protestants. This table
summarizes the classical views of three different Protestant beliefs.
