Priesthood (Latter Day Saints) In the Latter Day Saint movement, priesthood is
considered to be the power and authority of God, including the authority to act
as a leader in the church and to perform ordinances, and the power to perform
miracles. A body of priesthood holders is referred to as a "quorum".
"Priesthood" denotes elements of both power and authority. The priesthood
includes the power Jesus gave his apostles to perform miracles such as the
casting out of devils and the healing of sick (Luke 9:1). Latter Day Saints
believe that the Biblical miracles performed by prophets and apostles were
performed by the power of priesthood, including the miracles of Jesus, who
holds all of the keys of the priesthood. The priesthood is formally known as
the "Priesthood after the Order of the Son of God", but to avoid the too
frequent use of the name of the Son of God, the priesthood is referred to as
the Melchizedek Priesthood, Melchizedek being the high priest from whom Abraham
received and paid tithes. As an authority, priesthood is the authority by which
a bearer may perform ecclesiastical acts of service in the name of God. Latter
Day Saints believe that acts (and in particular, ordinances) performed by one
with priesthood authority are recognized by God and are binding in heaven, on
earth, and in the afterlife. In addition, Latter Day Saints believe that
leadership positions within the church are legitimized by the priesthood
authority. For most of the history of the Latter Day Saint movement, only men
have been ordained to specific offices in the Priesthood. The first exception
to this policy was within the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints
(Strangite), a minor faction founded by James J. Strang that flourished between
1844 and 1856 (though a diminutive remnant still exists today). In Strang's
church, women wereâ€”and still areâ€”permitted to hold the offices of Priest
and Teacher (but not any other offices) from as early as 1856. In 1984, the
Community of Christ, the second largest denomination of the movement, began
ordaining women to all of its priesthood offices. The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, the largest faction in the movement, still restricts its
priesthood to men, as do most of the other Latter Day Saint denominations.
Orders of Priesthood. Latter Day Saint theology has recognized at least three
orders of priesthood: (1)Â the Aaronic Priesthood, (2)Â the Melchizedek
Priesthood; and (3)Â the Patriarchal Priesthood. Although these are different
orders, they are, in reality, all subsumed under the priesthood held by Jesus
Christ, that is, the Melchizedek Priesthood. The Aaronic Priesthood (also
called the Levitical Priesthood), is considered to be a lesser priesthood
tracing its roots to Aaron the brother of Moses through John the Baptist. In
Latter Day Saint theology, it derives from the original Holy Priesthood which
Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery received on May 15, 1829, when they were
ordained by an angel identifying himself as John the Baptist. In 1835, Smith
and Cowdery clarified that this authority was the "Aaronic, or Levitical
priesthood". By early 1831, Latter Day Saint theology also recognized a higher
order of priesthood, or the high priesthood. This high priesthood had been
foreshadowed in the "Book of Mormon", which referred to men holding the unique
position of high priest in the church organization described in that book,
holding the "high priesthood of the holy order of God" (, ); however, the
office of high priest was not implemented in early Mormonism until some days
after Joseph Smith, Jr. was joined in his ministry by Sidney Rigdon, a newly-
converted Church of Christ minister from Ohio, who merged his congregation with
Smith's Church of Christ. Rigdon believed the teachings of the early Mormon
missionaries who converted him, but thought the missionaries were lacking in
heavenly power. Therefore, the church's first High Priests were ordained at a
special conference held on June 1831. By 1835, Latter Day Saints began
referring to this High Priesthood as the Melchizedek Priesthood, or, the "Holy
Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God". This priesthood was so named,
according to a revelation, because Melchizedek "was such a great high priest"
and "..out of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid
the too frequent repetition of his name..." This priesthood was thought to be
the order of priesthood held by Jesus, and a distinction was made between the
Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods, which derives in part from the "Epistle to
the Hebrews", whose author argues that Jesus arose "after the order of
Melchizedec, and not...after the order of Aaron." (Heb. 7:11). Although there
were generally considered to be only two orders of priesthood during most of
the life of Joseph Smith, Jr., toward the end of Smith's life, on August 27,
1843, he referred to a third order of priesthood called the Patriarchal
Priesthood. This one of the "3 grand orders of priesthood", Smith said, was
second in greatness between the lower Aaronic and the higher Melchizedek. The
priesthood included, according to Smith, the "keys to endowmentâ€”tokens,
etc.", the ability to "walk with God", and the authority of the "order of
prayer". Smith taught that this order of priesthood was passed from father to
son, and held by Abraham and the biblical patriarchs. However, Smith provided
little further information about this third order. Although Smith instituted an
office of Patriarch in the church, most modern Latter Day Saint denominations
classify the Patriarchal priesthood as an office within the Melchizedek
Priesthood, rather than a separate order. Calling and ordination. According to
Latter Day Saint doctrine, to exercise priesthood power or authority, a person
must (1) be called by God, (2) be ordained or endowed with priesthood power,
and (3) receive the necessary priesthood keys, either through ordination to an
"office" or through delegation or setting apart. Calling to the priesthood.
Latter Day Saints believe that as a prerequisite to receiving the priesthood, a
person must be "called" to the priesthood. When a person is "called", it is the
person's opportunity or destiny to hold the priesthood. "See" ("Many are called
but few are chosen"). There is some disagreement among the various Latter Day
Saint sects as to the manner by which a person may be called to the priesthood;
however, there are at least four possibilities expressed in Mormon scripture:
(1) calling by prophecy, (2) calling through lineage, (3) calling by
foreordination, or (4) calling through faith and good works. In addition, a
person's calling through lineage or foreordination may be revealed by prophecy,
and a person's faith and good works may identify him as one who was
foreordained; thus, these categories are far from mutually exclusive. Calling
by prophecy. Despite the existence in Mormon doctrine of other means by which a
person could be called to the priesthood, the most common and standard means by
which a person is said to have been called to the priesthood is "by prophecy".
In his The Wentworth Letter, Joseph Smith, Jr. stated, "We believe that a man
must be called of God, by prophecy...to preach the Gospel and administer in the
ordinances thereof." ("See also" Fifth Article of Faith.) In the early church,
many callings came as direct scriptural revelations by Joseph Smith, Jr.. Since
Smith's death, most Mormon denominations consider a person to have been called
by prophecy when someone within the church hierarchy, who holds the priesthood,
is inspired by the Holy Spirit that the person should hold the priesthood.
Right to the priesthood through lineage. In some situations, Latter Day Saints
believe that a person may also be called through their lineage, so that they
have a legal right to a priesthood office by lineal succession. For example,
Doctrine and Covenants 68:16-21 states, "And if they be literal descendants of
Aaron, they have a legal right to the bishopric, if they are the firstborn
among the sons of Aaron." In addition, Joseph Smith believed in a Patriarchal
Priesthood (or Abrahamic priesthood) that descended from father to son. ((see
"Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith", sec. 6, pp.Â 322â€“323.)) One who has
the right and calling to hold these positions through lineage must still be
ordained by the church hierarchy before officiating in the office. Calling by
foreordination. It is generally believed that those who were foreordained to
the priesthood earned this right by valiancy or nobility in the Pre-mortal
life. It is by prophecy that a person's foreordination is thought to be
revealed. Latter Day Saints, however, do not believe in predestination, and
therefore believe that foreordination is a destiny, but not an immutable
destiny. A person can lose their foreordination through sin. Calling by faith
and good works. Many Latter Day Saints believe that a person may be called to
the priesthood through their faith and good works. This view is based primarily
upon the "Book of Mormon", which states that "it was by faith that they of old
were called after the holy order of God". (). Similarly, in the "Book of
Mormon"'s first detailed discussion concerning the calling and ordination of
high priests, the scripture states, "And this is the manner after which they
were ordainedâ€”...they having chosen good, and exercising exceedingly great
faith, are called with a holy calling... And thus they have been called to this
holy calling on account of their faith." (). In a similar vein, the earliest
sections of the "Doctrine and Covenants" contain statements such as "if ye have
desires to serve God ye are called to the work" (LDS D&C 4:3) and "whosoever
will thrust in his sickle and reap, the same is called of God" (LDS D&C 6:4).
The gift of the priesthood and ordination to a particular priesthood office. In
addition to being "called" by God, Latter Day Saint theology holds that a
person must be "given" the priesthood power by one who previously holds it.
While "calling" represents a general call to exercise priesthood authority or
power, a person is not thought to actually "possess" the priesthood to which
they have been called until it is formally "conferred" or "endowed" to that
person through a sacred ceremony. Mormons generally understand priesthood power
to be given in one of two ways: (1) as part of an ordination ceremony, or (2)
through the Endowment ceremony (a minority view). After a person has received
the priesthood power a person may be ordained numerous times to various
particular offices within the church. Receiving the priesthood is considered to
be a saving ordinance. The requirement of priesthood succession. Very early in
his ministry, Joseph Smith, Jr. began to advocate the position that priesthood
does not come directly from God through the Holy Spirit, as many Protestants
believe, but through a line of direct or apostolic succession. Thus, Latter Day
Saints generally believe that priesthood originates with Jesus, and is passed
to others through a line of succession. Only one who holds the priesthood can
pass it to another. Thus, in 1829, Smith and his associate claimed that the
Aaronic Priesthood was given to him by John the Baptist, who was thought to
have authority through the lineage of his father Zacharias, who was an Aaronic
priest. Later, Smith also claimed to have received the Melchizedek Priesthood
from the Apostles Peter, James, and John, who were given their authority by
Jesus. Gift of the priesthood through an ordination ceremony. The most common
and well-recognized manner through which a Latter Day Saint receives the
priesthood is as part of an ordination ceremony. Typically, in an ordination
ceremony, before a person is ordained for the first time to a particular office
such as elder, teacher, or priest, the person performing the ceremony will
"confer upon them" the Aaronic or Melchizedek priesthood. Gift of the
priesthood through the Endowment ceremony. While most Latter Day Saints
recognize that priesthood may be conferred as part of an ordination ceremony,
some feminist Mormons understand the Endowment ceremony to be an endowment of
priesthood power. In the washing and anointing portion of the Endowment
ceremony, men are washed and anointed (by men) "to become kings and priests",
while women are washed and anointed (by women) "to become queens and
priestesses". Later in the ceremony, both men and women are clothed in the
"robes of the priesthood" and "prepared to officiate in the ordinances of" the
Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods. Female priesthood authority was closely
associated with the Relief Society. Joseph F. Smith, an influential Mormon
leader around the turn of the 20th century, argued that though Mormon women
were not ordained as general authorities, elders, or high priests, they are
admitted to an "ecclesiastical or priestly authority" through the Relief
Society, which may include holding offices within the church through that
organization. Ordination to particular priesthood offices in the church through
the laying on of hands. After a person has received the priesthood, they may be
ordained numerous times to various particular offices within the church. This
takes place by the laying on of hands. The ordination to a particular office,
such as priest, teacher, or elder, represents a more specific call to perform a
particular priesthood duty within the church, and a person may be ordained to
numerous offices during their lifetime, depending on the needs of the church.
That specific ordinations to preach or perform ordinances are made through the
laying on of hands was a concept formulated early in Joseph Smith's ministry.
He stated the principle as one of the church's articles of faith, that a
calling to preach or perform rituals in the name of Christ was to be made
through "prophecy and the laying on of hands by those who are in authority"
(See Fifth Article of Faith in The Wentworth Letter). A Book of Mormon example
of ordination by the laying on of hands is found in the Book of Alma, where
Alma "ordained priests and elders, by laying on his hands according to the
order of God, to preside and watch over the church." (Alma 6:1). Modern day
priesthood holders ordained to the office of priest (or higher) are able to
ordain other worthy members to priesthood offices up to their office.
Priesthood keys. Priesthood keys are conferred upon all the presidents of the
quorums. For a priesthood holder to exercise ecclesiastical power or authority,
Latter Day Saints believe that a priesthood holder must have a specific set of
keys or be authorized by one who holds those keys. Thus, even though a
priesthood holder is called and ordained with general priesthood power, the
person may also require specific keys not held by all priesthood holders. The
existence of keys makes possible a church hierarchy, in which particular
priesthood holders specialize in a particular ecclesiastical function.
Priesthood keys are passed in much the same way as priesthood power in general,
usually through the laying on of hands. The manner and rigor with which the
concept of "keys" is applied varies from denomination to denomination within
the Latter Day Saint movement. For example, in The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, the following declaration by Elder Merrill J. Bateman
explains how priesthood keys function: "The priesthood is the power and
authority of God delegated to man. Priesthood keys are the right to direct the
use of that power. The President of the Church holds the keys necessary for
governing the entire Church. His counselors in the First Presidency and the
Quorum of the Twelve Apostles also hold the keys of the kingdom and operate
under the President's direction. Stake presidents, bishops, and temple,
mission, and quorum presidents are given keys to guide the Church in their
jurisdictions. Their counselors do not hold keys..." (General Conference
Report, October 2003) Priesthood offices and quorums. Ordination to an office
does not necessarily mean ordination to a position of leadership. Priesthood
holders are organized into quorums, which each have a president and two
counselors. The Deacons, Teachers, and Priests quorums are mostly made up of,
but not limited to, young men. Each quorum has a president of that quorum who
holds priesthood keys. The president and counselors are selected by the bishop.
The priests quorum does not have a young man who is the president, the bishop
or branch president(like a bishop but leader of a branch not a ward) is the
priest quorum president which grants him keys as well. History of the
priesthood in the Latter Day Saint tradition. Because Latter Day Saints believe
that priesthood authority and keys may be granted only by one who holds that
authority or keys, they believe it is important that a person trace their
priesthood through a line of succession from a person in the "Bible" who was
known to hold that authority or keys. Moreover, Latter Day Saints believe that
the priesthood authority was absent from the earth during the Great Apostasy,
and that priesthood had to be restored through Joseph Smith, Jr.. Catholic and
Orthodox Christians do not believe that such a complete apostasy ever took
place when defending the validity of their priesthoods, and these churches do
not recognize the priesthood exercised by Latter Day Saints. Latter Day Saints
believe that ancient prophets and apostles conferred the priesthood directly
upon Joseph Smith, Jr. and other early members of the movement. Restoration of
the Melchizedek Priesthood. Unlike the restoration of the Aaronic priesthood,
Smith never provided a date for the restoration of the Melchizedek priesthood,
and never clearly indicated how this authority was conferred. Smith first
specifically introduced the Melchizedek or "High" priesthood to the church in
1831. In his 1832 history, he referred to "a confirmation and reception of the
high Priesthood after the holy order of the son of the living God power and
ordinence from on high to preach the Gospel in the administration and
demonstration of the spirit the Kees of the Kingdom of God conferred on him and
the continuation of the blessings of God to him &c" However, this provided no
date, and did not indicate any circumstances of this "confirmation and
reception". Though specific details were lacking, by the turn of the 20th
century, Latter Day Saint theologians were convinced that such a conferral had
occurred prior to the organization of the Church of Christ on April 6, 1830.
This was largely because the early church organization contained the office of
elder, which by 1835 was considered an office of the Melchizedek priesthood. As
evidence for such a pre-organization angellic conferral, writers referred to a
revelation in which Smith said he heard "The voice of Peter, James, and John in
the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome
county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring themselves as possessing the keys
of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times!" Thus, most
Mormons believe that Smith and Cowdery were visited by the three angels and
that they conferred the Melchizedek priesthood in the same way John the Baptist
had conferred the Aaronic priesthood. However, the official church history,
supervised or written by Smith, states that "the authority of the Melchizedek
priesthood was manifested and conferred for the first time upon several of the
Elders" during a General Conference in early June 1831. When Smith's official
history was first published in 1902, the compiler B.H. Roberts thought that
this was a mistake, because it would not be consistent with the then-common
Mormon belief that the priesthood had been conferred prior to the church's
founding in 1830. However, some recent Mormon historians accept Smith's history
as correct and consistent with other historical records showing that other
Mormons present at the conference dated the restoration of the Melchizedek
priesthood to 1831. This conference had been a very significant event in the
early church history, coming soon after the conversion of Sidney Rigdon, who
believed that Mormon missionaries lacked the necessary power to adequately
preach the gospel. Thus, in January 1831, Smith issued a revelation where he
wrote that after Mormons relocated to Kirtland, Ohio, they would "be endowed
with power from on high" and "sent forth". In a revelation given to an
individual, Smith assured the man that "at the conference meeting he be
ordained unto power from on high". One of Smith's associates that was present
at the conference expressed the view that this ordination "consisted the
endowment--it being a new order--and bestowed authority", and later that year,
an early convert who had left the church claimed that many of the Saints "have
been ordained to the High Priesthood, or the order of Melchizedek; and profess
to be endowed with the same power as the ancient apostles were". In 1835, the
historical record was muddled a bit when the first edition of the Doctrine and
Covenants altered pre-1831 revelations to make a distinction between the
Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods, and to classify the offices of elder and
apostle as part of the latter. Priesthood in The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the
largest denomination of the Latter Day Saint movement, priesthood is recognized
only in men and boys, who are ordained to offices in the priesthood as a matter
of course once they reach the age of 12, so long as they meet requirements of
"worthiness". There are no other requirements for ordination, although prior to
1978, the church did not ordain men or boys who were deemed to be of black
African descent, based on the mid-19th century teachings of Brigham Young,
which the church felt it could not abandon without a revelation from God. (See
Blacks and Mormonism). This doctrine has been reversed since then and now
allows all men, no matter of race or any other factor, to hold the Priesthood
as long as they stay worthy to obtain it as is outlined by scriptures and
church revelation. Priesthood is structured as a vertical hierarchy with a
clear chain of command. At each level in the hierarchy, the priesthood is
organized by quorums, led by a presidency which usually consists of a president
and two counselors. The church recognizes the two major "orders" of priesthood,
Aaronic and Melchizedek, the latter being limited to men over the age of about
18 who have been a member of the church for over a year. Priesthood in the
Community of Christ. The Community of Christ teaches that all Christians are
called by their gifts and talents to the ministry, priesthood is seen as a
particular expression of universal ministry to which all are called. Since
1984, the church has ordained both women and men to the priesthood. All offices
are deemed equal in importance, but the duties and responsibilities of each
differ. For a person to be called to the priesthood for the first time, his or
her calling is typically discerned by the pastor of the local congregation.
These priesthood calls are approved after review by a Mission Center President
and vote of a congregational conference. For certain calls, especially to
higher offices of the priesthood, the discernment will come through other
church officials and approval will be voted upon at a Mission Center Conference
or World Conference. Once the call has been administratively processed it is
presented to the individual called. If that individual accepts the call and is
sustained by a conference vote, he or she will be ordained to that office.
