Prophet In religion, a prophet is an individual who is claimed to have been
contacted by the supernatural or the divine, and to speak for them, serving as
an intermediary with humanity, delivering this newfound knowledge from the
supernatural entity to other people. The message that the prophet conveys is
called a prophecy. Claims of prophets have existed in many cultures through
history, including Judaism, Christianity, Islam, in Ancient Greece, Zoroaster,
and many others. Traditionally, prophets are regarded as having a role in
society that promotes change due to their messages and actions. The English
word ' comes from the Greek word ' (prof√©t√©s) meaning advocate. In the late
20th century the appellation of "prophet" has been used to refer to individuals
particularly successful at analysis in the field of economics, such as in the
derogatory "prophet of greed". Alternatively, social commentators who suggest
escalating crisis are often called "prophets of doom." Abrahamic religions.
Judaism. In Hebrew, the word ◊ ÷∞◊ë÷¥◊ô◊ê ("navi"), "spokesperson",
traditionally translates as "prophet". The second subdivision of the Hebrew
Bible, TaNaKh (for "Torah, Nevi'im, Ketuvim"), is devoted to the Hebrew
prophets. The meaning of "navi" is perhaps described in Deuteronomy 18:18,
where God said, "...and I will put My words in his mouth, and he shall speak
unto them all that I shall command him." Thus, the "navi" was thought to be the
"mouth" of God. The root nun-vet-alef ("navi") is based on the two-letter root
nun-vet which denotes hollowness or openness; to receive transcendental wisdom,
one must make oneself "open". Cf. Rashbam's comment to Genesis 20:7. In
addition to writing and speaking messages from God, Hebrew prophets often acted
out prophetic parables. For example, in order to contrast the people‚Äôs
disobedience with the obedience of the Rechabites, God has Jeremiah invite the
Rechabites to drink wine, in disobedience to their ancestor‚Äôs command. The
Rechabites refuse, wherefore God commends them. Other prophetic parables acted
out by Jeremiah include burying a linen belt so that it gets ruined to
illustrate how God intends to ruin Judah's pride. Likewise, Jeremiah buys a
clay jar and smashes it in the Valley of Ben Hinnom in front of elders and
priests to illustrate that God will smash the nation of Judah and the city of
Judah beyond repair. God instructs Jeremiah to make a yoke from wood and
leather straps and to put it on his own neck to demonstrate how God will put
the nation under the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon. In a similar way,
the prophet Isaiah had to walk stripped and barefoot for three years to
illustrate the coming captivity, and the prophet Ezekiel had to lie on his side
for 390 days and eat measured food to illustrate the coming siege. The
prophetic assignment is not always portrayed as positive in the Hebrew Bible,
and prophets were often the target of persecution and opposition. God‚Äôs
personal prediction to Jeremiah, "Attack you they will, overcome you they
can't," was fulfilled many times in the biblical narrative as Jeremiah warned
of destruction of those who continued to refuse repentance and accept more
moderate consequences. In return for his adherence to God‚Äôs discipline and
speaking God‚Äôs words, Jeremiah was attacked by his own brothers, beaten and
put into the stocks by a priest and false prophet, imprisoned by the king,
threatened with death, thrown into a cistern by Judah‚Äôs officials, and
opposed by a false prophet. Likewise, Isaiah was told by his hearers who
rejected his message, "Leave the way! Get off the path! Let us hear no more
about the Holy One of Israel!" The life of Moses being threatened by Pharaoh is
another example. According to I Samuel 9:9, the old name for navi is "ro'eh",
◊®◊ê◊î, which literally means "Seer". That could document an ancient shift,
from viewing prophets as seers for hire to viewing them as moral teachers.
Allen (1971) comments that in the First Temple Era, there were essentially
seer-priests, who formed a guild, divined, performed rituals and sacrifices,
and were scribes, and then there were canonical prophets, who did none of these
(and were against divination) and had instead a message to deliver. The seer-
priests were usually attached to a local shrine or temple, such as Shiloh, and
initiated others as priests in that priesthood: it was a mystical craft-guild
with apprentices and recruitment. Canonical prophets were not organised this
way. The similar term "ben-navi" ("son of the prophet") means "member of a
seer-priest guild". Some examples of prophets in the Tanakh include Abraham,
Moses, Miriam, Isaiah, Samuel, Ezekiel, Malachi, and Job. In Jewish tradition
Daniel is not counted in the list of prophets. A Jewish tradition suggests that
there were twice as many prophets as the number which left Egypt, which would
make 1,200,000 prophets. The Talmud recognizes the existence of 48 male
prophets who bequeathed permanent messages to mankind. According to the Talmud
there were also seven women who are counted as prophets whose message bears
relevance for all generations: Sarah, Miriam, Devorah, Hannah (mother of the
prophet Samuel), Abigail (a wife of King David), Huldah (from the time of
Jeremiah), and Esther. Rashi points out that Rebecca, Rachel and Leah were also
prophets. Prophets in Judaism are not always Jews. The story of Balaam in
Numbers 22,describes a non-Jewish prophet who honors God and refuses to curse
Israel and who is generally presented favorably. The last prophets mentioned in
the Hebrew Bible are Daniel, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, all of whom lived
at the end of the 70-year Babylonian exile. The Talmud (Sanhedrin 11a) states
that Haggai, Zachariah, and Malachi were the last prophets, and nowadays only
the "Bat Kol" (◊ë◊™ ◊ß◊ï◊ú) exists. Christianity. In Christianity a prophet (or
seer is one inspired by God through the Holy Spirit to deliver a message for a
specific purpose. In the popular vernacular, it is often associated with
predicting future events, but in Christian and biblical terms, its meaning is
wider and can include those given the power to preach repentance to those who
do not want to hear the message and to warn of God's wrath for disobedience.
God's calling as a prophet is not considered to elevate an individual for their
glory, but for the glory of God and to turn people to him. Some Christian
denominations would limit that and exclude those who receive a personal message
not intended for the body of believers, but in the Bible on a number of
occasions prophets were called to deliver personal messages. The reception of a
message is termed revelation and the delivery of the message is termed
prophecy. The term prophet is applied to those who receive public or private
revelation. Public Revelation, in Catholicism, is part of the Deposit of faith,
the revelation of which was completed by Jesus; whereas Private Revelation does
not add to the Deposit. The term "deposit of faith" refers to the entirety of
Jesus Christ's revelation, and is passed to successive generations in two
different forms, sacred scripture (the Bible) and sacred tradition. Anyone who
claims to speak God's words or teach in his name and is not a prophet the Bible
terms a false prophet. One test given in the Old Testament in Deuteronomy
contains a warning of those who prophecy events which do not come to pass and
said they should be put to death. Elsewhere a false prophet may be someone who
is purposely trying to deceive, is delusional, under the influence of Satan or
is speaking from his own spirit. Some Christians who believe in
dispensationalism believe prophecy ended along with the rest of the sign gifts
shortly after the coming of Jesus, who delivered the "fullness of the law."
Within this group, many Protestants believe that prophecy ended with the last
of the Hebrew prophets of the Torah of the Hebrew Bible, leaving a gap of about
400 years between then and the life of Jesus. The majority, including the
Eastern Orthodox, allow an exception for John the Baptist as a prophet
contemporary with Jesus. New Testament passages that explicitly discuss
prophets existing after the death and resurrection of Christ include Revelation
11:10, Matthew 10:40-41 and 23:34, John 13:20 and 15:20 and Acts 11:25-30, 13:
1 and 15:32. Christians believe that the Holy Spirit leads people to faith in
Jesus and gives them the ability to lead a Christian life and to give gifts
(i.e. abilities) to Christians. These may include the charismatic gifts such as
prophecy, tongues, healing, and knowledge. Christians holding a view known as
cessationism believe these gifts were given only in New Testament times and
ceased after the last apostle died. The Didache gives extensive instruction in
how to distinguish between true and false prophets, as well as commands
regarding tithes to prophets in the church. Irenaeus, wrote of 2nd century
believers with the gift of prophecy, while Justin Martyr argued in his
"Dialogue with Trypho" that prophets were not found among the Jews in his time,
but that the church had prophets. The Shepherd of Hermas describes revelation
in a vision regarding the proper operation of prophecy in the church. Eusebius
mentions that Quadratus and Ammia of Philadelphia were both prominent prophets
following the age of the Twelve Apostles. Tertullian, writing of the church
meetings of the Montanists (to whom he belonged), described in detail the
practice of prophecy in the 2nd century church. Prophetic movements in
particular can be traced throughout the Christian Church's history, in
expressions such as Montanism, Novatianism, Donatism, Franciscanism,
Anabaptism, Camisard enthusiasm, Puritanism, Quakerism, Quietism and Pietism.
Some Christians also believe that the title "prophet" encompasses others than
those who receive visions from God. A more modern definition of prophet is
someone who spreads God's truths. These can be revealed in a number of ways not
only visions. Some Christian sects recognize the existence of a "modern-day"
prophet, one such denomination is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints (or "Mormons"), which teaches that God still communicates with mankind
through prophecy. Islam. The Qur'an identifies a number of men as "Prophets of
Islam" (; pl. anbiyaa' ÿ£ŸÜÿ®Ÿäÿßÿ°). Muslims believe such individuals were
assigned a special mission by God (Arabic: "Allah") to guide humanity. Besides
Muhammad, this includes prophets such as Ibrahim (Abraham), Musa (Moses) and
Isa (Jesus). Although only twenty-five prophets are mentioned by name in the
Qur'an, a hadith (no. 21257 in "Musnad Ibn Hanbal") mentions that there were
124,000 of them in total throughout history (with other traditions placing the
number of Prophets at 224,000 while other scholars holding that there is even a
greater number in the history of mankind, and God alone knows), and the Qur'an
says that God has sent a prophet to every group of people throughout time, and
that Muhammad is the last of the prophets, sent for the whole of humankind. The
message of all the prophets is believed to be the same. In Islam, all Prophetic
Messengers are Prophets (such as [Noah, [Moses, and [Muhammad) not all Prophets
are Prophetic Messengers. The primary distinction being that a Prophet is
required to demonstrate God's law through his actions character, and behavior
without necessarily calling people to follow him, a Prophetic Messenger is
required to pronounce God's law (i.e. revelation) and call his people to submit
and follow him. The Prophet Muhammad is distinguished from the rest of the
Prophetic Messengers and Prophets in that he was commissioned by God to be the
Prophetic Messenger to all of mankind. Many of these prophets are also found in
the texts of Judaism (The Torah, the Prophets, and the Writings; collectively
known as the Old Testament to Christians) and Christianity. While Islam shares
the Jewish tradition that the first prophet is Adem (Adam), it differs in that
the last prophet is Muhammad, who in Islam is called Seal of the prophets or
"Khatim an-Nabuwwah". Isa (Jesus) is the result of a virgin birth in Islam as
in Christianity, and is regarded as a prophet like the others. Traditionally,
four prophets are believed to have been sent holy books: the Tawrat (Torah) to
Moses, the Zabur (Psalms) to David, the Injil (Gospel) to Jesus, and the Qur'an
to Muhammad; those prophets are considered "messengers" or "rasul" ("Ule al
A'zm men al Rusul" ÿ£ŸàŸÑŸä ÿßŸÑÿπÿ≤ŸÖ ŸÖŸÜ ÿßŸÑÿ±ÿ≥ŸÑ). Other main prophets
are considered messengers or "Nabi", even if they didn't receive a Book from
God. Examples include the messenger-prophet Aaron ("Haroon"), the messenger-
prophet Ishmael ("Isma'eel") and the messenger-prophet Yusuf (Joseph). Although
it offers many incidents from the lives of many prophets, the Qur'an focuses
with special narrative and rhetorical emphasis on the careers of the first four
of these five Major Prophets. Of all the figures before Muhammad, Moses is
referred to most frequently in the Qur'an. As for the fifth, the Qur'an is
frequently addressed directly to Muhammad, and it often discusses situations
encountered by him. Direct use of his name in the text, however, is rare. Rarer
still is the mention of Muhammad's contemporaries. Besides the four Holy Books
sent by God to the four messengers, Muslims believe that God also had granted
Scrolls ("Suhuf") to Abraham ("Suhuf-e-Ibrahim") and Moses (Books of Moses).
Bah√°'√≠. The Bah√°'√≠ Faith refers to what are commonly called prophets as
"Manifestations of God" who are directly linked with the concept of Progressive
revelation. Bah√°'√≠s believe that God expresses this will at all times and in
many ways, including through a series of divine messengers referred to as
"Manifestations of God" or "divine educators". In expressing God's intent,
these Manifestations are seen to establish religion in the world. Thus they are
seen as an intermediary between God and humanity. The Manifestations of God are
not seen as incarnations of God, but they are also not seen as ordinary
mortals. Instead, the Bah√°'√≠ concept of the Manifestation of God emphasizes
simultaneously the humanity of that intermediary and the divinity in the way
they show forth the will, knowledge and attributes of God; thus they have both
human and divine stations. In addition to the Manifestations of God, there are
also Minor Prophets. While the Manifestations of God, or Major Prophets, are
compared to the Sun, which produces its own heat and light, Minor Prophets are
compared to the Moon which receives its light from the sun. Moses, for example,
is taught as having been a Manifestation of God and his brother Aaron a minor
prophet. Moses spoke on behalf of God, and Aaron spoke on behalf of Moses
(Exodus 4:14-17). Other Jewish prophets are considered Minor Prophets, as they
are considered to have come in the shadow of the dispensation of Moses to
develop and consolidate the process he set in motion. Modern prophetic claims.
In modern times the term "prophet" can be somewhat controversial. Many
Christians with Pentecostal or charismatic beliefs believe in the continuation
of the gift of prophecy and the continuation of the role of prophet as taught
in Ephesians 4. The content of prophecies can vary widely. Prophecies are often
spoken as quotes from God. They may contain quotes from scripture, statements
about the past or current situation, or predictions of the future. Prophecies
can also 'make manifest the secrets' of the hearts of other people, telling
about the details of their lives. Sometimes, more than one person in a
congregation will receive the same message in prophecy, with one giving it
before another. Other movements claim to have prophets. In France, Michel Potay
says he received a revelation, called "The Revelation of Ar√®s", dictated by
Jesus in 1974, then by God in 1977. He is considered a prophet by his
followers, the Pilgrims of Ar√®s. Latter Day Saint movement. Joseph Smith, Jr.
who established the Church of Christ in 1830, is considered a prophet by
members of the Latter Day Saint movement, of which The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints is the largest denomination. Additionally, many churches
within the movement believe in a succession of living prophets (accepted by
Latter Day Saints as "prophets, seers, and revelators") since the time of
Joseph Smith. Churches in this movement also sustain their Quorum of the Twelve
as prophets, seers, and revelators. The current prophet of the LDS Church is
Thomas S. Monson. Jehovah's Witnesses. Jehovah's Witnesses do not consider any
single person in their modern-day organization to be a prophet. Their
literature has referred to their organization collectively as God's "prophet"
on earth; this is understood, however, in the sense of declaring their
interpretation of God's judgments from the Bible along with God's guidance of
His Holy Spirit. Their publishing company, Watch Tower, and official position
magazine, "The¬ Watchtower", have asserted: "Ever since "The¬ Watchtower" began
to be published in July 1879 it has looked ahead into the future... No,
"The¬ Watchtower" is no inspired prophet, but it follows and explains a Book of
prophecy the predictions in which have proved to be unerring and unfailing till
now. "The¬ Watchtower" is therefore under safe guidance. It may be read with
confidence, for its statements may be checked against that prophetic Book."
They also claim that they are God's one and only true channel to mankind on
earth, and used by God for this purpose. They have made many eschatological
forecasts, some of which have led people (including followers) to incorrect
assumptions. One example is "The¬ Watchtower's" assertions that the end of the
"Gentile times" or "times of the nations" would occur in 1914; even prominent
Watch Tower representatives such as A. H. Macmillan incorrectly concluded and
overstated their expectations. As a result "The Watchtower" has acknowledged
that Jehovah's Witnesses "have made mistakes in their understanding of what
would occur at the end of certain time periods." Concurrently with these
exceptions, Jehovah's Witnesses in their literature and assemblies have taught
their leadership was personally chosen by Jesus Christ in 1919 (a prophetic
year in JW eschatology) and that they are "God's sole channel on earth", and
"Jehovah's spirit directed organization". Seventh-day Adventist. The Seventh-
day Adventist Church, established in 1863, believes Ellen G. White, one of the
church's founders, was given the spiritual gift of prophecy, and are generally
skeptical toward other claims. Tenrikyo. Tenrikyo's prophet, Nakayama Miki, is
believed by Tenrikyoans to have been a messenger of God. Ifa and other African
traditional religions. "Main article:" Traditional African religion, Ifa,
Religion in Africa Divination remains an important aspect of the lives of the
people of contemporary Africa, especially amongst the usually rural, socially
traditionalistic segments of its population. In arguably its most influential
manifestation, the system of prophecy practiced by the babalawos and iyanifas
of the historically Yoruba regions of West Africa have bequeathed to the world
a corpus of fortune-telling poetic methodologies so intricate that it has been
added by UNESCO to its official "intangible cultural heritage of the World
list".
