Pseudoscience Pseudoscience is a claim, belief, or practice which is presented
as scientific, but does not adhere to a valid scientific method, lacks
supporting evidence or plausibility, cannot be reliably tested, or otherwise
lacks scientific status. Pseudoscience is often characterized by the use of
vague, exaggerated or unprovable claims, an over-reliance on confirmation
rather than rigorous attempts at refutation, a lack of openness to evaluation
by other experts, and a general absence of systematic processes to rationally
develop theories. A field, practice, or body of knowledge can reasonably be
called pseudoscientific when it is presented as consistent with the norms of
scientific research, but it demonstrably fails to meet these norms. Science is
also distinguishable from revelation, theology, or spirituality in that it
offers insight into the physical world obtained by empirical research and
testing. Commonly held beliefs in popular science may not meet the criteria of
science. "Pop" science may blur the divide between science and pseudoscience
among the general public, and may also involve science fiction.
Pseudoscientific beliefs are widespread, even among public school science
teachers and newspaper reporters. The demarcation problem between science and
pseudoscience has ethical political implications, as well as philosophical and
scientific issues. Differentiating science from pseudoscience has practical
implications in the case of health care, expert testimony, environmental
policies, and science education. Distinguishing scientific facts and theories
from pseudoscientific beliefs such as those found in astrology, medical
quackery, and occult beliefs combined with scientific concepts, is part of
science education and scientific literacy. The term "pseudoscience" is often
considered inherently pejorative, because it suggests something is being
inaccurately or even deceptively portrayed as science. Accordingly, those
labeled as practicing or advocating pseudoscience normally dispute the
characterization. See also List of topics characterized as pseudoscience.
Overview. Scientific methodology. While the standards for determining whether a
body of knowledge, methodology, or practice is scientific can vary from field
to field, a number of basic principles are widely agreed upon by scientists.
The basic notion is that all experimental results should be reproducible, and
able to be verified by other individuals. These principles aim to ensure
experiments can be measurably reproduced under the same conditions, allowing
further investigation to determine whether a hypothesis or theory related to
given phenomena is both valid and reliable. Standards require the scientific
method to be applied throughout, and bias will be controlled for or eliminated
through randomization, fair sampling procedures, blinding of studies, and other
methods. All gathered data, including the experimental or environmental
conditions, are expected to be documented for scrutiny and made available for
peer review, allowing further experiments or studies to be conducted to confirm
or falsify results. Statistical quantification of significance, confidence, and
error are also important tools for the scientific method. Falsifiability. In
the mid-20th century, Karl Popper put forth the criterion of falsifiability to
distinguish science from nonscience. Falsifiability means a result can be
disproved. For example, a statement such as "God created the universe" may be
true or false, but no tests can be devised that could prove it either way; it
simply lies outside the reach of science. Popper used astrology and
psychoanalysis as examples of pseudoscience and Einstein's theory of relativity
as an example of science. He subdivided nonscience into philosophical,
mathematical, mythological, religious and/or metaphysical formulations on one
hand, and pseudoscientific formulations on the other, though he did not provide
clear criteria for the differences. Refusal to acknowledge problems. In 1978,
Paul Thagard proposed that pseudoscience is primarily distinguishable from
science when it is less progressive than alternative theories over a long
period of time, and its proponents fail to acknowledge or address problems with
the theory. In 1983, Mario Bunge has suggested the categories of "belief
fields" and "research fields" to help distinguish between pseudoscience and
science, where the first is primarily personal and subjective and the latter
involves a certain systematic approach. Criticism of the term. Philosophers of
science, such as Paul Feyerabend, argued that a distinction between science and
nonscience is neither possible nor desirable. Among the issues which can make
the distinction difficult is variable rates of evolution among the theories and
methodologies of science in response to new data. In addition, specific
standards applicable to one field of science may not be applicable in other
fields. Larry Laudan has suggested pseudoscience has no scientific meaning and
is mostly used to describe our emotions: "If we would stand up and be counted
on the side of reason, we ought to drop terms like 'pseudo-science' and
'unscientific' from our vocabulary; they are just hollow phrases which do only
emotive work for us". Likewise, Richard McNally states, "The term
'pseudoscience' has become little more than an inflammatory buzzword for
quickly dismissing one's opponents in media sound-bites" and "When therapeutic
entrepreneurs make claims on behalf of their interventions, we should not waste
our time trying to determine whether their interventions qualify as
pseudoscientific. Rather, we should ask them: How do you know that your
intervention works? What is your evidence?" Etymology. The word "pseudoscience"
is derived from the Greek root "pseudo" meaning false and the Latin word
"scientia" meaning knowledge. Although the term has been in use since at least
the late 18th century (used in 1796 in reference to alchemy,) the concept of
pseudoscience as distinct from real or proper science appears to have emerged
in the mid-19th century. Among the first recorded uses of the word "pseudo-
science" was in 1844 in the "Northern Journal of Medicine", I 387: "That
opposite kind of innovation which pronounces what has been recognized as a
branch of science, to have been a pseudo-science, composed merely of so-called
facts, connected together by misapprehensions under the disguise of
principles". An earlier recorded use of the term was in 1843 by the French
physiologist FranÃ§ois Magendie. During the 20th century, the word was used
rhetorically to ascribe to an action falsely maintaining scientific status. --
> From time to time, though, the usage of the word occurred in a more formal,
technical manner around a perceived threat to individual and institutional
security in a social and cultural setting. History. The history of
pseudoscience is the study of pseudoscientific theories over time. A
pseudoscience is a set of ideas that presents itself as science, while it does
not meet the criteria to properly be called such. Distinguishing between proper
science and pseudoscience is sometimes difficult. One proposal for demarcation
between the two is the falsification criterion, most notably attributed to the
philosopher Karl Popper. In the history of science and "history of
pseudoscience" it can be especially hard to separate the two, because some
sciences developed from pseudosciences. An example of this is the science
chemistry, which traces its origins to pseudoscientific alchemy. The vast
diversity in pseudosciences further complicates the history of science. Some
modern pseudosciences, such as astrology and acupuncture, originated before the
scientific era. Others developed as part of an ideology, such as Lysenkoism, or
as a response to perceived threats to an ideology. Examples are creation
science and intelligent design, which were developed in response to the
scientific theory of evolution. Despite failing to meet proper scientific
standards, many pseudosciences survive. This is usually due to a persistent
core of devotees who refuse to accept scientific criticism of their beliefs, or
due to popular misconceptions. Sheer popularity is also a factor, as is
attested by astrology, which remains popular despite being rejected by a large
majority of scientists. Identifying pseudoscience. A field, practice, or body
of knowledge might reasonably be called pseudoscientific when it is presented
as consistent with the norms of scientific research, but it demonstrably fails
to meet these norms. Karl Popper stated it is insufficient to distinguish
science from pseudoscience, or from metaphysics, by the criterion of rigorous
adherence to the empirical method, which is essentially inductive, based on
observation or experimentation. He proposed a method to distinguish between
genuine empirical, nonempirical or even pseudoempirical methods. The latter
case was exemplified by astrology, which appeals to observation and
experimentation. While it had astonishing empirical evidence based on
observation, on horoscopes and biographies, it crucially failed to adhere to
acceptable scientific standards. Popper proposed falsifiability as an important
criterion in distinguishing science from pseudoscience. To demonstrate this
point, Popper gave two cases of human behavior and typical explanations from
Freud and Adler's theories: "that of a man who pushes a child into the water
with the intention of drowning it; and that of a man who sacrifices his life in
an attempt to save the child." From Freud's perspective, the first man would
have suffered from psychological repression, probably originating from an
Oedipus complex, whereas the second had attained sublimation. From Adler's
perspective, the first and second man suffered from feelings of inferiority and
had to prove himself which drove him to commit the crime or, in the second
case, rescue the child. Popper was not able to find any counterexamples of
human behavior in which the behavior could not be explained in the terms of
Adler's or Freud's theory. Popper argued it was that the observation always
fitted or confirmed the theory which, rather than being its strength, was
actually its weakness. In contrast, Popper gave the example of Einstein's
gravitational theory, which predicted "light must be attracted by heavy bodies
(such as the sun), precisely as material bodies were attracted." Following from
this, stars closer to the sun would appear to have moved a small distance away
from the sun, and away from each other. This prediction was particularly
striking to Popper because it involved considerable risk. The brightness of the
sun prevented this effect from being observed under normal circumstances, so
photographs had to be taken during an eclipse and compared to photographs taken
at night. Popper states, "If observation shows that the predicted effect is
definitely absent, then the theory is simply refuted." Popper summed up his
criterion for the scientific status of a theory as depending on its
falsifiability, refutability, or testability. Paul R. Thagard used astrology as
a case study to distinguish science from pseudoscience and proposed principles
and criteria to delineate them. First, astrology has not progressed in that it
has not been updated nor added any explanatory power since Ptolemy. Second, it
has ignored outstanding problems such as the precession of equinoxes in
astronomy. Third, alternative theories of personality and behavior have grown
progressively to encompass explanations of phenomena which astrology statically
attributes to heavenly forces. Fourth, astrologers have remained uninterested
in furthering the theory to deal with outstanding problems or in critically
evaluating the theory in relation to other theories. Thagard intended this
criterion to be extended to areas other than astrology. He believed it would
delineate as pseudoscientific such practices as witchcraft and pyramidology,
while leaving physics, chemistry and biology in the realm of science.
Biorhythms, which like astrology relied uncritically on birth dates, did not
meet the criterion of pseudoscience at the time because there were no
alternative explanations for the same observations. The use of this criterion
has the consequence that a theory can at one time be scientific and at another
pseudoscientific. Science is also distinguishable from revelation, theology, or
spirituality in that it offers insight into the physical world obtained by
empirical research and testing. For this reason, the teaching of creation
science and intelligent design has been strongly condemned in position
statements from scientific organisations. The most notable disputes concern the
evolution of living organisms, the idea of common descent, the geologic history
of the Earth, the formation of the solar system, and the origin of the
universe. Systems of belief that derive from divine or inspired knowledge are
not considered pseudoscience if they do not claim either to be scientific or to
overturn well-established science. Moreover, some specific religious claims,
such as the power of intercessory prayer to heal the sick can be tested by the
scientific method, though they may be based on untestable beliefs. Some
statements and commonly held beliefs in popular science may not meet the
criteria of science. "Pop" science may blur the divide between science and
pseudoscience among the general public, and may also involve science fiction.
Indeed, pop science is disseminated to, and can also easily emanate from,
persons not accountable to scientific methodology and expert peer review. If
the claims of a given field can be experimentally tested and methodological
standards are upheld, it is not "pseudoscience", however odd, astonishing, or
counterintuitive. If claims made are inconsistent with existing experimental
results or established theory, but the methodology is sound, caution should be
used; science consists of testing hypotheses which may turn out to be false. In
such a case, the work may be better described as ideas that are "not yet
generally accepted". Protoscience is a term sometimes used to describe a
hypothesis that has not yet been adequately tested by the scientific method,
but which is otherwise consistent with existing science or which, where
inconsistent, offers reasonable account of the inconsistency. It may also
describe the transition from a body of practical knowledge into a scientific
field. Pseudoscientific concepts. Examples of pseudoscience concepts, proposed
as scientific when they are not scientific, are creation science, intelligent
design, orgone energy, cold fusion, Nârays, ch'i, Scientology founder L.Â Ron
Hubbard's engram theory, enneagram, iridology, the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator,
New Age psychotherapies (e.g.,Â rebirthing therapy), reflexology, applied
kinesiology, astrology, biorhythms, facilitated communication, paranormal plant
perception, extrasensory perception (ESP), Velikovsky's ideas, ancient
astronauts, craniometry, graphology, metoposcopy, personology, physiognomy,
acupuncture, alchemy, cellular memory, Lysenkoism, naturopathy, reiki, Rolfing,
therapeutic touch, ayurvedic medicine, and homeopathy. --> Robert T. Carroll
stated in part: "Pseudoscientists claim to base their theories on empirical
evidence, and they may even use some scientific methods, though often their
understanding of a controlled experiment is inadequate. Many pseudoscientists
relish being able to point out the consistency of their ideas with known facts
or with predicted consequences, but they do not recognize that such consistency
is not proof of anything. It is a necessary condition but not a sufficient
condition that a good scientific theory be consistent with the facts." In 2006,
the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) issued an executive summary of a
paper on science and engineering which briefly discussed the prevalence of
pseudoscience in modern times. --> It said, "belief in pseudoscience is
widespread" and, referencing a Gallup Poll, stated that belief in the 10
commonly believed examples of paranormal phenomena listed in the poll were
"pseudoscientific beliefs". The items were: "extrasensory perception (ESP),
that houses can be haunted, ghosts, telepathy, clairvoyance, astrology, that
people can communicate mentally with someone who has died, witches,
reincarnation, and channelling". Such beliefs in pseudoscience reflect a lack
of knowledge of how science works. --> The scientific community may aim to
communicate information about science out of concern for the public's
susceptibility to unproven claims. The following are some of the indicators of
the possible presence of pseudoscience. Demographics. In his book "The Most
Precious Thing" Carl Sagan discusses the government of China and the Chinese
Communist Party concern about Western pseudoscience developments and certain
ancient Chinese practices in China. --> He sees pseudoscience occurring in the
U.S. as part of a worldwide trend and suggests its causes, dangers, diagnosis
and treatment may be universal. In Spain, another science writer Luis Alfonso
GÃ¡mez was sued after he notified the public about the lack of efficacy to
support the claims of a popular pseudoscientist. --> In the US, 54% of the
population believe in psychic healing and 35% believe in telepathy. In Europe,
the statistics are not that much different. --> A significant percentage of
Europeans consider homeopathy (34%) and horoscopes (13%) to be reliable
science. Over the past decade, consumer interest in the use of complementary
and alternative medicine (CAM) practices and/or products has increased. --
> Surveys demonstrate that the people with the most serious medical conditions,
such as cancer, chronic pain, and HIV, are the most routine consumers of CAM.
The National Science Foundation stated that pseudoscientific beliefs in the
U.S. became more widespread during the 1990s, peaked near 2001, and declined
slightly since with pseudoscientific beliefs remaining common. --> According to
the NSF report, there is a lack of knowledge of pseudoscientific issues in
society and pseudoscientific practices are commonly followed. Bunge states, "A
survey on public knowledge of science in the United States showed that in 1988
50% of American adults evolution, and 88% believed astrology is a science."
Other surveys indicate about a third of all adult Americans consider astrology
to be scientific. In the Journal of College Science Teaching, Art Hobson
writes, "Pseudoscientific beliefs are surprisingly widespread in our culture
even among public school science teachers and newspaper editors, and are
closely related to scientific illiteracy." Psychological explanations.
Pseudoscientific thinking has been explained in terms of psychology and social
psychology. The human proclivity for seeking confirmation rather than
refutation (confirmation bias), the tendency to hold comforting beliefs, and
the tendency to overgeneralize have been proposed as reasons for the common
adherence to pseudoscientific thinking. According to Beyerstein (1991), humans
are prone to associations based on resemblances only, and often prone to
misattribution in cause-effect thinking. Lindeman states that social motives
(i.e., "to comprehend self and the world, to have a sense of control over
outcomes, to belong, to find the world benevolent and to maintain one's self-
esteem") are often "more easily" fulfilled by pseudoscience than by scientific
information. --> Furthermore, pseudoscientific explanations are generally not
analyzed rationally, but instead experientially. --> Operating within a
different set of rules compared to rational thinking, experiential thinking
regards an explanation as valid if the explanation is "personally functional,
satisfying and sufficient", offering a description of the world that may be
more personal than can be provided by science and reducing the amount of
potential work involved in understanding complex events and outcomes. In our
culture and thinking, people appear to have trouble distinguishing science from
pseuodoscience. --> The prime reason people believe in wishful things is
because they want to, it feels good and it is consoling. --> Many weird beliefs
give immediate gratification. Immediate gratification of a person's belief is
made a lot easier by simple explanantions for an often complicated and
contingent world. --> The scientific and secular systems of morality and
meaning are generally unsatisfying to most people. --> Humans are, by nature, a
forward-minded species pursuing greater avenues of happiness and satisfaction,
but we are all too frequently willing to grasp at unrealistic promises of a
better life. Psychology has much to discuss about pseudoscience thinking, as it
is the illusory perceptions of causality and effectiveness of numerous
individuals that needs to be illuminated. --> Research suggests that
illusionary thinking that happens in most people when exposed to certain
circumstances such as reading a book, an advertisement or the testimony of
others are the basis of pseudoscience beliefs. --> It is assumed that illusions
are not unusual, and given the right conditions, illusions are able to occur
systematically even in normal emotional situations. --> One of the things
pseudoscience believers quibble most about is that academic science usually
treats them as fools. --> Minimizing these illusions in the real world is not
simple. To this aim, designing evidence-based educational programs can be
effective to help people identify and reduce their own illusions. Boundaries
between science and pseudoscience. In the philosophy and history of science,
Imre Lakatos stresses the social and political importance of the demarcation
problem, the normative methodological problem of distinguishing between science
and pseudoscience. His distinctive historical analysis of scientific
methodology based on research programmes suggests: "scientists regard the
successful theoretical prediction of stunning novel facts â such as the
return of Halley's comet or the gravitational bending of light rays â as what
demarcates good scientific theories from pseudo-scientific and degenerate
theories, and in spite of all scientific theories being forever confronted by
'an ocean of counterexamples'". Lakatos offers a "novel fallibilist analysis of
the development of Newton's celestial dynamics, favourite historical example of
his methodology" and argues in light of this historical turn, that his account
answers for certain inadequacies in those of Sir Karl Popper and Thomas Kuhn.
"Nonetheless, Lakatos did recognize the force of Kuhn's historical criticism of
Popper â all important theories have been surrounded by an 'ocean of
anomalies', which on a falsiï¬cationist view would require the rejection of
the theory outrightâ¦ Lakatos sought to reconcile the rationalism of Popperian
falsificationism with what seemed to be its own refutation by history". The
boundary lines between the science and pseudoscience are disputed and difficult
to determine analytically, even after more than a century of dialogue among
philosophers of science and scientists in varied fields, and despite some basic
agreements on the fundaments of scientific methodology. The concept of
pseudoscience rests on an understanding that scientific methodology has been
misrepresented or misapplied with respect to a given theory, but many
philosophers of science maintain that different kinds of methods are held as
appropriate across different fields and different eras of human history.
According to Lakatos, the typical descriptive unit of great scientific
achievements is not an isolated hypothesis but "a powerful problem-solving
machinery, which, with the help of sophisticated mathematical techniques,
digests anomalies and even turns them into positive evidence." Politics,
health, and education. Political implications. The demarcation problem between
science and pseudoscience brings up debate in the realms of science, philosophy
and politics. --> Imre Lakatos, for instance, points out that the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union at one point declared that Mendelian genetics was
pseudoscientific and had its advocates, including well-established scientists
such as Nikolai Vavilov, sent to a Gulag and that the "liberal Establishment of
the West" denies freedom of speech to topics it regards as pseudoscience,
particularly where they run up against social mores. Pseudoscience is used
recurrently in political, policy-making discourse in allegations of distortion
or fabrication of scientific findings to support a political position. --> The
Prince of Wales has accused climate change skeptics of using pseudoscience and
persuasion to hinder the world from adopting precautionary principles to avert
catastrophic global warming. --> People have given attention to the climate
skeptics and have tried to understand the kind of pseudoscience they are
canvassing. --> But he insisted the "environmental collapse" evidence is
already here, --> not only in climbing temperatures but the imprint on
particular species like honey bees. It becomes pseudoscientific when science
cannot be separated from ideology, scientists misrepresent scientific findings
to promote or draw attention for publicity, when politicians, journalists and a
nation's intellectual elite distort the facts of science for short-term
political gain, when powerful individuals in the public conflate causation and
cofactors (for example, in the causes of HIV/AIDS) through a mixture of clever
wordplay, or when science is being used by the powerful to promote ignorance
rather than tackle ignorance. --> These ideas reduce the authority, value,
integrity and independence of science in society. A large percentage of the
United states population lacks scientific literacy, not adequately
understanding scientific principles and methodology. --> Instead of seeking
scientific professionals for expert medical advise, people increasingly put
their trust in pseudoscience, with its claims that are not supported and not
testable. --> Research scientists and doctors have been drowned out by
pseudoscientists, in topics from evolution to animal models of human biology. -
-> The backlash against science threatens to halt progress in combating disease
and erodes public support for research and development. --> The ridicule of
researchers has been a tool for political advantage, assisting to the public
condemnation of science and medicine. Health and education implications.
Distinguishing science from pseudoscience has practical implications in the
case of health care, expert testimony, environmental policies, and science
education. --> Treatments with a patina of scientific authority which have not
actually been subjected to actual scientific testing may be ineffective,
expensive, and dangerous to patients, and confuse health providers, insurers,
government decision makers, and the public as to what treatments are
appropriate. --> Claims advanced by pseudoscience may result in government
officials and educators making poor decisions in selecting curricula; for
example, creation science may replace evolution in studies of biology. The
extent to which students acquire a range of social and cognitive thinking
skills related to the proper usage of science and technology determines whether
they are scientifically literate. --> Education in the sciences encounters new
dimensions with the changing landscape of science and technology, a fast-
changing culture, and a knowledge-driven era. --> A reinvention of the school
science curriculum is one that shapes students to contend with its changing
influence on human welfare. --> A scientifically literate person is able to
distinguish science from pseudoscience such as astrology, are among the
attributes that enable students to adapt to the changing world. --> Science
literacy characteristics are embedded in a curriculum where students are
engaged in resolving problems, conductung investigations, or developing
projects. Scientists do not want to get involved to counter pseudoscience for
various reasons. --> For example, pseudoscientific beliefs are irrational and
impossible to combat with rational arguments, and even agreeing to talk about
pseudoscience indicates acceptance as a credible discipline. --> Pseudoscience
harbors a continuous and an increasing threat to our society. It is impossible
to determine the irreversible harm that will happen in the distance. --> In a
time when the science literacy of the public has declined and the danger of
pseudoscience has increased, revising the conventional science course to
current science through the prism of pseudoscience could offer a way to improve
science literacy and help society to eliminate misconceptions and assault the
growing trends (remote viewing, psychic readings, etc.) that may harm
(financially or otherwise) trusting citizens. Pseudosciences such as
homeopathy, even if generally benign, are magnets for charlatans. --> This
poses a serious issue because incompetent practitioners should not be given the
right of administering health care. --> True-believing zealots may pose a more
serious threat than typical con men because of their affection to homeopathy's
ideology. --> Irrational health care is not harmless, and it is careless to
create patient confidence in pseudomedicine.
