Quietism Quietism in philosophy is an approach to the subject that sees the
role of philosophy as broadly therapeutic or remedial. Quietist philosophers
believe that philosophy has no positive thesis to contribute, but rather that
its value is in defusing confusions in the linguistic and conceptual frameworks
of other subjects, including non-quietist philosophy. By re-formulating
supposed problems in a way that makes the misguided reasoning from which they
arise apparent, the quietist hopes to put an end to man's confusion, and help
return to a state of intellectual quietude. Quietist philosophers. Quietism is
by its very nature not a philosophical school in the traditional sense of a
body of doctrines, but can still be identified by its methodology, which is to
focus on language and the use of words, and its objective, which is to show
that most philosophical problems are only pseudo-problems. The genesis of the
approach can be traced back to Ludwig Wittgenstein, whose work greatly
influenced the Ordinary Language philosophers. One of the early Ordinary
Language works was Gilbert Ryle's "The Concept of Mind", an attempt to
demonstrate that dualism arises from a failure to appreciate that mental
vocabulary and physical vocabulary are simply different ways of describing one
and the same thing, namely human behaviour. J L Austin's "Sense and Sensibilia"
took a similar approach to the problems of scepticism and the reliability of
sense perception, arguing that they arise only by misconstruing ordinary
language, not because there is anything genuinely wrong with our empirical
knowledge. Norman Malcolm, a friend of Wittgenstein's, took a quietist approach
to sceptical problems in the philosophy of mind. More recently, two other
philosophers to take an explicitly quietist position are John McDowell and
Richard Rorty.
