Reconstructionist Judaism Reconstructionist Judaism () () is a modern American-
based Jewish movement based on the ideas of Mordecai Kaplan (1881â€“1983). The
movement views Judaism as a progressively evolving civilization. It originated
as a branch of Conservative Judaism, before it splintered. The movement
developed from the late 1920s to 1940s, and it established a rabbinical college
in 1968. There is substantial theological diversity within the movement.
Halakha is not considered binding, but is treated as a valuable cultural
remnant that should be upheld unless there is reason for the contrary. The
movement emphasizes positive views toward modernism, and has an approach to
Jewish custom which aims toward communal decision making through a process of
education and distillation of values from traditional Jewish sources. Origin.
Reconstructionism was developed by Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan (1881â€“1983) and his
son-in-law, Rabbi Ira Eisenstein (1906â€“2001), over a period of time spanning
from the late 1920s to the 1940s. It made its greatest stride in becoming the
fourth movement in North American Judaism (Orthodox, Conservative and Reform
being the other three) with the founding of the Reconstructionist Rabbinical
College in 1968. Reconstructionist Judaism is the first major movement of
Judaism to originate in North America; the second is the Humanistic Judaism
movement founded in 1963 by Rabbi Sherwin Wine. Theology. Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan
believed that, in light of advances in philosophy, science and history, it
would be impossible for modern Jews to continue to adhere to many of Judaism's
traditional theological claims. In agreement with Orthodox theology
(articulated by prominent medieval Jewish thinkers including Maimonides),
Kaplan affirmed that God is not anthropomorphic in any way. As such, all
anthropomorphic descriptions of God are used metaphorically. Kaplan's theology
went beyond this to claim that God is not Personal, in that, God is not a
conscious being, nor can God in any way relate to or communicate with Man.
Furthermore, Kaplan's theology defines God as the sum of all natural processes
that allow man to become self-fulfilled. Sonsino, Rifat. "The Many Faces of
God: A Reader of Modern Jewish Theologies". 2004, page 22â€“23 Not all of
Kaplan's writings on the subject were consistent; his position evolved somewhat
over the years, and two distinct theologies can be discerned with a careful
reading. The view more popularly associated with Kaplan is strict naturalism,
"Ã  la" Dewey, which has been criticized as using religious terminology to mask
a nontheistic, if not outright atheistic, position. However, a second strand of
Kaplanian theology exists, which makes clear that at times Kaplan believed that
God has ontological reality, a real and absolute existence independent of human
beliefs. In this latter theology, Kaplan still rejects classical forms of
theism and any belief in miracles, but holds to a position that in some ways is
neoplatonic. Most "classical" Reconstructionist Jews (those agreeing with
Kaplan) reject traditional forms of theism, though this is by no means
universal. Many are deists, a small number accept Kabbalistic views of God or
the concept of a personal God. Kaplan's theology, as he explicitly stated, does
not represent the only Reconstructionist understanding of theology and theology
is not the cornerstone of the Reconstructionist movement. Much more central is
the idea that Judaism is a civilization, and that the Jewish people must take
an active role in ensuring its future by participating in its ongoing
evolution. Consequently, a strain of Reconstructionism exists which is
distinctly non-Kaplanian. In this view, Kaplan's assertions concerning belief
and practice are largely rejected, while the tenets of an "evolving religious
civilization" are supported. The basis for this approach is that Kaplan spoke
for his generation; he also wrote that every generation would need to define
itself and its civilization for itself. In the thinking of these
Reconstructionists, what Kaplan said concerning belief and practice is not
applicable today. This approach may include a belief in a personal God,
acceptance of the concept of "chosenness", a belief in some form of
resurrection or continued existence of the dead, and the existence of an
obligatory form of "halakha". In the latter, in particular, there has developed
a broader concept of "halakhah" wherein concepts such as "eco-Kashrut" are
incorporated. Jewish law and tradition. Reconstructionist Judaism holds that
contemporary Western secular morality has precedence over Jewish law and
theology. It does not ask that its adherents hold to any particular beliefs,
nor does it ask that Jewish law be accepted as normative. Unlike classical
Reform Judaism, Reconstructionism holds that a person's default position should
be to incorporate Jewish laws and tradition into their lives, unless they have
a specific reason to do otherwise. The most important distinction between
Reconstructionist Judaism and traditional Judaism is that Reconstructionism
concludes that all of halakha should be categorized as "folkways", and not as
religious law. Reconstructionism promotes many traditional Jewish practices.
Thus, "mitzvot" (commandments) have been replaced with "folkways", non-binding
customs that can be democratically accepted or rejected by the congregations.
Folkways that are promoted include keeping Hebrew in the prayer service,
studying Torah, daily prayer, wearing "kipot" ("yarmulkas"), "tallitot" and
"tefillin" during prayer, and observance of the Jewish holidays. Principles of
belief. Most Reconstructionists do not believe in revelation (the idea that God
reveals his will to human beings). This is dismissed as supernaturalism. Kaplan
posits that revelation "consists in disengaging from the traditional context
those elements in it which answer permanent postulates of human nature, and in
integrating them into our own ideology ... the rest may be relegated to
archaeology." Many writers have criticized the movement's most widely held
theology, religious naturalism. David Ray Griffin and Louis Jacobs have
objected to the redefinitions of the terms "revelation" and "God" as being
intellectually dishonest, and as being a form of "conversion by definition"; in
their critique, these redefinitions take non-theistic beliefs and attach
theistic terms to them. Similar critiques have been put forth by Rabbis Neil
Gillman, Milton Steinberg, and Michael Samuels. Reconstructionist Judaism is
egalitarian with respect to gender roles. All positions are open to both
genders; they are open to lesbians and gay men as well. Jewish identity.
Reconstructionist Judaism allows its rabbis to determine their own policy
regarding officiating at intermarriages. Some congregations accept patrilineal
as well as matrilineal descent, and children of one Jewish parent, of either
sex, are considered Jewish if raised as Jews. This is less restrictive than the
traditional standard that only considers children with Jewish mothers to be
Jewish, regardless of how they were raised. The role of non-Jews in
Reconstructionist congregations is a matter of ongoing debate. Practices vary
between synagogues. Most congregations strive to strike a balance between
inclusivity and integrity of boundaries. The Jewish Reconstructionist
Federation (JRF) has issued a non-binding statement attempting to delineate the
process by which congregations set policy on these issues, and sets forth
sample recommendations. These issues are ultimately decided by local lay
leadership. Mixed Jewish/Non-Jewish couples, however, are welcome in
Reconstructionist congregations. Organizations. Over 100 synagogues and
"havurot", mostly in the United States and Canada, were affiliated with the
Jewish Reconstructionist Federation. As of June 3, 2012 the Reconstructionist
movement has been restructured. The Reconstructionist Rabbinical College is now
the primary organization of the movement, headed by Rabbi Dan Ehrenkrantz, a
1989 graduate of the College. The movement's new designation is simply the
Jewish Reconstructionist Movement. The Reconstructionist Rabbinical College
educates rabbis and cantors. The Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association is
the professional organization of Reconstructionist rabbis. Relation to other
Jewish movements. Originally an offshoot of Conservative Judaism/Masorti
Judaism, Reconstructionism retains warm relations with both the Conservative/
Masorti movement and Reform Judaism. Orthodox Judaism, however, considers
Reconstructionism to be in violation of proper observance of interpretation of
Jewish law. The Jewish Reconstructionist Federation is a member of the World
Union for Progressive Judaism.
