Reincarnation Reincarnation is the religious or philosophical concept that the
soul or spirit, after biological death, begins a new life in a new body that
may be human, animal or spiritual depending on the moral quality of the
previous life's actions. This doctrine is a central tenet of the Indian
religions and is a belief that was held by such historic figures as Pythagoras,
Plato and Socrates. It is also a common belief of pagan religions such as
Druidism, Spiritism, Theosophy, and Eckankar and is found in many tribal
societies around the world, in places such as Siberia, West Africa, North
America, and Australia. Although the majority of sects within the Abrahamic
religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam do not believe that individuals
reincarnate, particular groups within these religions do refer to
reincarnation; these groups include the mainstream historical and contemporary
followers of Kabbalah, the Cathars, and the Shia sects such as the Alawi Shias
and the Druze and the Rosicrucians. The historical relations between these
sects and the beliefs about reincarnation that were characteristic of
Neoplatonism, Orphism, Hermeticism, Manicheanism and Gnosticism of the Roman
era, as well as the Indian religions has been the subject of recent scholarly
research. In recent decades, many Europeans and North Americans have developed
an interest in reincarnation. Contemporary films, books, and popular songs
frequently mention reincarnation. In the last decades, academic researchers
have begun to explore reincarnation and published reports of children's
memories of earlier lives in peer-reviewed journals and books. Skeptics are
generally incredulous about this and any other claims of life after death.
Conceptual definitions. The word "reincarnation" derives from Latin, literally
meaning, "entering the flesh again". The Greek equivalent "metempsychosis"
(ŒºŒµœÑŒµŒºœàœçœáœâœÉŒπœÇ) roughly corresponds to the common English phrase
"transmigration of the soul" and also usually connotes reincarnation after
death, as either human, animal, though emphasising the continuity of the soul,
not the flesh. The term has been used by modern philosophers such as Kurt
G√∂del and has entered the English language. Another Greek term sometimes used
synonymously is "palingenesis", "being born again". There is no word
corresponding exactly to the English terms "rebirth", "metempsychosis",
"transmigration" or "reincarnation" in the traditional languages of PƒÅli and
Sanskrit. The entire universal process that gives rise to the cycle of death
and rebirth, governed by karma, is referred to as "Samsara" while the state one
is born into, the individual process of being born or coming into the world in
any way, is referred to simply as "birth" ("jƒÅti"). "Devas" (gods) may also
die and live again. Here the term "reincarnation" is not strictly applicable,
yet Hindu gods are said to have reincarnated ("see Avatar"): Lord Vishnu is
known for his ten incarnations, the "Dashavatars". Celtic religion seems to
have had reincarnating gods also. Many Christians regard Jesus as a divine
incarnation. Some Christians and Muslims believe he and some prophets may
incarnate again. Most Christians, however, believe that Jesus will come again
in the Second Coming at the end of the world, although this is not a
reincarnation. Some ghulat Shi'a Muslim sects also regard their founders as in
some special sense divine incarnations ("hulul"). Philosophical and religious
beliefs regarding the existence or non-existence of an unchanging "self" have a
direct bearing on how reincarnation is viewed within a given tradition. The
Buddha lived at a time of great philosophical creativity in India when many
conceptions of the nature of life and death were proposed. Some were
materialist, holding that there was no existence and that the self is
annihilated upon death. Others believed in a form of cyclic existence, where a
being is born, lives, dies and then is reborn, but in the context of a type of
determinism or fatalism in which karma played no role. Others were
"eternalists", postulating an eternally existent self or soul comparable to
that in Judaic monotheism: the ƒÅtman survives death and reincarnates as
another living being, based on its karmic inheritance. This is the idea that
has become dominant (with certain modifications) in modern Hinduism. The
Buddhist concept of reincarnation differs from others in that there is no
eternal "soul", "spirit' or self" but only a "stream of consciousness" that
links life with life. The actual process of change from one life to the next is
called "punarbhava" (Sanskrit) or "punabbhava" (PƒÅli), literally "becoming
again", or more briefly "bhava", "becoming", and some English-speaking
Buddhists prefer the term "rebirth" or "re-becoming" to render this term as
they take "reincarnation" to imply a fixed entity that is reborn. Popular Jain
cosmology and Buddhist cosmology as well as a number of schools of Hinduism
posit rebirth in many worlds and in varied forms. In Buddhist tradition the
process occurs across five or six realms of existence, including the human, any
kind of animal and several types of supernatural being. It is said in Tibetan
Buddhism that it is very rare for a person to be reborn in the immediate next
life as a human "Gilgul", "Gilgul neshamot" or "Gilgulei Ha Neshamot" (Heb.
◊í◊ú◊í◊ï◊ú ◊î◊ ◊©◊û◊ï◊™) refers to the concept of reincarnation in Kabbalistic
Judaism, found in much Yiddish literature among Ashkenazi Jews. "Gilgul" means
"cycle" and "neshamot" is "souls." The equivalent Arabic term is "tanasukh":
the belief is found among Shi'a ghulat Muslim sects. History. Origins (outside
Africa). The origins of the notion of reincarnation are obscure. They
apparently date to the Iron Age (around 1200 BCE). Discussion of the subject
appears in the philosophical traditions of India and Greece from about the 6th
century BCE. Also during the Iron Age, the Greek Pre-Socratics discussed
reincarnation, and the Celtic Druids are also reported to have taught a
doctrine of reincarnation. The ideas associated with reincarnation may have
arisen independently in different regions, or they might have spread as a
result of cultural contact. Proponents of cultural transmission have looked for
links between Iron Age Celtic, Greek and Vedic philosophy and religion, some
even suggesting that belief in reincarnation was present in Proto-Indo-European
religion. In ancient European, Iranian and Indian agricultural cultures, the
life cycles of birth, death, and rebirth were recoginized as a replica of
natural agricultural cycles. Early Jainism, Hinduism and Buddhism. Patrick
Olivelle asserts that the origin of the concept of the cycle of birth and
death, the concept of samsara, and the concept of liberation in the Indian
tradition, were in part the creation of the non-Vedic Shramana tradition.
Another possibility are the prehistoric Dravidian traditions of South India.
Some scholars suggest that the idea is original to the Buddha. In Jainism, the
soul and matter are considered eternal, uncreated and perpetual. There is a
constant interplay between the two, resulting in bewildering cosmic
manifestations in material, psychic and emotional spheres around us. This led
to the theories of transmigration and rebirth. Changes but not total
annihilation of spirit and matter is the basic postulate of Jain philosophy.
The life as we know now, after death therefore moves on to another form of life
based on the merits and demerits it accumulated in its current life. The path
to becoming a supreme soul is to practice non-violence and be truthful. Indian
discussion of reincarnation enters the historical record from about the 6th
century BCE, with the development of the Advaita Vedanta tradition in the early
Upanishads (around the middle of the first millennium BCE), Gautama Buddha
(623-543 BCE) as well as Mahavira, the 24th Tirthankara of Jainism. The
systematic attempt to attain first-hand knowledge of past lives has been
developed in various ways in different places. The early Buddhist texts discuss
techniques for recalling previous births, predicated on the development of high
levels of meditative concentration. The later Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, which
incorporated elements of Buddhist thought, give similar instructions on how to
attain the ability. The Buddha reportedly warned that this experience can be
misleading and should be interpreted with care. Tibetan Buddhism has developed
a unique 'science' of death and rebirth, a good deal of which is set down in
what is popularly known as "The Tibetan Book of the Dead". Early Greece. Early
Greek discussion of the concept likewise dates to the 6th century BCE. An early
Greek thinker known to have considered rebirth is Pherecydes of Syros (fl. 540
BCE). His younger contemporary Pythagoras (c. 570-c. 495 BCE), its first famous
exponent, instituted societies for its diffusion. Plato (428/427 ‚Äì 348/347
BCE) presented accounts of reincarnation in his works, particularly the "Myth
of Er". Authorities have not agreed on how the notion arose in Greece:
sometimes Pythagoras is said to have been Pherecydes' pupil, sometimes to have
introduced it with the doctrine of Orphism, a Thracian religion that was to be
important in the diffusion of reincarnation, or else to have brought the
teaching from India. In "Phaedo", Plato makes his teacher Socrates, prior to
his death, state; "I am confident that there truly is such a thing as living
again, and that the living spring from the dead." However Xenophon does not
mention Socrates as believing in reincarnation and Plato may have systematised
Socrates' thought with concepts he took directly from Pythagoreanism or
Orphism. Classical Antiquity. The Orphic religion, which taught reincarnation,
first appeared in Thrace in north-eastern Greece and Bulgaria, about the 6th
century BC, organized itself into mystery schools at Eleusis and elsewhere, and
produced a copious literature. Orpheus, its legendary founder, is said to have
taught that the immortal soul aspires to freedom while the body holds it
prisoner. The wheel of birth revolves, the soul alternates between freedom and
captivity round the wide circle of necessity. Orpheus proclaimed the need of
the grace of the gods, Dionysus in particular, and of self-purification until
the soul has completed the spiral ascent of destiny to live for ever. An
association between Pythagorean philosophy and reincarnation was routinely
accepted throughout antiquity. In the "Republic" Plato makes Socrates tell how
Er, the son of Armenius, miraculously returned to life on the twelfth day after
death and recounted the secrets of the other world. There are myths and
theories to the same effect in other dialogues, in the Chariot allegory of the
Phaedrus, in the Meno, Timaeus and Laws. The soul, once separated from the
body, spends an indeterminate amount of time in "formland" (see The Allegory of
the Cave in "The Republic") and then assumes another body. In later Greek
literature the doctrine is mentioned in a fragment of Menander and satirized by
Lucian. In Roman literature it is found as early as Ennius, who, in a lost
passage of his "Annals", told how he had seen Homer in a dream, who had assured
him that the same soul which had animated both the poets had once belonged to a
peacock. Persius in his satires (vi. 9) laughs at this: it is referred to also
by Lucretius and Horace. Virgil works the idea into his account of the
Underworld in the sixth book of the Aeneid. It persists down to the late
classic thinkers, Plotinus and the other Neoplatonists. In the Hermetica, a
Graeco-Egyptian series of writings on cosmology and spirituality attributed to
Hermes Trismegistus/Thoth, the doctrine of reincarnation is central. In Greco-
Roman thought, the concept of metempsychosis disappeared with the rise of Early
Christianity, reincarnation being incompatible with the Christian core doctrine
of salvation of the faithful after death. It has been suggested that some of
the early Church Fathers, especially Origen still entertained a belief in the
possibility of reincarnation, but evidence is tenuous, and the writings of
Origen as they have come down to us speak explicitly against it. Some early
Christian Gnostic sects professed reincarnation. The Sethians and followers of
Valentinus believed in it. The followers of Bardaisan of Mesopotamia, a sect of
the 2nd century deemed heretical by the Catholic Church, drew upon Chaldean
astrology, to which Bardaisan's son Harmonius, educated in Athens, added Greek
ideas including a sort of metempsychosis. Another such teacher was Basilides
(132‚Äì? CE/AD), known to us through the criticisms of Irenaeus and the work of
Clement of Alexandria. "(see also Neoplatonism and Gnosticism and Buddhism and
Gnosticism)" In the third Christian century Manichaeism spread both east and
west from Babylonia, then within the Sassanid Empire, where its founder Mani
lived about 216‚Äì276. Manichaean monasteries existed in Rome in 312 AD. Noting
Mani's early travels to the Kushan Empire and other Buddhist influences in
Manichaeism, Richard Foltz attributes Mani's teaching of reincarnation to
Buddhist influence. However the inter-relation of Manicheanism, Orphism,
Gnosticism and neo-Platonism is far from clear. The Celts. In the 1st century
BC Alexander Cornelius Polyhistor wrote; Julius Caesar recorded that the druids
of Gaul, Britain and Ireland had metempsychosis as one of their core doctrines;
Judaism. In Judaism, Rabbi Isaac Luria was said to know the past lives of each
person through his semi-prophetic abilities. This was also true of the Baal
Shem Tov, Rabbi Nachman of Breslov, the Seer of Lublin, and other Hasidic
masters and Sefardic Kabbalists. Taoism. Taoist documents from as early as the
Han Dynasty claimed that Lao Tzu appeared on earth as different persons in
different times beginning in the legendary era of Three Sovereigns and Five
Emperors. The (ca. 3rd century BC) "Chuang Tzu" states: "Birth is not a
beginning; death is not an end. There is existence without limitation; there is
continuity without a starting-point. Existence without limitation is Space.
Continuity without a starting point is Time. There is birth, there is death,
there is issuing forth, there is entering in." Middle Ages. Around the 11-12th
century several reincarnationist movements were persecuted as heresies, through
the establishment of the Inquisition in the Latin west. These included the
Cathar, Paterene or Albigensian church of western Europe, the Paulician
movement, which arose in Armenia, and the Bogomils in Bulgaria. Christian sects
such as the Bogomils and the Cathars, who professed reincarnation and other
gnostic beliefs, were referred to as "Manichean", and are today sometimes
described by scholars as "Neo-Manichean". As there is no known Manichaean
mythology or terminology in the writings of these groups there has been some
dispute among historians as to whether these groups truly were descendants of
Manichaeism. Norse mythology. Reincarnation also appears in Norse mythology, in
the "Poetic Edda". The editor of the "Poetic Edda" says that Helgi
Hj√∂rvar√∞sson and his mistress, the valkyrie Sv√°fa, whose love story is told
in the poem "Helgakvi√∞a Hj√∂rvar√∞ssonar", were reborn as Helgi Hundingsbane
and the valkyrie Sigr√∫n. Helgi and Sigr√∫n's love story is the matter of a
part of the "V√∂lsunga saga" and the lays "Helgakvi√∞a Hundingsbana I and II".
They were reborn a second time as Helgi Haddingjaskati and the valkyrie K√°ra,
but unfortunately their story, "K√°rulj√≥√∞", only survives in a probably
modified form in the "Hr√≥mundar saga Gripssonar". Renaissance and Early Modern
period. While reincarnation has been a matter of faith in some communities from
an early date it has also frequently been argued for on principle, as Plato
does when he argues that the number of souls must be finite because souls are
indestructible, Benjamin Franklin held a similar view. Sometimes such
convictions, as in Socrates' case, arise from a more general personal faith, at
other times from anecdotal evidence such as Plato makes Socrates offer in the
"Myth of Er". During the Renaissance translations of Plato, the Hermetica and
other works fostered new European interest in reincarnation. Marsilio Ficino
argued that Plato's references to reincarnation were intended allegorically,
Shakespeare made fun but Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake by authorities
after being found guilty of heresy by the Roman Inquisition for his teachings.
But the Greek philosophical works remained available and, particularly in north
Europe, were discussed by groups such as the Cambridge Platonists. 19th to 20th
centuries. By the 19th century the philosophers Schopenhauer and Nietzsche
could access the Indian scriptures for discussion of the doctrine of
reincarnation, which recommended itself to the American Transcendentalists
Henry David Thoreau, Walt Whitman and Ralph Waldo Emerson and was adapted by
Francis Bowen into "Christian Metempsychosis". By the early 20th century,
interest in reincarnation had been introduced into the nascent discipline of
psychology, largely due to the influence of William James, who raised aspects
of the philosophy of mind, comparative religion, the psychology of religious
experience and the nature of empiricism. James was influential in the founding
of the American Society for Psychical Research (ASPR) in New York City in 1885,
three years after the British Society for Psychical Research (SPR) was
inaugurated in London, leading to systematic, critical investigation of
paranormal phenomena. At this time popular awareness of the idea of
reincarnation was boosted by the Theosophical Society's dissemination of
systematised and universalised Indian concepts and also by the influence of
magical societies like The Golden Dawn. Notable personalities like Annie
Besant, W. B. Yeats and Dion Fortune made the subject almost as familiar an
element of the popular culture of the west as of the east. By 1924 the subject
could be satirised in popular children's books. Th√©odore Flournoy was among
the first to study a claim of past-life recall in the course of his
investigation of the medium H√©l√®ne Smith, published in 1900, in which he
defined the possibility of cryptomnesia in such accounts. Carl Gustav Jung,
like Flournoy based in Switzerland, also emulated him in his thesis based on a
study of cryptomnesia in psychism. Later Jung would emphasise the importance of
the persistence of memory and ego in psychological study of reincarnation;
"This concept of rebirth necessarily implies the continuity of personality...
(that) one is able, at least potentially, to remember that one has lived
through previous existences, and that these existences were one's own...".
Hypnosis, used in psychoanalysis for retrieving forgotten memories, was
eventually tried as a means of studying the phenomenon of past life recall.
Reincarnation research. Psychiatrist Ian Stevenson, from the University of
Virginia, investigated many reports of young children who claimed to remember a
past life. He conducted more than 2,500 case studies over a period of 40 years
and published twelve books, including "Twenty Cases Suggestive of
Reincarnation" and "Where Reincarnation and Biology Intersect". Stevenson
methodically documented each child's statements and then identified the
deceased person the child identified with, and verified the facts of the
deceased person's life that matched the child's memory. He also matched
birthmarks and birth defects to wounds and scars on the deceased, verified by
medical records such as autopsy photographs, in "Reincarnation and Biology".
Stevenson searched for disconfirming evidence and alternative explanations for
the reports, and believed that his strict methods ruled out all possible
"normal" explanations for the child‚Äôs memories. However, a significant
majority of Stevenson's reported cases of reincarnation originated in Eastern
societies, where dominant religions often permit the concept of reincarnation.
Following this type of criticism, Stevenson published a book on "European Cases
of the Reincarnation Type". Other people who have undertaken reincarnation
research include Jim B. Tucker, Satwant Pasricha, Godwin Samararatne, and
Erlendur Haraldsson. Skeptics such as Paul Edwards have analyzed many of these
accounts, and called them anecdotal. while also suggesting that claims of
evidence for reincarnation originate from selective thinking and from the false
memories that often result from one's own belief system and basic fears, and
thus cannot be counted as empirical evidence. Carl Sagan referred to examples
apparently from Stevenson's investigations in his book "The Demon-Haunted
World" as an example of carefully collected empirical data, though he rejected
reincarnation as a parsimonious explanation for the stories. Objection to
claims of reincarnation include the facts that the vast majority of people do
not remember previous lives and there is no mechanism known to modern science
that would enable a personality to survive death and travel to another body.
Researchers such as Stevenson have acknowledged these limitations.
Reincarnation in the West. During recent decades, many people in the West have
developed an interest in reincarnation. Feature films, such as "The
Reincarnation of Peter Proud", "Dead Again", "Kundun", "Fluke", "What Dreams
May Come" and "Birth", contemporary books by authors such as Carol Bowman and
Vicki Mackenzie, as well as popular songs, deal with reincarnation. Recent
studies have indicated that some Westerners accept the idea of reincarnation
including certain contemporary Christians, modern Neopagans, followers of
Spiritism, Theosophists and students of esoteric philosophies such as Kabbalah,
and Gnostic and Esoteric Christianity as well as of Indian religions.
Demographic survey data from 1999-2002 shows a significant minority of people
from Europe and America, where there is reasonable freedom of thought and
access to ideas but no outstanding recent reincarnationist tradition, believe
we had a life before we were born, will survive death and be born again
physically. The mean for the Nordic countries is 22%. The belief in
reincarnation is particularly high in the Baltic countries, with Lithuania
having the highest figure for the whole of Europe, 44%. The lowest figure is in
East Germany, 12%. In Russia, about one-third believes in reincarnation. The
effect of communist anti-religious ideas on the beliefs of the populations of
Eastern Europe seems to have been rather slight, if any, except apparently in
East Germany. Overall, 22% of respondents in Western Europe believe in
reincarnation. According to a 2005 Gallup poll 20 percent of U.S. adults
believe in reincarnation. Recent surveys by the Barna Group, a Christian
research nonprofit organization, have found that a quarter of U.S. Christians,
including 10 percent of all born-again Christians, embrace the idea. Skeptic
Carl Sagan asked the Dalai Lama what he would do if a fundamental tenet of his
religion (reincarnation) were definitively disproved by science. The Dalai Lama
answered; "if science can disprove reincarnation, Tibetan Buddhism would
abandon reincarnation... but it's going to be mighty hard to disprove
reincarnation." Ian Stevenson reported that belief in reincarnation is held
(with variations in details) by adherents of almost all major religions except
Christianity and Islam. In addition, between 20 and 30 percent of persons in
western countries who may be nominal Christians also believe in reincarnation.
One 1999 study by Walter and Waterhouse reviewed the previous data on the level
of reincarnation belief and performed a set of thirty in-depth interviews in
Britain among people who did not belong to a religion advocating reincarnation.
The authors reported that surveys have found about one fifth to one quarter of
Europeans have some level of belief in reincarnation, with similar results
found in the USA. In the interviewed group, the belief in the existence of this
phenomenon appeared independent of their age, or the type of religion that
these people belonged to, with most being Christians. The beliefs of this group
also did not appear to contain any more than usual of "new age" ideas (broadly
defined) and the authors interpreted their ideas on reincarnation as "one way
of tackling issues of suffering", but noted that this seemed to have little
effect on their private lives. Waterhouse also published a detailed discussion
of beliefs expressed in the interviews. She noted that although most people
"hold their belief in reincarnation quite lightly" and were unclear on the
details of their ideas, personal experiences such as past-life memories and
near-death experiences had influenced most believers, although only a few had
direct experience of these phenomena. Waterhouse analyzed the influences of
second-hand accounts of reincarnation, writing that most of the people in the
survey had heard other people's accounts of past-lives from regression hypnosis
and dreams and found these fascinating, feeling that there "must be something
in it" if other people were having such experiences. Contemporary religious
philosophies. Hinduism. Reincarnation - known as Punarjanma is one of the core
beliefs of Hinduism that is generally accepted by many of its practitioners.
Reincarnation is the natural process of birth, death and rebirth. Hindus
believe that the Jiva or Atman(soul) is intrinsically pure. Howevever, because
of the layers of I-ness and My-ness, the jiva goes through transmigration in
the cycle of births and deaths. Death destroys the physical body, but not the
jiva. The jiva is eternal. It takes on another body with respect to its karmas.
Every karma produces a result which must be experienced either in this or some
future life. As long as the jiva is enveloped in ignorance, it remains attached
to material desires and subject to the cycles of births and deaths (Samsara).
There is no permanent heaven or hell in Hinduism. After services in the
afterlife, the "jiva" enters the karma and rebirth system, reborn as an animal,
a human or a divinity. This reincarnation continues until "mok·π£a", the final
release, is gained. The Bhagavad Gita states; and, According to the Hindu sage
Adi Shankaracharya, the world - as we ordinarily understand it - is like a
dream: fleeting and illusory. To be trapped in samsara (the cycle of birth and
death) is a result of ignorance of the true nature of our existence. It is
ignorance ("avidya") of one's true self that leads to ego-consciousness,
grounding one in desire and a perpetual chain of reincarnation. The idea is
intricately linked to action ("karma"), a concept first recorded in the
Upanishads. Every action has a reaction and the force determines one's next
incarnation. One is reborn through desire: a person "desires" to be born
because he or she wants to enjoy a body, which can never bring deep, lasting
happiness or peace ("ƒÅnanda"). After many births every person becomes
dissatisfied and begins to seek higher forms of happiness through spiritual
experience. When, after spiritual practice (sƒÅdhanƒÅ), a person realizes that
the true "self" is the immortal soul rather than the body or the ego all
desires for the pleasures of the world will vanish since they will seem insipid
compared to spiritual "ƒÅnanda". When all desire has vanished the person will
not be born again. When the cycle of rebirth thus comes to an end, a person is
said to have attained liberation ("moksha"). All schools agree this implies the
cessation of worldly desires and freedom from the cycle of birth and death,
though the exact definition differs. Followers of the Advaita Vedanta school
believe they will spend eternity absorbed in the perfect peace and happiness of
the realization that all existence is One "Brahman" of which the soul is part.
Dvaita schools perform worship with the goal of spending eternity in a
spiritual world or heaven ("loka") in the blessed company of the Supreme Being.
Jainism. Jainism is historically connected with the "sramana" tradition with
which the earliest mentions of reincarnation are associated. Karma forms a
central and fundamental part of Jain faith, being intricately connected to
other of its philosophical concepts like transmigration, reincarnation,
liberation, non-violence ("ahi·πÉsƒÅ") and non-attachment, among others.
Actions are seen to have consequences: some immediate, some delayed, even into
future incarnations. So the doctrine of karma is not considered simply in
relation to one life-time, but also in relation to both future incarnations and
past lives. "UttarƒÅdhyayana-s≈´tra" 3.3‚Äì4 states: "The "jƒ´va" or the soul
is sometimes born in the world of gods, sometimes in hell. Sometimes it
acquires the body of a demon; all this happens on account of its karma. This
"jƒ´va" sometimes takes birth as a worm, as an insect or as an ant." The text
further states (32.7): "Karma is the root of birth and death. The souls bound
by karma go round and round in the cycle of existence." Actions and emotions in
the current lifetime affect future incarnations depending on the nature of the
particular karma. For example, a good and virtuous life indicates a latent
desire to experience good and virtuous themes of life. Therefore, such a person
attracts karma that ensures that his future births will allow him to experience
and manifest his virtues and good feelings unhindered. In this case, he may
take birth in heaven or in a prosperous and virtuous human family. On the other
hand, a person who has indulged in immoral deeds, or with a cruel disposition,
indicates a latent desire to experience cruel themes of life. As a natural
consequence, he will attract karma which will ensure that he is reincarnated in
hell, or in lower life forms, to enable his soul to experience the cruel themes
of life. There is no retribution, judgment or reward involved but a natural
consequences of the choices in life made either knowingly or unknowingly.
Hence, whatever suffering or pleasure that a soul may be experiencing in its
present life is on account of choices that it has made in the past. As a result
of this doctrine, Jainism attributes supreme importance to pure thinking and
moral behavior. The Jain texts postulate four "gatis", that is states-of-
existence or birth-categories, within which the soul transmigrates. The four
"gatis" are: "deva" (demi-gods), "manu·π£ya" (humans), "nƒÅraki" (hell beings)
and "tirya√±ca" (animals, plants and micro-organisms). The four "gatis" have
four corresponding realms or habitation levels in the vertically tiered Jain
universe: demi-gods occupy the higher levels where the heavens are situated;
humans, plants and animals occupy the middle levels; and hellish beings occupy
the lower levels where seven hells are situated. Single-sensed souls, however,
called "nigoda", and element-bodied souls pervade all tiers of this universe.
"Nigodas" are souls at the bottom end of the existential hierarchy. They are so
tiny and undifferentiated, that they lack even individual bodies, living in
colonies. According to Jain texts, this infinity of "nigodas" can also be found
in plant tissues, root vegetables and animal bodies. Depending on its karma, a
soul transmigrates and reincarnates within the scope of this cosmology of
destinies. The four main destinies are further divided into sub-categories and
still smaller sub‚Äìsub categories. In all, Jain texts speak of a cycle of 8.4
million birth destinies in which souls find themselves again and again as they
cycle within "samsara". In Jainism, God has no role to play in an individual's
destiny; one's personal destiny is not seen as a consequence of any system of
reward or punishment, but rather as a result of its own personal karma. A text
from a volume of the ancient Jain canon, "Bhagvati s≈´tra" 8.9.9, links
specific states of existence to specific karmas. Violent deeds, killing of
creatures having five sense organs, eating fish, and so on, lead to rebirth in
hell. Deception, fraud and falsehood leads to rebirth in the animal and
vegetable world. Kindness, compassion and humble character result in human
birth; while austerities and the making and keeping of vows leads to rebirth in
heaven. Each soul is thus responsible for its own predicament, as well as its
own salvation. Accumulated karma represent a sum total of all unfulfilled
desires, attachments and aspirations of a soul. It enables the soul to
experience the various themes of the lives that it desires to experience. Hence
a soul may transmigrate from one life form to another for countless of years,
taking with it the karma that it has earned, until it finds conditions that
bring about the required fruits. In certain philosophies, heavens and hells are
often viewed as places for eternal salvation or eternal damnation for good and
bad deeds. But according to Jainism, such places, including the earth are
simply the places which allow the soul to experience its unfulfilled karma.
Buddhism. The early Buddhist texts make it clear that there is no permanent
consciousness that moves from life to life. Gautama Buddha taught a distinct
concept of rebirth constrained by the concepts of anattƒÅ, that there is no
irreducible ƒÅtman or "self" tying these lives together, which serves as a
contrast to Hinduism, where everything is connected, and in a sense,
"everything is everything." and anicca, that all compounded things are subject
to dissolution, including all the components of the human person and
personality. In Buddhist doctrine the evolving consciousness (Pali:
"samvattanika-vi√±√±ana") or stream of consciousness (Pali: "vi√±√±ana-sotam",
Sanskrit: "vij√±ƒÅna-srotƒÅm, vij√±ƒÅna-santƒÅna", or "citta-santƒÅna") upon
death (or "the dissolution of the aggregates" (P. "khandha"s, S. "skandha"s)),
becomes one of the contributing causes for the arising of a new aggregation. At
the death of one personality, a new one comes into being, much as the flame of
a dying candle can serve to light the flame of another. The consciousness in
the new person is neither identical to nor entirely different from that in the
deceased but the two form a causal continuum or stream. Transmigration is the
effect of "karma" ("kamma") or volitional action. The basic cause is the
abiding of consciousness in ignorance (Pali: "avijja", Sanskrit: "avidya"):
when ignorance is uprooted rebirth ceases. The Buddha's detailed conception of
the connections between action (karma), rebirth and causality is set out in the
twelve links of dependent origination. The empirical, changing self does not
only affect the world about it, it also generates, consciously and
unconsciously, a subjective image of the world in which it lives as 'reality'.
It "tunes in" to a particular level of consciousness which has a particular
range of objects, selectively notices such objects and forms a partial model of
reality in which the ego is the crucial reference point. Vipassana meditation
uses "bare attention" to mind-states without interfering, owning or judging.
Observation reveals each moment as an experience of an individual mind-state
such as a thought, a memory, a feeling or a perception that arises, exists and
ceases. This limits the power of desire, which, according to the second noble
truth of Buddhism, is the cause of suffering ("dukkha"), and leads to "Nirvana"
("nibbana", vanishing (of the self-idea)) in which self-oriented models are
transcended and "the world stops". Thus consciousness is a continuous birth and
death of mind-states: rebirth is the persistence of this process. While all
Buddhist traditions accept rebirth there is no unified view about precisely how
events unfold after death. The Tibetan schools hold to the notion of a bardo
(intermediate state) that can last up to forty-nine days. An accomplished or
realized practitioner (by maintaining conscious awareness during the death
process) can choose to return to samsara, that many lamas choose to be born
again and again as humans and are called "tulkus" or incarnate lamas. The
Sarvastivada school believed that between death and rebirth there is a sort of
limbo in which beings do not yet reap the consequences of their previous
actions but may still influence their rebirth. The death process and this
intermediate state were believed to offer a uniquely favourable opportunity for
spiritual awakening. Theravada Buddhism generally denies there is an
intermediate state, though some early Buddhist texts seem to support it, but
asserts that rebirth is immediate. Some schools conclude that karma continues
to exist and adhere to the person until it works out its consequences. For the
Sautrantika school each act "perfumes" the individual or "plants a seed" that
later germinates. In another view remaining impure aggregates, skandhas, reform
consciousness. Tibetan Buddhism stresses the state of mind at the time of
death. To die with a peaceful mind will stimulate a virtuous seed and a
fortunate rebirth, a disturbed mind will stimulate a non-virtuous seed and an
unfortunate rebirth. The medieval Pali scholar Buddhaghosa labeled the
consciousness that constitutes the condition for a new birth as described in
the early texts "rebirth-linking consciousness" ("patisandhi"). Sant mystics
and Sikhism. Reincarnation remained a tenet of the Sant Bhakti movement and of
related mystics on the frontiers of Islam and Hinduism such as the Baul
minstrels, the Kabir panth and the Sikh Brotherhood. Sikhs believe the soul is
passed from one body to another until Liberation. If we perform good deeds and
actions and remember the Creator, we attain a better life while, if we carry
out evil actions and sinful deeds, we will be incarnated in ‚Äúlower‚Äù life
forms. God may pardon wrongs and release us. Otherwise reincarnation is due to
the law of cause and effect but does not create any caste or differences among
people. Eckankar is a Western presentation of Sant mysticism. It teaches that
the soul is eternal and either chooses an incarnation for growth or else an
incarnation is imposed because of Karma. The soul is perfected through a series
of incarnations until it arrives at "Personal Mastery". African Vodun. The
Yoruba believe in reincarnation within the family. The names Babatunde (father
returns), Yetunde (Mother returns), Babatunji (Father wakes once again) and
Sotunde (The wise man returns) all offer vivid evidence of the Ifa concept of
familial or lineal rebirth. There is no simple guarantee that your grandfather
or great uncle will "come back" in the birth of your child, however. Whenever
the time arrives for a spirit to return to Earth (otherwise known as The
Marketplace) through the conception of a new life in the direct bloodline of
the family, one of the component entities of a person's being returns, while
the other remains in Heaven (Ikole Orun). The spirit that returns does so in
the form of a Guardian Ori. One's Guardian Ori, which is represented and
contained in the crown of the head, represents not only the spirit and energy
of one's previous blood relative, but the accumulated wisdom he or she has
acquired through a myriad of lifetimes. This is not to be confused with one‚Äôs
spiritual Ori, which contains personal destiny, but instead refers to the
coming back to The Marketplace of one's personal blood Ori through one's new
life and experiences. The explanation in The Way of the Orisa was really quite
clear. The Primary Ancestor (which should be identified in your Itefa (Life
Path Reading)) becomes - if you are aware and work with that specific energy -
a ‚Äúguide‚Äù for the individual throughout their lifetime. At the end of that
life they return to their identical spirit self and merge into one, taking the
additional knowledge gained from their experience with the individual as a form
of "payment". Islam. The idea of reincarnation is accepted by a few Muslim
sects, particularly of the (Ghulat), and by other sects in the Muslim world
such as Druzes. Historically, South Asian Isma'ilis performed chantas yearly,
one of which is for sins committed in past lives. (Aga Khan IV) Sinan ibn
Salman ibn Muhammad, also known as Rashid al-Din Sinan, (r. 1162-92) subscribed
to the transmigration of souls as a tenet of the Alawi, who are thought to have
been influenced by Isma'ilism. Modern Sufis who embrace the idea of
reincarnation include Bawa Muhaiyadeen. However Hazrat Inayat Khan has
criticized the idea as unhelpful to the spiritual seeker. Judaism.
Reincarnation is not an essential tenet of traditional Judaism. It is not
mentioned in the Tanakh ("Hebrew Bible"), the classical rabbinical works
(Mishnah and Talmud), or Maimonides' 13 Principles of Faith, though the tale of
the Ten Martyrs in the "Yom Kippur" liturgy, who were killed by Romans to atone
for the souls of the ten brothers of Joseph, is read in Ashkenazi Orthodox
Jewish communities. Medieval Jewish Rationalist philosophers discussed the
issue, often in rejection. However, Jewish mystical texts (the Kabbalah), from
their classic Medieval canon onwards, teach a belief in "Gilgul Neshamot"
(Hebrew for metempsychosis of souls: literally "soul cycle", plural
""gilgulim""). It is a common belief in contemporary Hasidic Judaism, which
regards the Kabbalah as sacred and authoritative, though unstressed in favour
of a more innate psychological mysticism. Other, Non-Hasidic, Orthodox Jewish
groups while not placing a heavy emphasis on reincarnation, do acknowledge it
as a valid teaching. Its popularisation entered modern secular Yiddish
literature and folk motif. The 16th-century mystical renaissance in communal
Safed replaced scholastic Rationalism as mainstream traditional Jewish
theology, both in scholarly circles and in the popular imagination. References
to "gilgul" in former Kabbalah became systemised as part of the metaphysical
purpose of creation. Isaac Luria (the Ari) brought the issue to the centre of
his new mystical articulation, for the first time, and advocated identification
of the reincarnations of historic Jewish figures that were compiled by Haim
Vital in his Shaar HaGilgulim. "Gilgul" is contrasted with the other processes
in Kabbalah of Ibbur ("pregnancy"), the attachment of a second soul to an
individual for (or by) good means, and Dybuk ("possession"), the attachment of
a spirit, demon, etc. to an individual for (or by) "bad" means. In Lurianic
Kabbalah, reincarnation is not retributive or fatalistic, but an expression of
Divine compassion, the microcosm of the doctrine of cosmic rectification of
creation. "Gilgul" is a heavenly agreement with the individual soul,
conditional upon circumstances. Luria's radical system focused on rectification
of the Divine soul, played out through Creation. The true essence of anything
is the divine spark within that gives it existence. Even a stone or leaf
possesses such a soul that "came into this world to receive a rectification". A
human soul may occasionally be exiled into lower inanimate, vegetative or
animal creations. The most basic component of the soul, the nefesh, must leave
at the cessation of blood production. There are four other soul components and
different nations of the world possess different forms of souls with different
purposes. Each Jewish soul is reincarnated in order to fulfil each of the 613
Mosaic commandments that elevate a particular spark of holiness associated with
each commandment. Once all the Sparks are redeemed to their spiritual source,
the Messianic Era begins. Non-Jewish observance of the 7 Laws of Noah assists
the Jewish people, though Biblical adversaries of Israel reincarnate to oppose.
Among the many rabbis who accepted reincarnation are Nahmanides (the Ramban)
and Rabbenu Bahya ben Asher, Levi ibn Habib (the Ralbah), Shelomoh Alkabez,
Moses Cordovero, Moses Chaim Luzzatto, the Baal Shem Tov and later Hasidic
masters, and the Mitnagdic Vilna Gaon and Chaim Volozhin and their school, Ben
Ish Chai of Baghdad and the Baba Sali. Rabbis who have rejected the idea
include Saadia Gaon, David Kimhi, Hasdai Crescas, Joseph Albo, Abraham ibn Daud
and Leon de Modena. Among the Geonim, Hai Gaon argued in favour of "gilgulim".
Native American nations. Reincarnation is an intrinsic part of many Native
American and Inuit traditions. In the now heavily Christian Polar North (now
mainly parts of Greenland and Nunavut), the concept of reincarnation is
enshrined in the Inuit language. The following is a story of human-to-human
reincarnation as told by Thunder Cloud, a Winnebago shaman referred to as T. C.
in the narrative. Here T. C. talks about his two previous lives and how he died
and came back again to this his third lifetime. He describes his time between
lives, when he was ‚Äúblessed‚Äù by Earth Maker and all the abiding spirits and
given special powers, including the ability to heal the sick. T. C.‚Äôs Account
of His Two Reincarnations Christianity. Though the major Christian
denominations reject the concept of reincarnation, a large number of Christians
profess the belief. In a survey by the Pew Forum in 2009, 24% of American
Christians expressed a belief in reincarnation. In a 1981 Survey in Europe 31%
of regular churchgoing Catholics expressed a belief in reincarnation. Geddes
MacGregor, an Episcopalian priest who is Emeritus Distinguished Professor of
Philosophy at the University of Southern California, Fellow of the Royal
Society of Literature, a recipient of the California Literature Award (Gold
Medal, non-fiction category), and the first holder of the Rufus Jones Chair in
Philosophy and Religion at Bryn Mawr, demonstrates in his book "Reincarnation
in Christianity: A New Vision of the Role of Rebirth in Christian Thought",
that Christian doctrine and reincarnation are not mutually exclusive belief
systems. New religious movements. Theosophy. The Theosophical Society draws
much of its inspiration from India. The idea is, according to a recent
Theosophical writer, "the master-key to modern problems," including heredity.
In the Theosophical world-view reincarnation is the vast rhythmic process by
which the soul, the part of a person which belongs to the formless non-material
and timeless worlds, unfolds its spiritual powers in the world and comes to
know itself. It descends from sublime, free, spiritual realms and gathers
experience through its effort to express itself in the world. Afterwards there
is a withdrawal from the physical plane to successively higher levels of
Reality, in death, a purification and assimilation of the past life. Having
cast off all instruments of personal experience it stands again in its
spiritual and formless nature, ready to begin its next rhythmic manifestation,
every lifetime bringing it closer to complete self-knowledge and self-
expression. However it may attract old mental, emotional, and energetic "karma"
patterns to form the new personality. Eckankar. Awareness of past lives,
dreams, and soul travel are spiritual disciplines practiced by students of
Eckankar. Eckankar teaches that each person is Soul, which transcends time and
space. Soul travel is a term specific to Eckankar that refers to a shift in
consciousness. Eckists believe the purpose of being aware of past lives is to
help with understanding personal conditions in the present. Practicing students
of Eckankar can become aware of past lives, through dreams, soul travel, and
spiritual exercises called contemplations. This form of contemplation is the
active, unconditional practice of going within to connect with the "Light and
Sound of God" known as the divine life current or Holy Spirit. Scientology.
Past reincarnation, usually termed "past lives", is a key part of the
principles and practices of the Church of Scientology. Scientologists believe
that the human individual is actually an immortal thetan, or spiritual entity,
that has fallen into a degraded state as a result of past-life experiences.
Scientology auditing is intended to free the person of these past-life traumas
and recover past-life memory, leading to a higher state of spiritual awareness.
This idea is echoed in their highest fraternal religious order, the Sea
Organization, whose motto is "Revenimus" or "We Come Back", and whose members
sign a "billion-year contract" as a sign of commitment to that ideal. L. Ron
Hubbard, the founder of Scientology, does not use the word "reincarnation" to
describe its beliefs, noting that: "The common definition of reincarnation has
been altered from its original meaning. The word has come to mean 'to be born
again in different life forms' whereas its actual definition is 'to be born
again into the flesh of another body.' Scientology ascribes to this latter,
original definition of reincarnation." The first writings in Scientology
regarding past lives date from around 1951 and slightly earlier. In 1960,
Hubbard published a book on past lives entitled "Have You Lived Before This
Life". In 1968 he wrote "Mission into Time", a report on a five-week sailing
expedition to Sardinia, Sicily and Carthage to see if specific evidence could
be found to substantiate L. Ron Hubbard's recall of incidents in his own past,
centuries ago. Meher Baba. Baba, Meher, "Discourses", Volume III, Sufism
Reoriented, 1967, ISBN 1-880619-09-1, p. 96.
