Religion and abortion Many religious traditions have taken a stance on
abortion, and these stances span a broad spectrum as highlighted below.
Buddhism. There is no single Buddhist view concerning abortion. Traditional
sources, such as the Buddhist monastic code, hold that life begins at
conception and that abortion, which would then involve the deliberate
destruction of life, should be rejected. Many Buddhists also subscribe to this
view. Complicating the issue is the Buddhist belief that "life is a continuum
with no discernible starting point". The Dalai Lama has said that abortion is
"negative," but there are exceptions. He said, "I think abortion should be
approved or disapproved according to each circumstance"." Inducing or otherwise
causing an abortion is regarded as a serious matter in the monastic rules
followed by both Theravada and Vajrayana monks; monks can be expelled for
assisting a woman in procuring an abortion. Traditional sources do not
recognize a distinction between early- and late-term abortion, but in Sri Lanka
and Thailand the "moral stigma" associated with an abortion grows with the
development of the fetus. While traditional sources do not seem to be aware of
the possibility of abortion as relevant to the health of the mother, modern
Buddhist teachers from many traditionsÂ â€“ and abortion laws in many Buddhist
countriesÂ â€“ recognize a threat to the life or physical health of the mother
as an acceptable justification for abortion as a practical matter, though it
may still be seen as a deed with negative moral or karmic consequences.
Christianity. Christianity and abortion has a long and complex history though
there is no mention of abortion in the Christian Bible, and there is scholarly
disagreement on how early Christians felt about abortion. Some scholars have
concluded that early Christians took a nuanced stance on what is now called
abortion, and that at different and in separate places early Christians have
taken different stances. Other scholars have concluded that early Christians
considered abortion a sin at all stages; though there is disagreement over
their thoughts on what type of sin it was and how grave a sin it was held to
be, it was seen as at least as grave as sexual immorality. Some early
Christians believed that the embryo did not have a soul from conception, and
consequently opinion was divided as to whether early abortion was murder or
ethically equivalent to murder. Early Christian texts nonetheless condemned
abortion without distinction: Luker mentions the Didache, Clement of
Alexandria, Tertullian, and Saint Basil. Early church councils punished women
for abortions that were combined with other sexual crimes, as well as makers of
abortifacient drugs. Christian philosophers such as Father of the Church
Augustine and Doctor of the Church Aquinas. Augustine affirmed Aristotle's
concepts of ensoulment occurring some time after conception, after which point
abortion was to be considered homicide, while still maintaining the
condemnation of abortion at any time from conception onward. Aquinas reiterated
Aristotle's views of successive souls: vegetative, animal, and rational. This
would be the Catholic Church's position until 1869, when the limitation of
automatic excommunication to abortion of a "formed" fetus was removed, a change
that has been interpreted as an implicit declaration that conception was the
moment of ensoulment. Consequently, in the Middle Ages, a less severe penance
was imposed for the sin of abortion "before foetus has life". Contemporary
Christian denominations have nuanced positions, thoughts and teachings about
abortion, especially in extenuating circumstances. The Catholic Church, the
Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodoxy, and most evangelical Protestants
oppose deliberate abortion as immoral, while allowing what is sometimes called
indirect abortion, namely, an action that does not seek the death of the fetus
as an end or a means but that is followed by the death as a side effect. Some
mainline Protestant denominations such as the Methodist Church, United Church
of Christ, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church of America, among others, are
more permissive of abortion. More generally, some Christian denominations can
be considered pro-life while others may be considered pro-choice. Additionally,
there are sizable minorities in all denominations that disagree with their
denomination's stance on abortion, an example of which is the group Catholics
for a Free Choice. Hinduism. Classical Hindu texts strongly condemn abortion.
The British Broadcasting Corporation writes, "When considering abortion, the
Hindu way is to choose the action that will do least harm to all involved: the
mother and father, the foetus and society." The BBC goes on to state, "In
practice, however, abortion is practiced in Hindu culture in India, because the
religious ban on abortion is sometimes overruled by the cultural preference for
sons. This can lead to abortion to prevent the birth of girl babies, which is
called 'female foeticide'." Hindu scholars and women's rights advocates have
supported bans on sex-selective abortions. Some Hindus support abortion in
cases where the mother's life is at imminent risk or when the fetus has a life
threatening developmental anomaly. Some Hindu theologians and Brahma Kumaris
believe personhood begins at three months and develops through to five months
of gestation, possibly implying permitting abortion up to the third month and
considering any abortion past the third month to be destruction of the soul's
current incarnate body. Islam. Although there are different opinions among
Islamic scholars about when life begins and when abortion is permissible, most
agree that the termination of a pregnancy after 120 daysÂ â€“ the point at
which, in Islam, a fetus is thought to become a living soulÂ â€“ is not
permissible. Several Islamic thinkers contend that in cases prior to four
months of gestation, abortion should be permissible only in instances in which
the mother's life is in danger or in cases of rape. Judaism. Orthodox Jewish
teachings sanction abortion as a means of safeguarding the life of the woman.
While the Reform, Reconstructionist and Conservative movements openly advocate
for the right to a safe and accessible abortion, the Orthodox movement is less
unified on the issue. In Judaism, views on abortion draw primarily upon the
legal and ethical teachings of the Hebrew Bible, the Talmud, the case-by-case
decisions of responsa, and other rabbinic literature. In the modern period,
moreover, Jewish thinking on abortion has responded both to liberal
understandings of personal autonomy as well as Christian opposition to
abortion. Generally speaking, orthodox Jews oppose abortion after the 40th day
with health-related exceptions, and reform and conservative Jews tend to allow
greater latitude for abortion. There are rulings that often appear conflicting
on the matter. The Talmud states that a fetus is not legally a person until it
is delivered. The Torah contains the law that "when men fight and one of them
pushes a pregnant woman and a miscarriage results but no other misfortune, the
one responsible shall be fined...but if other misfortune ensues, the penalty
shall be life (nefesh) for life (nefesh)." (Ex.21:22-25); causing an abortion
on an unwilling woman is thus a crime, but not because the fetus is considered
a person. Sikhism. Although the Sikh code of conduct does not deal directly
with abortion (or indeed many other bioethical issues), it is generally
forbidden in Sikhism because it is said to interfere with the creative work of
God. Despite this theoretical viewpoint, abortion is not uncommon among the
Sikh community in India, and there is growing concern that female fetuses are
being aborted because of the cultural preference for sons. Unitarian
Universalism. The Unitarian Universalist Church strongly supports abortion
rights. In 1978, the Unitarian Universalist Church passed a resolution that
declared, "...[http://www.uua.org/socialjustice/socialjustice/statements/
20271.shtml Right to Choose The Church had released earlier statements in 1963
and 1968 favoring the reform of restrictive abortion laws. Wicca. Although
views differ, most Wiccans consider abortion to be a spiritual decision that
shouldbe free from inteference by the state or politicians.
