Religion in the United States Religion in the United States is characterized by
a diversity of religious beliefs and practices. Various religious faiths have
flourished, as well as perished, in the United States. Religions that span the
country's multicultural immigrant heritage, as well as those founded within the
country, have led the United States to become one of the most religiously
diverse countries in the world. A majority of Americans report that religion
plays a "very important" role in their lives, a proportion unique among
developed nations. The majority of Americans (73%) identify themselves as
Christians and about 20% have no religious affiliation. According to the
American Religious Identification Survey (ARIS), those who identify themselves
as Catholics make up about 25% of the adult population, while "other
Christians" account for another 51%. The same survey says that other religions
(including, for example, Judaism, Buddhism, Islam, and Hinduism) collectively
make up about 4% of the adult population, another 15% of the adult population
claim no religious affiliation, and 5.2% said they did not know, or they
refused to reply. According to another survey, 36 percent of Americans state
that they attend services nearly every week or more. Despite a high level of
religious adherence, only 9% of Americans in a 2008 poll said religion was the
most important thing in their life, compared with 45% who said family was
paramount in their life and 17% who said money and career was paramount.
Overview. From early colonial days, when some English and German settlers came
in search of religious freedom, America has been profoundly influenced by
religion. That influence continues in American culture, social life, and
politics. Several of the original Thirteen Colonies were established by
settlers who wished to practice their own religion within a community of like-
minded people: the Massachusetts Bay Colony was established by English Puritans
(Congregationalists), Pennsylvania by British Quakers, Maryland by English
Catholics, and Virginia by English Anglicans. The text of the First Amendment
to the country's Constitution states that "Congress shall make no law
respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of
the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress
of grievances." It guarantees the free exercise of religion while also
preventing the government from establishing a state religion. The Supreme Court
has also interpreted this as preventing the government from having any
authority in religion. Freedom of religion. Although some New England States
continued to use tax money to fund local Congregational churches into the
1830s, the United States was the first nation to have no official state-
endorsed religion. Modeling the provisions concerning religion within the
Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, the framers of the Constitution
rejected any religious test for office, and the First Amendment specifically
denied the federal government any power to enact any law respecting either an
establishment of religion or prohibiting its free exercise, thus protecting any
religious organization, institution, or denomination from government
interference. The decision was mainly influenced by European Rationalist and
Protestant ideals, but was also a consequence of the pragmatic concerns of
minority religious groups and small states that did not want to be under the
power or influence of a national religion that did not represent them.
Abrahamic religions. Baha'i Faith. The United States has perhaps the second
largest BahÃ¡'Ã­ community. It was established in 1894 by Ibrahim Kheiralla, a
Syrian BahÃ¡'Ã­ immigrant who later left the main group and founded a rival
movement. Christianity. The largest religion in the US is Christianity,
practiced by the majority of the population (76% in 2008). From those queried,
roughly 51.3% of Americans are Protestants, 23.9% are Catholics, 1.7% are
Mormons (the name commonly used to refer to members of The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints), and 1.7% have affiliations with various other
Christian denominations. The Southern Baptist Convention, with over 16 million
adherents, is the largest of more than 200 distinctly named Protestant
denominations. As of 2007, members of Evangelical Churches comprise 26.3% of
the American population, while another 18.1% belong to mainline Protestant
churches, and 6.9% belong to historically black churches. Due to its large
population and history, the United States has numerically more Christians and
Protestants than any other country in the world. Other countries, however, have
higher percentages of Christians and Protestants within their total
populations. Beginning in the 17th century, Northern European peoples
introduced Protestantism. Among Protestants, Anglicans, Baptists, Puritans,
Presbyterians, Lutherans, Quakers, and Moravians were the first to settle in
the US, spreading their faith in the new country. Beginning in the 16th
century, the Spanish (and later the French and English) introduced Catholicism.
From the 19th century to the present, Catholics came to the US in large numbers
due to immigration of the Hispanics/Latinos, Irish, Highland Scots, Italians,
Dutch, Flemish, Polish, French, Portuguese, Hungarians, Germans, Lebanese, and
other ethnic groups. Greek, Ukrainian, Russian, Central and Eastern European,
Middle Eastern, Ethiopian, and South Indian immigrants brought Eastern
Orthodoxy and Oriental Orthodoxy to the United States. These branches of
Christianity have since spread beyond the boundaries of ethnic immigrant
communities and now include multi-ethnic membership and parishes. Since the
foundational settlements, American Christians have developed in their own
paths. During the Great Awakenings interdenominational evangelicalism and
Pentecostalism emerged, along with new Protestant denominations such as
Adventism, and non-denominational movements such as the Restoration Movement
(which over time separated into the Churches of Christ, the Christian churches
and churches of Christ, and the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)), the
Watchtower Bible and Tract Society, commonly referred to as Jehovah's
Witnesses, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, also commonly
referred to as Mormonism. The strength of various sects varies greatly in
different regions of the country, with rural parts of the South (except
Louisiana and the Gulf Coast, and the Hispanic community, which both consist
mainly of Catholics), having many evangelicals but very few Catholics, while
urbanized areas of the north Atlantic states and Great Lakes, as well as many
industrial and mining towns, are heavily Catholic, though still quite mixed,
especially due to the heavily Protestant African-American communities. As of
1990, nearly 72% of the population of Utah was Mormon, as well as 26% of
neighboring Idaho. Lutheranism is most prominent in the Upper Midwest, with
North Dakota having the highest percentage of Lutherans (35% according to a
2001 survey.) Despite its status as the most widespread and influential
religion in the US, Christianity has undergone a continuous relative decline in
demographics. While the absolute number of Christians rose from 1990 to 2008 as
the overall population increased, the actual percentage of Christians dropped
from 86.2% to 76.0%. A nationwide telephone interview of 1,002 adults conducted
by The Barna Group found that 70% of American adults believe that God is "the
all-powerful, all-knowing creator of the universe who still rules it today",
and that 9% of all American adults and 0.5% young adults hold to what the
survey defined as a "biblical worldview". Islam. American Islam effectively
began with the arrival of African slaves. It is estimated that about 10% of
African slaves transported to the United States were Muslim. Most, however,
became Christians, and the United States did not have a significant Muslim
population until the arrival of immigrants from Arabic and East Asian Muslim
areas. Islam gained a higher profile through the Nation of Islam, a religious
group that appealed to black Americans after the 1940s; its prominent converts
included Malcolm X and Muhammad Ali. The first Muslim elected in Congress was
Keith Ellison in 2006, followed by Andre Carson in 2008. Research indicates
that Muslims in the US are generally more assimilated and prosperous than
Muslims in Europe. Surveys also suggest, however, that they are less
assimilated than other American subcultural and religious communities,
especially after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Like other subcultural and
religious communities, the Islamic community has generated its own political
organizations and charity organizations. Judaism. After Christianity, Judaism
is the next largest religious affiliation in the US, though this identification
is not necessarily indicative of religious beliefs or practices. A significant
number of people identify themselves as American Jews on ethnic and cultural
grounds, rather than religious ones. For example, 19% of self-identified
American Jews believe God does not exist. The 2001 ARIS study projected from
its sample that there are about 5.3Â million adults in the American Jewish
population: 2.83Â million adults (1.4% of the U.S. adult population) are
estimated to be adherents of Judaism; 1.08Â million are estimated to be
adherents of no religion; and 1.36Â million are estimated to be adherents of a
religion other than Judaism. ARIS 2008 estimated about 2.68 million people
(1.2%) in the country identify Judaism as their faith. Jews have been present
in what is now the US since the 17th century, though large scale immigration
did not take place until the 19th century, largely as a result of persecutions
in parts of Eastern Europe. The Jewish community in the United States is
composed predominantly of Ashkenazi Jews whose ancestors emigrated from Central
and Eastern Europe. There are, however, small numbers of older (and some
recently arrived) communities of Sephardi Jews with roots tracing back to 15th
century Iberia (Spain, Portugal, and North Africa). There are also Mizrahi Jews
(from the Middle East, Caucasia and Central Asia), as well as much smaller
numbers of Ethiopian Jews, Indian Jews, Kaifeng Jews and others from various
smaller Jewish ethnic divisions. Approximately 25% of the Jewish American
population lives in New York City. According to a 2007 survey conducted by the
Pew Forum on Religion and Public life, of the 1.7% of the U.S. adult population
who are affiliated with the Jewish religion, 43% said they were Reform Jews,
31% said they were Conservative Jews, and 10% said they were Orthodox Jews. A
2009 study estimated the Jewish population (including both those who define
themselves as Jewish by religion and those who define themselves as Jewish in
cultural or ethnic terms) to be between 6.0 and 6.4 million. According to a
study done in 2000 there were an estimated 6.14 million Jewish people in the
country, about 2% of the population. According to the 2001 National Jewish
Population Survey, 4.3Â million American Jewish adults have some sort of strong
connection to the Jewish community, whether religious or cultural. Jewishness
is generally considered an ethnic identity as well as a religious one. Among
the 4.3Â million American Jews described as "strongly connected" to Judaism,
over 80% have some sort of active engagement with Judaism, ranging from
attendance at daily prayer services on one end of the spectrum to attending
Passover Seders or lighting Hanukkah candles on the other. The survey also
discovered that Jews in the Northeast and Midwest are generally more observant
than Jews in the South or West. Reflecting a trend also observed among other
religious groups, Jews in the Northwestern United States are typically the
least observant. Beginning in the 1960's, a worldwide movement among previously
secular Jews, called "baalei teshuva" ("returners", returning to a more
religious, in most cases, Orthodox, style of observance) has had a noticeable
presence in America. It is uncertain how widespread or demographically
important this movement is at present. Among American Jews actively observing
their faith, 33% belong to Orthodox synagogues, 32% are affiliated with the
Conservative tradition, 28% belong to Reform congregations, 3% are
Reconstructionists, and 4% belong to some other tradition. Dharmic religions.
Buddhism. Buddhism entered the US during the 19th century with the arrival of
the first immigrants from Eastern Asia. The first Buddhist temple was
established in San Francisco in 1853 by Chinese Americans. During the late 19th
century Buddhist missionaries from Japan came to the US. During the same time
period, US intellectuals started to take interest in Buddhism. The first
prominent US citizen to publicly convert to Buddhism was Henry Steel Olcott. An
event that contributed to the strengthening of Buddhism in the US was the
Parliament of the World's Religions in 1893, which was attended by many
Buddhist delegates sent from India, China, Japan,Vietnam, Thailand and Sri
Lanka. The early 20th century was characterized by a continuation of tendencies
that had their roots in the 19th century. The second half, by contrast, saw the
emergence of new approaches, and the move of Buddhism into the mainstream and
making itself a mass and social religious phenomenon. Many foreign associations
and teachersâsuch as Soka Gakkai and Tenzin Gyatso (the 14th Dalai Lama for
Tibetan Buddhism)âstarted to organize missionary activities, while US
converts established the first Western-based Buddhist institutions, temples and
worship groups. Estimates of the number of Buddhists in the United States vary
between 0.5% and 0.9%, with 0.7% reported by both the CIA and PEW. Hinduism.
The first time Hinduism entered the US is not clearly identifiable. However,
large groups of Hindus have immigrated from India and other Asian countries
since the enactment of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965. During the
1960s and 1970s Hinduism exercised fascination contributing to the development
of New Age thought. During the same decades the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness (a Vaishnavite Hindu reform organization) was founded in
the US. According to recent surveys, estimates for Hindus in the US suggest
they number nearly 800 thousand people or about 0.4% of the total population.
In 2004 the Hindu American Foundationâa national institution protecting
rights the Hindu community of USâwas founded. Jainism. Adherents of Jainism
first arrived in the United States in the 20th century. The most significant
time of Jain immigration was in the early 1970s. The United States has since
become a center of the Jain Diaspora. The Federation of Jain Associations in
North America is an umbrella organization of local American and Canadian Jain
congregations to preserve, practice, and promote Jainism and the Jain Way of
Life. Sikhism. Around 1900, the state of Punjab of British India was hit hard
by British practices of mercantilism. Some Sikhs emigrated to the United States
to work on farms in California. The first Sikh Gurdwara in America was built in
Stockton, California in 1912. No religion. This group includes atheists,
agnostics and people who describe their religion as ânothing in particular".
âUnaffiliatedâ does not necessarily mean ânon-religious.â Some people
who are unaffiliated with any particular religion express religious beliefs
(such as belief in God or reincarnation) and engage in religious practices
(such as prayer or meditation). Agnosticism, atheism, deism and humanism. A
2001 survey directed by Dr. Ariela Keysar for the City University of New York
indicated that, amongst the more than 100 categories of response, "no religious
identification" had the greatest increase in population in both absolute and
percentage terms. This category included atheists, agnostics, humanists, and
others with no theistic religious beliefs or practices. Figures are up from
14.3Â million in 1990 to 34.2Â million in 2008, representing a proportionate
increase from 8% of the total in 1990 to 15% in 2008. Another nation-wide study
puts the figure of unaffiliated persons at 16.1%. In the United States,
Enlightenment philosophy (which itself was heavily inspired by deist ideals)
played a major role in creating the principle of religious freedom, expressed
in Thomas Jefferson's letters and included in the First Amendment to the United
States Constitution. American Founding Fathers, or Framers of the Constitution,
who were especially noted for being influenced by such philosophy of deism
include Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Cornelius Harnett, Gouverneur
Morris, and Hugh Williamson. Their political speeches show distinct deistic
influence. Other notable Founding Fathers may have been more directly deist.
These include Thomas Paine, James Madison, possibly Alexander Hamilton, and
Ethan Allen, In a 2006 nationwide poll, University of Minnesota researchers
found that despite an increasing acceptance of religious diversity, atheists
were generally distrusted by other Americans, who trusted them less than
Muslims, recent immigrants and other minority groups in "sharing their vision
of American society". They also associated atheists with undesirable attributes
such as criminal behavior, rampant materialism, and cultural elitism. However,
the same study also reported that "The researchers also found acceptance or
rejection of atheists is related not only to personal religiosity, but also to
one's exposure to diversity, education and political orientation--with more
educated, East and West Coast Americans more accepting of atheists than their
Midwestern counterparts." Some surveys have indicated that doubts about the
existence of a god were growing quickly among Americans under 30. On 24 March
2012, American Atheists sponsored the Reason Rally in Washington D.C. This was
followed by the American Atheist Convention at the Bethesda North Marriott and
Convention Center in Bethesda, MD. Organizers called the estimated crowd of
8,000-10,000 the largest-ever gathering of nonbelievers in one place. Others.
Many other religions are represented in the United States, including Shinto,
Caodaism, Thelema, SanterÃ­a, Kemetism, Religio Romana, Kaldanism,
Zoroastrianism, Vodou, and many forms of New Age spirituality. Native American
religions. Native American religions historically exhibited much diversity, and
are often characterized by animism or panentheism. The membership of Native
American religions in the 21st century comprises about 9000 people.
Neopaganism. Neopaganism in the United States is represented by widely
different movements and organizations. The largest Neopagan religion is Wicca,
followed by Neo-Druidism. Other neopagan movements include Germanic
Neopaganism, Celtic Reconstructionist Paganism, Hellenic Polytheistic
Reconstructionism, and Semitic Neopaganism. Druidry. According to the American
Religious Identification Survey (ARIS), there are approximately 30,000 druids
in the United States. Modern Druidism came to North America first in the form
of fraternal Druidic organizations in the nineteenth century and orders such as
the Ancient Order of Druids in America were founded as distinct American groups
as early as 1912. In 1963, the Reformed Druids of North America (RDNA) was
founded by students at Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota. They adopted
elements of Neopaganism into their practices, for instance celebrating the
festivals of the Wheel of the Year. Wicca. Wicca advanced in North America in
the 1960s by Raymond Buckland, an expatriate Briton who visited Gardner's Isle
of Man coven to gain initiation. Universal Eclectic Wicca was popularized in
1969 a diverse membership drawing from both Dianic and British Traditional
Wiccan backgrounds. New Thought Movement. A group of churches which started in
the 1830s in the United States is known under the banner of "New Thought".
These churches share a spiritual, metaphysical and mystical predisposition and
understanding of the Bible and were strongly influenced by the
Transcendentalist movement particularly the work of Emerson. Another antecedent
of this movement was Swedenborgianism, founded on the writings of Emanuel
Swedenborg in 1787. The New Thought concept was named by Emma Curtis Hopkins
("teacher of teachers") after Hopkins broke off from Mary Baker Eddy's Church
of Christ, Scientist. The movement had been previously known as the Mental
Sciences or The Christian Sciences. Unitarian Universalism. Unitarian
Universalists do not share a creed; rather, they are unified by their shared
search for spiritual growth and by the understanding that an individual's
theology is a result of that search and not obedience to an authoritarian
requirement. Taoism. In 2004 there were an estimated 56,000 Taoists in the US.
Taoism was popularied thoughout the world through Tai Chi Chuang, and includes
the practise of martial arts. Government positions. The First Amendment
guarantees both the free practice of religion and the non-establishment of
religion by the federal government (later court decisions have extended that
prohibition to the states). The U.S. Pledge of Allegiance was modified in 1954
to add the phrase "under God", in order to distinguish itself from the state
atheism espoused by the Soviet Union. Various American presidents have often
stated the importance of religion. On February 20, 1955, President Dwight D.
Eisenhower stated that "Recognition of the Supreme Being is the first, the most
basic, expression of Americanism." President Gerald Ford agreed with and
repeated this statement in 1974. Statistics. The U.S. Census does not ask about
religion. Various groups have conducted surveys to determine approximate
percentages of those affiliated with each religious group. Some surveys ask
people to self-identify, while others calculate church memberships. The first
table below represents the ranges that have been found. Attendance. Gallup
International indicates that 41.6% of American citizens report they regularly
attend religious services, compared to 15% of French citizens, 10% of UK
citizens, and 7.5% of Australian citizens. In 2006, an online Harris Poll (they
stated that the magnitude of errors cannot be estimated due to sampling errors,
non-response,etc.; 2,010 U.S. adults were surveyed) found that 26% of those
surveyed attended religious services "every week or more often", 9% went "once
or twice a month", 21% went "a few times a year", 3% went "once a year", 22%
went "less than once a year", and 18% never attend religious services. Church
attendance varies considerably by state and region. In a 2009 Gallup survey,
41.6% of Americans said that they attended church or synagogue once a week or
almost every week. The figures ranged from 63% in Mississippi to 23% in
Vermont. Religion and politics. In August 2010 67% of Americans said religion
is losing influence, compared with 59% who said this in 2006. Majorities of
white evangelical Protestants (79%), while mainline Protestants (67%), Black
Protestants (56%), Catholics (71%), and the religiously unaffiliated (62%) all
agree that religion is losing influence on American life; 53% of the total
public says this is a bad thing while just 10% see it as a good thing.
Politicians frequently discuss their religion when campaigning, and
Fundamentalist and Black Protestants are highly politically active. However, to
keep their status as tax-exempt organizations they must not officially endorse
a candidate. Historically Catholics were heavily Democrats before the 1970s,
while mainline Protestants comprised the core of the Republican Party. Those
patterns have faded awayâCatholics, for example, now split about 50â50.
However, white evangelicals since 1980 have made up a solidly Republican group
that favors conservative candidates. Secular voters are increasingly
Democratic. Joe Biden is the first Catholic vice president. The only Jewish
major party candidate was Joe Lieberman in the Gore-Lieberman campaign of 2000
(although John Kerry and Barry Goldwater both had Jewish ancestry). In 2006
Keith Ellison of Minnesota became the first Muslim elected to Congress; when
re-enacting his swearing-in for photos, he used the copy of the Qur'an once
owned by Thomas Jefferson. A Gallup Poll released in 2007 indicated that 53% of
Americans would refuse to vote for an atheist as president, up from 48% in 1987
and 1999. In fact, there is a single American congressman who is openly non-
theistic, Pete Stark. The 2012 Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney is
Mormon and a member of the The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He
is the former governor of the state of Massachusetts and his father George
Romney was the governor of the state of Michigan. The Romneys were involved in
Mormonism in their states and in the state of Utah. Membership reported by
congregations. Christian bodies. The table below is based mainly on data
reported by individual denominations to the "Yearbook of American and Canadian
Churches," and published in 2011 by the National Council of Churches of Christ
in USA. It only includes religious bodies reporting 60,000 or more members. The
definition of a member is determined by each religious body. ARDA survey. The
Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA) surveyed congregations for their
memberships. Churches were asked for their membership numbers. Adjustments were
made for those congregations that did not respond and for religious groups that
reported only adult membership. ARDA estimates that most of the churches not
responding were black Protestant congregations. Significant difference in
results from other databases include the lower representation of adherents of
1> all kinds (62.7%), 2>Christians (59.9%) 3>Protestants (less than 36%); and
the greater number of unaffiliated (37.3%). ARIS findings regarding self-
identification. The United States government does not collect religious data in
its census. The survey below, the American Religious Identification Survey
(ARIS) 2008, was a random digit-dialed telephone survey of 54,461 American
residential households in the contiguous United States. The 1990 sample size
was 113,723; 2001 sample size was 50,281. Adult respondents were asked the
open-ended question, "What is your religion, if any?" Interviewers did not
prompt or offer a suggested list of potential answers. The religion of the
spouse or partner was also asked. If the initial answer was "Protestant" or
"Christian" further questions were asked to probe which particular
denomination. About one third of the sample was asked more detailed demographic
questions. Religious Self-Identification of the U.S. Adult Population: 1990,
2001, 2008Figures are not adjusted for refusals to reply; investigators suspect
refusals are possibly more representative of "no religion" than any other
group. Ethnicity. The table below shows the religious affiliations among the
ethnicities in the United States, according to the Pew Forum 2007 survey.
People of Black ethnicity were most likely to be part of a formal religion,
with 85% percent being Christians. Protestant denominations make up the
majority of the Christians in the ethnicities.
