Religious cosmology A Religious cosmology (also mythological cosmology) is a
way of explaining the origin, the history and the evolution of the cosmos or
universe based on the religious mythology of a specific tradition. Religious
cosmologies usually include an act or process of creation by a creator deity or
a larger pantheon. Buddhism. In Buddhism, the universe comes into existence
dependent upon the actions (karma) of its inhabitants. Buddhists posit neither
an ultimate beginning or final end to the universe, but see the universe as
something in flux, passing in and out of existence, parallel to an infinite
number of other universes doing the same thing. The Buddhist universe consists
of a large number of worlds which correspond to different mental states,
including passive states of trance, passionless states of purity, and lower
states of desire, anger, and fear. The beings in these worlds are all coming
into existence or being born, and passing out of existence into other states,
or dying. A world comes into existence when the first being in it is born, and
ceases to exist, as such, when the last being in it dies. The universe of these
worlds also is born and dies, with the death of the last being preceding a
universal conflagration that destroys the physical structure of the worlds;
then, after an interval, beings begin to be born again and the universe is once
again built up. Other universes, however, also exist, and there are higher
planes of existence which are never destroyed, though beings that live in them
also come into and pass out of existence. As well as a model of universal
origins and destruction, Buddhist cosmology also functions as a model of the
mind, with its thoughts coming into existence based on preceding thoughts, and
being transformed into other thoughts and other states. Hebrew Bible. The main
Judeo-Christian religious text, the Bible, opens with a story of creation. The
first two chapters of the Book of Genesis describe the creation of heaven and
earth by God (called both Elohim and Yhvh) in six successive days.
Christianity. It is a tenet of Christian faith (Roman Catholic, Orthodox and
Protestant) that God is the creator of all things from nothing, and has made
human beings in the Image of God, who by direct inference is also the source of
the human soul. In Chalcedonian Christology, Jesus is the Word of God, which
was in the beginning and, thus, is uncreated, and hence is God, and
consequently identical with the Creator of the world "ex nihilo". Mormon.
Mormon cosmology draws from Biblical cosmology, but has many unique elements
provided by Latter Day Saint movement founder Joseph Smith, Jr. According to
Mormon cosmology, there was a pre-existence, better described as a pre-mortal
life, in which human spirits were literal children of heavenly parents. Though
their spirits were "created", the essential "intelligence" of these spirits is
considered eternal, and without beginning. During this pre-existence, two plans
were said to have been presented, one championed by Lucifer (Satan) that would
have involved loss of moral agency, and another championed by God the Father.
When his plan was not accepted, Lucifer is said to have rebelled and taken a
third of the hosts of heaven with him to the earth to serve as tempters.
According to a plan of salvation as described by God the Father, Jesus would
create the earth, under the direction of God the Father, as a place where
humanity would be tested. After the resurrection all men and women except
spirits that followed Lucifer and the sons of perdition would be assigned one
of three degrees of glory. Within the highest degree, the Celestial Kingdom,
there are three divisions, and those in the highest of these divisions would
become gods and goddesses through a process called exaltation or "eternal
progression". This would involve having spirit children and populating new
worlds. The Earth's creation, according to Mormon scripture, was not "ex
nihilo", but organized from existing matter. The faith teaches that this earth
is just one of many inhabited worlds, and that there are many governing
heavenly bodies, including a planet or star Kolob which is said to be nearest
the throne of God. According to some Mormon sources, God the Father himself was
once like a human, and lived on a planet with his own higher god. Hinduism. The
Hindu cosmology and timeline is the closest to modern scientific timelines and
even more which might indicate that the Big Bang is not the beginning of
everything but just the start of the present cycle preceded by an infinite
number of universes and to be followed by another infinite number of universes.
It also includes an infinite number of universes at one given time. "Neither
being (sat) nor non-being was as yet. What was concealed? And where? And in
whose protection?â€¦Who really knows? Who can declare it? Whence was it born,
and whence came this creation? The devas (demigods) were born later than this
world's creation, so who knows from where it came into existence? None can know
from where creation has arisen, and whether he has or has not produced it. He
who surveys it in the highest heavens, he alone knows-or perhaps does not
know." (Rig Veda 10. 129) The Rig Veda's view of the cosmos also sees one true
divine principle self-projecting as the divine word, "Vaak", 'birthing' the
cosmos that we know, from the monistic "Hiranyagarbha" or Golden Womb. The
"Hiranyagarbha" is alternatively viewed as Brahma, the creator who was in turn
created by God, or as God (Brahman) himself. The universe is considered to
constantly expand since creation and disappear into a thin haze after billions
of years. An alternate view is that the universe begins to contract after
reaching its maximum expansion limits until it disappears into a fraction of a
millimeter. The creation begins anew after billions of years (Solar years) of
non-existence. The puranic view asserts that the universe is created,
destroyed, and re-created in an eternally repetitive series of cycles. In Hindu
cosmology, a universe endures for about 4,320,000,000 years (one day of Brahma,
the creator or "kalpa") and is then destroyed by fire or water elements. At
this point, Brahma rests for one night, just as long as the day. This process,
named "pralaya" ("Cataclysm"), repeats for 100 Brahma years (311 Trillion, 40
Billion Human Years) that represents Brahma's lifespan. Similarly at a given
time there are an infinite number of Brahma's performing the creation of each
of these universes that are infinite in number. Brahma is the creator but not
necessarily regarded as God in Hinduism. He is mostly regarded as a creation of
God / Brahman. We are currently believed to be in the 51st year of the present
Brahma and so about 156 trillion years have elapsed since He was born as
Brahma. After Brahma's "death", it is necessary that another 100 Brahma years
(311 Trillion, 40 Billion Years) pass until a new Brahma is born and the whole
creation begins anew. This process is repeated again and again, forever.
Brahma's day is divided in one thousand cycles "(Maha Yuga", or the Great
Year). "Maha Yuga", during which life, including the human race appears and
then disappears, has 71 divisions, each made of 14 "Manvantara" (1000) years.
Each "Maha Yuga" lasts for 4,320,000 years. "Manvantara" is Manu's cycle, the
one who gives birth and governs the human race. Each "Maha Yuga" consists of a
series of four shorter "yugas", or ages. The "yugas" get progressively worse
from a moral point of view as one proceeds from one "yuga" to another. As a
result, each "yuga" is of shorter duration than the age that preceded it. The
current "Kali Yuga" (Iron Age) began at midnight 17 February / 18 February in
3102 BC in the proleptic Julian calendar. Space and time are considered to be
"maya" (illusion). What looks like 100 years in the cosmos of Brahma could be
thousands of years in other worlds, millions of years in some other worlds and
311 trillion and 40 billion years for our solar system and earth. Islam. Islam
preaches that God, or "Allah", created the universe, including Earth's physical
environment and human beings. The highest goal is to visualize the cosmos as a
book of symbols for meditation and contemplation for spiritual upliftment or as
a prison from which the human soul must escape to attain true freedom in the
spiritual journey to God. Islam elaborates on cosmology in many instances. A
modern English translation of the Quran describes the creation of the universe
as follows:"We have built the heaven with might, and We are Steadily Expanding
it."51:47 Earlier English translations like for example Ahmed Ali, The Noble
Qur'an, Pickthal, Shakir and Yusuf Ali never specify the expansion as a process
that is still going on so it seems to be an addition after the expansion of the
universe became a generally accepted scientific fact. Below here there are some
other citations from the Quran on cosmology. "Do not the Unbelievers see that
the heavens and the earth were joined together (as one unit of creation),
before we clove them asunder? We made from water every living thing. Will they
not then believe?" 21:30 Yusuf Ali translation "The Day that We roll up the
heavens like a scroll rolled up for books (completed),- even as We produced the
first creation, so shall We produce a new one: a promise We have undertaken:
truly shall We fulfil it." 21:104 Yusuf Ali translation Jainism. Jain cosmology
considers the loka, or universe, as an uncreated entity, existing since
infinity, having no beginning or an end. Jain texts describe the shape of the
universe as similar to a man standing with legs apart and arm resting on his
waist. This Universe, according to Jainism, is narrow at the top, broad at the
middle and once again becomes broad at the bottom. "Some foolish men declare
that a creator made the world. The doctrine that the world was created is ill
advised and should be rejected. If God created the world, where was he before
the creation? If you say he was transcendent then and needed no support, where
is he now? How could God have made this world without any raw material? If you
say that he made this first, and then the world, you are faced with an endless
regression." Chinese mythology. There is a "primordial universe" Wuji
(philosophy), and Hongjun Laozu, water or qi. It transformed into Taiji and
multiplied into everything. The Pangu legend tells a formless chaos coalesced
into a cosmic egg. Pangu emerged (or woke up) and separated Yin from Yang with
a swing of his giant axe, creating the Earth (murky "Yin") and the Sky (clear
"Yang"). To keep them separated, Pangu stood between them and pushed up the
Sky. After Pangu died, he became everything. Serer religion. Serer religion
posits that, "Roog", the creator deity, is the point of departure and
conclusion. As farming people, trees play an important role in Serer religious
cosmology and creation mythology. The Serer high priests and priestesses (the
Saltigues) chart the Star of Sirius known as "Yoonir" in the Serer language and
some of the Cangin languages. This star enables them to give accurate
information as to when Serer farmers should start planting seeds among other
things relevant to Serer lives and Serer country. The Star of "Yoonir" is the
symbol of the universe in Serer cosmology and creation mythology.
