Religious persecution Religious persecution is the systematic mistreatment of
an individual or group of individuals as a response to their religious beliefs
or affiliations or lack thereof. The tendency of societies or groups within
society to alienate or repress different subcultures is a recurrent theme in
human history. Moreover, because a person's religion often determines to a
significant extent his or her morality and personal identity, religious
differences can be significant cultural factors. Religious persecution may be
triggered by religious bigotry (i.e. the denigration of practitioners'
religions other than those of the oppressors) or by the State when it views a
particular religious group as a threat to its interests or security. At a
societal level, this dehumanization of a particular religious group may readily
turn into violence or other forms of persecution. Indeed, in many countries,
religious persecution has resulted in so much violence that it is considered a
human rights problem. Forms. Religious persecution can be considered the
opposite of freedom of religion. Religious persecution may also affect atheists
in that they may be denounced as being amoral or be persecuted by the religious
on the grounds that they are godless. Often it is the alleged persecution of
individuals within a group - in the attempt to maintain their religious
identity, or the exercise of power by an individual or organization - that
causes members of a religious group to suffer. Persecution in this case may
refer to confiscation or destruction of property, incitement to hate, arrest,
imprisonment, beatings, torture, and execution. Denial of civil rights on the
basis of religion is most often described as religious discrimination, rather
than religious persecution. Ethnicity. Other acts of violence, such as war,
torture, and ethnic cleansing not aimed at religion in particular, may
nevertheless take on the qualities of religious persecution when one or more of
the parties involved are characterized by religious homogeneity; an example
being when conflicting populations that belong to different ethnic groups often
also belong to different religions or denominations. The difference between
religious and ethnic identity might sometimes be obscure (see: Ethnoreligious);
cases of genocide of the 20th century cannot be explained in full by citing
religious differences. Nazi antisemitism provides another example of the
contentious divide between ethnic and religious persecution, because Nazi
propaganda tended to construct its image of Jews as race, and de-emphasized
Jews as being defined by their religion. The Shoah made no distinction between
secular Jews, atheistic Jews, orthodox Jews and Jews that had converted to
Christianity. Cases. The descriptive use of the term religious persecution is
rather difficult. Religious persecution has taken place at least since the
antiquity, and has happened in different historical, geographical and social
contexts. Until the 18th century, some groups were nearly universally
persecuted for their views about religion, such as atheists, Jews and
zoroastrians. Early modern England. One period of religious persecution which
has been studied extensively is early modern England, since the rejection of
religious persecution, now common in the Western world, originated there. The
English 'Call for Toleration' was the turning point in the Christian debate on
persecution and toleration, and early modern England stands out to the
historians as a time in which literally "hundreds of books and tracts were
published either for or against religious toleration." The most ambitious
chronicle of that time is W.K.Jordan's magnum opus "The Development of
Religious Toleration in England, 1558-1660" (four volumes, published 1932-
1940). Jordan wrote as the threat of fascism rose in Europe, and this work is
seen as a defense of the fragile values of humanism and tolerance. More recent
introductions to this period are "Persecution and Toleration in Protestant
England, 1558â€“1689" (2000) by John Coffey and "Charitable hatred. Tolerance
and intolerance in England, 1500-1700" (2006) by Alexandra Walsham. To
understand why religious persecution has occurred, historians like Coffey "pay
close attention to what the persecutors said they were doing." Ecclesiastical
dissent and civil tolerance. No religion is free from internal dissent,
although the degree of dissent that is tolerated within a particular religious
organization can strongly vary. This degree of diversity tolerated within a
particular church is described as "ecclesiastical tolerance", and is one form
of religious toleration. However, when people nowadays speak of religious
tolerance, they most often mean "civil tolerance", which refers to the degree
of religious diversity that is tolerated within the state. In the absence of
civil toleration, someone who finds himself in disagreement with his
congregation doesn't have the option to leave and chose a different faith -
simply because there is only one recognized faith in the country (at least
officially). In modern western civil law any citizen may join and leave a
religious organization at will; In western societies, this is taken for
granted, but actually, this legal separation of Church and State only started
to emerge a few centuries ago. In the Christian debate on persecution and
toleration, the notion of civil tolerance allowed Christian theologians to
reconcile Jesus' commandment to love one's enemies with other parts of the New
Testament that are rather strict regarding dissent within the church. Before
that, theologians like Joseph Hall had reasoned from the ecclesiastical
intolerance of the early Christian church in the New Testament to the civil
intolerance of the Christian state. Religious uniformity in early modern
Europe. By contrast to the notion of civil tolerance, in early modern Europe
the subjects were required to attend the state church; This attitude can be
described as "territoriality" or "religious uniformity", and its underlying
assumption is brought to a point by a statement of the Anglican theologian
Richard Hooker: "There is not any man of the Church of England but the same man
is also a member of the commonwealth; nor any man a member of the commonwealth,
which is not also of the Church of England." Before a vigorous debate about
religious persecution took place in England (starting in the 1640s), for
centuries in Europe, religion had been tied to territory. In England there had
been several Acts of Uniformity; in continental Europe the Latin phrase "cuius
regio, eius religio" had been used. Persecution meant that the state was
committed to secure religious uniformity by coercive measures, as eminently
obvious in a statement of Roger L'Estrange: "That which you call persecution, I
translate Uniformity". However, in the 17th century writers like John Locke,
Richard Overton and Roger William broke the link between territory and faith,
which eventually resulted in a shift from territoriality to religious
voluntarism. It was Locke, who, in his Letter Concerning Toleration, defined
the state in purely secular terms: ""The commonwealth seems to me to be a
society of men constituted only for the procuring, preserving, and advancing
their own civil interests."" Concerning the church, he went on: ""A church,
then, I take to be a voluntary society of men, joining themselves together of
their own accord."" With this treatise, John Locke laid one of the most
important intellectual foundations of the separation of church and state, which
ultimately led to the secular state. Persecution for heresy and blasphemy. The
persecution of beliefs that are deemed schismatic is one thing; the persecution
of beliefs that are deemed heretic or blasphemous is another. Although a public
disagreement on secondary matters might be serious enough, it has often only
led to religious discrimination. A public renouncement of core elements of a
religious doctrine under the same circumstances, on the other hand, would have
put one far greater danger. While a dissenter from its official Church was only
faced with fines and imprisonment in Protestant England, six people were
executed for heresy or blasphemy during the reign of Elizabeth I, and two more
in 1612 under James I. Similarly, heretical sects like Cathars, Waldensians and
Lollards were brutally suppressed in western Europe, while, at the same time,
Catholic Christians lived side-by-side with 'schismatic' Orthodox Christians
after the East-West Schism in the borderland of eastern Europe. Persecution for
political reasons. More than 300 Roman Catholics were put to death by English
governments between 1535 and 1681 for treason, thus for secular than religious
offenses. In 1570, Pope Pius V had issued the bull "Regnans in Excelsis", which
absolved Catholics from their obligations to the government. This dramatically
worsened the situation of the Catholics in England. English governments
continued to fear Popish Plot. An English act of government from the year 1585
declared that the purpose of Jesuit missionaries who had come to Britain was
"to stir up and move sedition, rebellion and open hostility". Consequently
Jesuit priests like Saint John Ogilvie were hanged. This somehow contrasts with
the image of the Elizabethan era as the time of William Shakespeare, but
compared to the antecedent Marian Persecutions there is an important difference
to consider. Mary I had been motivated by a religious zeal to purge heresy from
her land, and during her short reign from 1553 to 1558 about 290 Protestants
had been burned at the stake for heresy, whereas Elizabeth I of England "acted
out of fear for the security of her realm." Contemporary. Although his book was
written before the September 11 attacks, John Coffey explicitly compares the
English fear of a Popish Plot with the contemporary Islamophobia in the Western
world. Among the Muslims imprisoned in the Guantanamo Bay detention camp there
also were Mehdi Ghezali and Murat Kurnaz who could not have been found to have
any connections with terrorism, but had traveled to Afghanistan and Pakistan
because of their religious interests. Early persecution of and by monotheisms.
According to Jewish tradition, monotheistic Judaism arose in Egypt under the
direction of Moses. Among the Ten Commandments of that religion was one that
forbade the worship of any other god than Yahweh; this led to conflict when
Imperial Rome extended its reach into the Middle East. Early Christianity also
came into conflict with the Roman Empire, and may have been more threatening to
the established polytheistic order than had been Judaism, because of the
importance of evangelism in Christianity. Under Nero, the Jewish exemption from
the requirement to participate in public cults was lifted and Rome began to
actively persecute monotheists. This persecution ended in 313 C.E. with the
Edict of Milan, and Christianity was made the official religion of the empire
in 380 C.E.. By the eighth century Christianity had attained a clear ascendancy
across Europe and neighboring regions, and a period of consolidation began
marked by the pursuit of heretics, heathens, Jews, Muslims, and various other
religious groups. Persecutions of Jews. Major component of Jewish history,
persecutions have been committed by Seleucids, ancient Greeks, Christians
(Catholics, Protestants and Orthodox), Muslims, Nazis, etc. Some of the most
important events constituting this history include the 1066 Granada massacre,
the Persecution of Jews in the First Crusade (by Catholics but against papal
orders, see also : Sicut Judaeis), the Alhambra Decree after the Reconquista
and the creation of the Spanish Inquisition, the publication of On the Jews and
Their Lies by Martin Luther which initiated the Protestant antisemitism and
strengthened German antisemitism, the pogroms and the Holocaust. Persecutions
of atheists. Used before the 18th century as an insult, atheism was punishable
by death in ancient Greece, in ancient Israel, in Christian countries during
the Middle Ages and in Muslim countries. Today, Atheism is a crime in Iran,
Saudi Arabia, Indonesia, Pakistan and some other Muslim countries. Persecution
of minorities in Islamic lands. Victims of Muslim persecution include Jews,
Christians, Zoroastrians, Hindus, Buddhists, BahÃ¡'Ã­s, and Atheists with
detailed description in articles according to victim classification. Muslim
persecution of fellow Muslims include as victims Shia, Sufi, and Alevis. State
atheism. State atheism has been defined by David Kowalewski as the official
"promotion of atheism" by a government, typically by active suppression of
religious freedom and practice. It is a misnomer referring to a government's
anti-clericalism, which opposes religious institutional power and influence,
real or alleged, in all aspects of public and political life, including the
involvement of religion in the everyday life of the citizen. State atheism was
first practised during a brief period in Revolutionary France and repeated only
in Revolutionary Mexico and some communist states. The Soviet Union had a long
history of state atheism, in which social success largely required individuals
to profess atheism, stay away from churches and even vandalize them; this
attitude was especially militant during the middle Stalinist era from 1929-
1939. The Soviet Union attempted to suppress religion over wide areas of its
influence, including places like central Asia, and the Socialist People's
Republic of Albania under Enver Hoxha went so far as to officially ban all
religious practices. BahÃ¡'Ã­s in Iran. The BahÃ¡'Ã­s are Iran's largest
religious minority, and Iran is the location of one of the largest BahÃ¡'Ã­
populations in the world. BahÃ¡'Ã­s in Iran have allegedly been subject to
unwarranted arrests, false imprisonment, beatings, torture, unjustified
executions, confiscation and destruction of property owned by individuals and
the BahÃ¡'Ã­ community, denial of employment, denial of government benefits,
denial of civil rights and liberties, and denial of access to higher education.
More recently, in the later months of 2005, an intensive anti-BahÃ¡'Ã­ campaign
was conducted by Iranian newspapers and radio stations. The state-run and
influential Kayhan newspaper, whose managing editor is appointed by Iran's
supreme leader, Ayatollah Khamenei ran nearly three dozen articles defaming the
BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith. Furthermore, a confidential letter sent on October 29, 2005 by
the Chairman of the Command Headquarters of the Armed Forced in Iran states
that the Supreme Leader of Iran, Ayatollah Khamenei has instructed the Command
Headquarters to identify people who adhere to the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith and to monitor
their activities and gather any and all information about the members of the
BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith. The letter was brought to the attention of the international
community by Asma Jahangir, the Special Rapporteur of the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights on freedom of religion or belief, in a March 20,
2006 press release [http://www.unhchr.ch/huricane/huricane.nsf/view01/
5E72D6B7B624AABBC125713700572D09?opendocument. In the press release the Special
Rapporteur states that she "is highly concerned by information she has received
concerning the treatment of members of the BahÃ¡'Ã­ community in Iran." She
further states that "The Special Rapporteur is concerned that this latest
development indicates that the situation with regard to religious minorities in
Iran is, in fact, deteriorating." [http://www.unhchr.ch/huricane/huricane.nsf/
view01/5E72D6B7B624AABBC125713700572D09?opendocument]. Persecution of the
Serers. Persecution of the Serer people of Senegal, the Gambia and Mauritania
is multifaceted, and include both religious and ethnic elements. Religious and
ethnic persecution of the Serer people dates back to the 11th century when King
War Jabi usurped the throne of Tekrur (part of present-day Senegal) in 1030,
and by 1035, introduced Sharia law and forced his subjects to submit to Islam.
With the assistance of his son (Leb), their Almoravid allies and other African
ethnic groups who have embraced Islam, the Muslim coalition army launched
jihads against the Serer people of Tekrur who refused to abandon Serer religion
in favour of Islam. The number of Serer deaths are unknown, but it triggered
the exodus of the Serers of Tekrur to the south following their defeat, where
they were granted asylum by the Serer Lamanic Class. Persecution of the Serer
people continued from the medieval era to the 19th century, resulting in the
Battle of Fandane-Thiouthioune. From the 20th to the 21st centuries,
persecution of the Serers is less obvious, nevertheless they are the object of
scorn and prejudice.
