Religious denomination A religious denomination is a subgroup within a religion
that operates under a common name, tradition, and identity. The term describes
various Christian denominations (for example, Eastern Orthodox, Anglicanism,
and the many varieties of Protestantism). The term also describes the four
branches of Judaism (Orthodox, Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionist), and
describes the two main branches of Islam (Sunni and Shia). In Hinduism, the
major deity or philosophical belief identifies a denomination, which also
typically has distinct cultural and religious practices. The major
denominations include Shaivism, Shaktism, Vaishnavism and Smartism. Formation
of denominations. Denominations often form slowly over time for many reasons.
Due to historical accidents of geography, culture and influence between
different groups, members of a given religion slowly begin to diverge in their
views. Over time members of a religion may find that they have developed
significantly different views on theology, philosophy, religious pluralism,
ethics and religious practices and rituals. Consequently, different
denominations may eventually form. In other cases, denominations form very
rapidly, either resulting from a split or schism in an existing denomination,
or if people share an experience of spiritual revival or spiritual awakening,
and choose to form a new denomination based on that new experience or
understanding. Examples. An example within Christianity is the Mennonite and
the Church of the Brethren denominations. Both denominations are similar in
their beliefs, yet they are unique because their traditions were influenced by
different founders (Menno Simons and Alexander Mack respectively). Their
division is administrative, and there is much communication and interaction
between them. Since its founding, the Mennonite denomination has split into a
number of smaller Mennonite denominations, due to geography, social and
theological differences. Another example is Lutheranism. When Martin Luther
protested Catholic practices, he and his followers were persecuted by the Roman
Catholic Church as heretics. This led to the formation of alternative
communities of practice that became known as "Lutheran" or "Protestant". Over
time, the various communities who considered themselves Lutheran identified
with one another and through various definitions of "Lutheran" practices (five
solas, priesthood of all believers) the conglomerations of churches formed
concrete denominations based on a common school of thought related to these
practices. Even today, there are major ideological differences between
different denominations of Lutherans, although there may be significant overlap
between their beliefs. Multi-denominational. May refer to a religious event
that includes several religious denominations from not always related religious
groups. Many civic events include religious portions led by representatives
from several religious denominations to be as inclusive or representational as
possible of the expected population or audience. A recent example is the Sunday
thanksgiving mass at Campamento Esperanza (English: Camp Hope), Chile, where
services were led by both a Roman Catholic priest and by an Evangelical
preacher during the Chilean 2010 Copiap√≥ mining accident. Chaplains,
frequently ordained clergy of any religion, are often assigned to secular
organizations to provide spiritual support to its members who may belong to any
of many different religions or denominations. Many of these chaplains,
particularly those serving with the military or other large secular
organizations, are specifically trained to minister to members of many
different faiths, even faiths with opposing religious ideology from that of the
chaplain's faith. Military organizations that do not have enough members
representing several smaller but related denominations will routinely hold
multi-denominational religious services, often called "protestant" Sunday
services, so minority protestant denominations are not left out or unserved.
