Requiem A Requiem or Requiem Mass, also known as Mass for the dead (Latin:
"Missa pro defunctis") or Mass of the dead (Latin: "Missa defunctorum"), is a
Mass celebrated for the repose of the soul or souls of one or more deceased
persons, using a particular form of the Roman Missal. It is frequently, but not
necessarily, celebrated in the context of a funeral. Musical settings of the
propers of the Requiem Mass are also called Requiems, and the term has
subsequently been applied to other musical compositions associated with death
and mourning, even when they lack religious or liturgical relevance. The term
is also used for similar ceremonies outside the Catholic Church, especially in
the Anglo-Catholic branch of Anglicanism and in certain Lutheran churches. A
comparable service, with a wholly different ritual form and texts, exists in
the Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches, as well as in the Methodist
Church. The Mass and its settings draw their name from the introit of the
liturgy, which begins with the words ""Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine""¬ ‚Äì
"Grant them eternal rest, O Lord". ("Requiem" is the accusative singular form
of the Latin noun "requies", "rest, repose".) The Roman Missal as revised in
1970 employs this phrase as the first entrance antiphon among the formulas for
Masses for the dead, and it remains in use to this day. Liturgical rite. In
earlier forms of the Roman Rite, some of which are still in use, a Requiem Mass
differs in several ways from the usual Mass in that form. Some parts that were
of relatively recent origin, including some that have been excluded in the 1970
revision, are omitted. Examples are the psalm "Iudica" at the start of Mass,
the prayer said by the priest before reading the Gospel (or the blessing of the
deacon, if a deacon reads it), and the first of the two prayers of the priest
for himself before receiving Communion. Other omissions include the use of
incense at the Introit and the Gospel, the kiss of peace, lit candles held by
acolytes when a deacon chants the Gospel, and blessings. There is no Gloria in
excelsis Deo and no recitation of the Creed; the Alleluia chant before the
Gospel is replaced by a Tract, as in Lent; and the "Agnus Dei" is altered. "Ite
missa est" is replaced with "Requiescant in pace" (May they rest in peace); the
"Deo gratias" response is replaced with "Amen". Black is the obligatory
liturgical colour of the vestments in the earlier forms, while the later form
allows a choice between black and violet, and in some countries, such as
England and Wales, white. The sequence" Dies Ir√¶", recited or sung between the
Tract and the Gospel, is an obligatory part of the Requiem Mass in the earlier
forms. As its opening words, "Dies irae" (Day of wrath), indicate, this poetic
composition speaks of the Day of Judgment in fearsome terms; it then appeals to
Jesus for mercy. Celebrations of the Requiem Mass were sometimes referred to as
"black Masses", from the colour of the vestments worn by the priest. This term
has no connection with the Satanist ritual of the same name. Post Vatican II.
In the liturgical reforms of the mid-20th century in the Roman Catholic Church
following the Second Vatican Council, there was a significant shift in the
funeral rites used by the Church. The emphasis on sorrow and grief was to be
replaced by one which also includes the whole community's worship of God and in
which the deceased is entrusted to God's love, based on trust in the salvific
value of the Passion, Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ. The term "Requiem
Mass" was often replaced by the term Mass of the Resurrection or Mass of
Christian Burial. In line with this shift, the use of black vestments was made
optional (and has all but disappeared by the 21st century), with the new
preference being for white, the color of joy associated with Easter, or purple,
for a muted version of mourning. The texts used for the service made a similar
change, with the overall theme of the service to be a proclamation of the
promise of eternal life made by Jesus. Music. The Requiem Mass is notable for
the large number of musical compositions that it has inspired, including
settings by Mozart, Verdi, Dvo≈ô√°k, Faur√© and Durufl√©. Originally, such
compositions were meant to be performed in liturgical service, with monophonic
chant. Eventually the dramatic character of the text began to appeal to
composers to an extent that they made the requiem a genre of its own, and the
compositions of composers such as Verdi are essentially concert pieces rather
than liturgical works. The following are the texts that have been set to music.
Introit.   Kyrie eleison.   This is Greek (ŒöœçœÅŒπŒµ ·ºêŒªŒ≠Œ∑œÉŒøŒΩ,
ŒßœÅŒπœÉœÑ·Ω≤ ·ºêŒªŒ≠Œ∑œÉŒøŒΩ, ŒöœçœÅŒπŒµ ·ºêŒªŒ≠Œ∑œÉŒøŒΩ). Traditionally, each
utterance is sung three times. Gradual.   Tract.   Sequence. A sequence is a
liturgical poem sung, when used, after the Tract (or Alleluia, if present). The
sequence employed in the Requiem, "Dies Irae", attributed to Thomas of Celano
(c. 1200¬ ‚Äì c. 1260‚Äì1270), has been called "the greatest of hymns", worthy
of "supreme admiration". The Latin text below is taken from the Requiem Mass in
the 1962 Roman Missal. The first English version below, translated by William
Josiah Irons in 1849, replicates the rhyme and metre of the original. The
second English version is a more formal equivalence. Offertory.     Sanctus.
Communion.   As mentioned above, there is no "Gloria", "Alleluia" or Credo in
these musical settings. Pie Jesu. Some extracts too have been set independently
to music, such as "Pie Iesu" in the settings of Dvo≈ô√°k, Faur√©, Durufl√© and
John Rutter. The "Pie Jesu" consists of the final words of the "Dies Irae"
followed by the final words of the "Agnus Dei".   Musical Requiem settings
sometimes include passages from the "Absolution at the bier" ("Absolutio ad
feretrum") or "Commendation of the dead person" (referred to also as the
Absolution of the dead), which in the case of a funeral, follows the conclusion
of the Mass. Libera Me.   In paradisum.   History of musical compositions. For
many centuries the texts of the requiem were sung to Gregorian melodies. The
Requiem by Johannes Ockeghem, written sometime in the later half of the 15th
century, is the earliest surviving polyphonic setting. There was a setting by
the elder composer Dufay, possibly earlier, which is now lost: Ockeghem's may
have been modelled on it. Many early compositions employ different texts that
were in use in different liturgies around Europe before the Council of Trent
set down the texts given above. The requiem of Brumel, circa 1500, is the first
to include the "Dies Ir√¶". In the early polyphonic settings of the Requiem,
there is considerable textural contrast within the compositions themselves:
simple chordal or fauxbourdon-like passages are contrasted with other sections
of contrapuntal complexity, such as in the Offertory of Ockeghem's Requiem. In
the 16th century, more and more composers set the Requiem mass. In contrast to
practice in setting the Mass Ordinary, many of these settings used a cantus-
firmus technique, something which had become quite archaic by mid-century. In
addition, these settings used less textural contrast than the early settings by
Ockeghem and Brumel, although the vocal scoring was often richer, for example
in the six-voice Requiem by Jean Richafort which he wrote for the death of
Josquin des Prez. Other composers before 1550 include Pedro de Escobar, Antoine
de F√©vin, Crist√≥bal Morales, and Pierre de La Rue; that by La Rue is probably
the second oldest, after Ockeghem's. Over 2,000 Requiem compositions have been
composed to the present day. Typically the Renaissance settings, especially
those not written on the Iberian Peninsula, may be performed "a cappella" (i.e.
without necessary accompanying instrumental parts), whereas beginning around
1600 composers more often preferred to use instruments to accompany a choir,
and also include vocal soloists. There is great variation between compositions
in how much of liturgical text is set to music. Most composers omit sections of
the liturgical prescription, most frequently the Gradual and the Tract. Faur√©
omits the "Dies ir√¶", while the very same text had often been set by French
composers in previous centuries as a stand-alone work. Sometimes composers
divide an item of the liturgical text into two or more movements; because of
the length of its text, the "Dies ir√¶" is the most frequently divided section
of the text (as with Mozart, for instance). The "Introit" and "Kyrie", being
immediately adjacent in the actual Roman Catholic liturgy, are often composed
as one movement. Musico-thematic relationships among movements within a Requiem
can be found as well. Requiem in concert. Beginning in the 18th century and
continuing through the 19th, many composers wrote what are effectively concert
works, which by virtue of employing forces too large, or lasting such a
considerable duration, prevent them being readily used in an ordinary funeral
service; the requiems of Gossec, Berlioz, Verdi, and Dvo≈ô√°k are essentially
dramatic concert oratorios. A counter-reaction to this tendency came from the
Cecilian movement, which recommended restrained accompaniment for liturgical
music, and frowned upon the use of operatic vocal soloists. Requiem in other
rites and churches. Requiem is also used to describe any sacred composition
that sets to music religious texts which would be appropriate at a funeral, or
to describe such compositions for liturgies other than the Roman Catholic Mass.
Among the earliest examples of this type are the German settings composed in
the 17th century by Heinrich Sch√ºtz and Michael Praetorius, whose works are
Lutheran adaptations of the Roman Catholic requiem, and which provided
inspiration for the mighty "German Requiem" by Brahms. Eastern Christian rites.
In the Eastern Orthodox and Greek-Catholic Churches, the requiem is the fullest
form of memorial service (, Slavonic: "–ûp–µl–æ"). The normal memorial service
is a greatly abbreviated form of Matins, but the Requiem contains all of the
psalms, readings, and hymns normally found in the All-Night Vigil (which
combines the Canonical Hours of Vespers, Matins and First Hour), providing a
complete set of propers for the departed. The full requiem will last around
three and a half hours. In this format it more clearly represents the original
concept of "parastas", which means literally, "standing throughout (the
night)." Often, there will be a Divine Liturgy celebrated the next morning with
further propers for the departed. Because of their great length, a full Requiem
is rarely served. However, at least in the Russian liturgical tradition, a
Requiem will often be served on the eve before the Glorification (canonization)
of a saint, in a special service known as the "Last Panikhida." Modern
treatments. In the 20th century the requiem evolved in several new directions.
The genre of War Requiem is perhaps the most notable, which comprise of
compositions dedicated to the memory of people killed in wartime. These often
include extra-liturgical poems of a pacifist or non-liturgical nature; for
example, the "War Requiem" of Benjamin Britten juxtaposes the Latin text with
the poetry of Wilfred Owen, Krzysztof Penderecki's "Polish Requiem" includes a
traditional Polish hymn within the sequence, and Robert Steadman's "Mass in
Black" intersperses environmental poetry and prophecies of Nostradamus.
Holocaust Requiem may be regarded as a specific subset of this type. The "World
Requiem" of John Foulds was written in the aftermath of the First World War and
initiated the Royal British Legion's annual festival of remembrance. Recent
requiem works by Taiwanese composers Tyzen Hsiao and Fan-Long Ko follow in this
tradition, honouring victims of the 2-28 Incident and subsequent White Terror.
Another recent requiem composed by Hong Kong composer Man-Ching Donald Yu, in
remembrance of the victims of the 2008 Sichuan Earthquake. Lastly, the 20th
century saw the development of the secular Requiem, written for public
performance without specific religious observance, such as Frederick Delius's
"Requiem", completed in 1916 and dedicated to "the memory of all young Artists
fallen in the war", and Dmitry Kabalevsky's "Requiem" (Op. 72¬ ‚Äì 1962), a
setting of a poem written by Robert Rozhdestvensky especially for the
composition. Herbert Howells's unaccompanied "Requiem" uses Psalm 23 ("The Lord
is my shepherd"), Psalm 121 ("I will lift up mine eyes"), "Salvator mundi" ("O
Saviour of the world," in English), "Requiem aeternam" (two different
settings), and "I heard a voice from heaven." Some composers have written
purely instrumental works bearing the title of "requiem", as famously
exemplified by Britten's "Sinfonia da Requiem". Hans Werner Henze's "Das Flo√ü
der Medusa", written in 1968 as a requiem for Che Guevara, is properly speaking
an oratorio; Henze's Requiem is instrumental but retains the traditional Latin
titles for the movements. Igor Stravinsky's "Requiem canticles" mixes
instrumental movements with segments of the "Introit," "Dies irae," "Pie Jesu,"
and "Libera me." Other composers. Requiem by language (other than Latin).
English with Latin Estonian German French, Greek, with Latin French, English,
German with Latin Japanese and Latin Polish and Latin Russian Taiwanese
Nonlinguistic Annual requiems. This memorial has been taking place since 1914.
In the early years it was covered every year by British Path√© News.
