Kenneth E. Hagin Kenneth Erwin Hagin (August 20, 1917 - September 19, 2003) was
an influential American Pentecostal preacher. He is often referred to as the
"father" (or "granddaddy") of the "Word of Faith" movement. Many of his
followers often refer to him affectionately as "Dad Hagin", "Pappa Hagin" and
more commonly "Brother Hagin". Biography. Personal life. Kenneth E. Hagin was
born in McKinney, Texas, the son of Lillie Viola Drake Hagin and Jess Hagin. He
was married to Oretha Rooker. They had two children, a son named Kenneth Wayne
Hagin, who is presently the pastor of Rhema Bible Church and President of
Kenneth Hagin Ministries, and a daughter named Patricia Harrison. His most
quoted scripture was Bible Beginning to preach. According to Hagin's testimony,
he was sickly as a child, suffering from a deformed heart and what was believed
to be an incurable blood disease. He related that he was not expected to live
and became bedfast at age 15. In April 1933 during a dramatic conversion
experience, he reported dying three times in 10 minutes, each time seeing the
horrors of hell and then returning to life. He also claimed that he was raised
from a deathbed on August 8, 1934 by "the revelation of faith in God's Word"
(Kenneth Hagin, "I Went to Hell" and "What Faith Is"). Two years later he
preached his first sermon as the pastor of a small community church in Roland,
Texas, from McKinney. During the next twelve years he pastored five Assemblies
of God churches in Texas: in the cities of Tom Bean, Farmersville (twice),
Talco, Greggton, Texas, and Van. Establishing a faith-based organization. In
1949, he began an itinerant ministry as a Bible teacher and evangelist. Hagin
was at this time also given full admission to the Full Gospel Business Men's
Fellowship International (FGBMFI) which had been established in 1951. He was
also a part of the Voice of Healing Revival in the U.S. in the 40s and 50s
together with Oral Roberts, Gordon Lindsay and T. L. Osborn. In 1963, Kenneth
E. Hagin Evangelistic Association was incorporated, and the offices of the
ministry moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma in 1966. That same year, he taught for the
first time on radio â€” on KSKY in Dallas. In 1967, he began a regular radio
broadcast that continues today as Faith Seminar of the Air. Teaching by his
son, Rev. Kenneth Wayne Hagin, is also heard on the program. In 1974, Hagin
founded RHEMA Bible Training Center USA, which now has training centers in
fourteen countries and has 30,000 alumni. In 1979, he founded the Prayer and
Healing Center there to provide a place for the sick to come to "have the
opportunity to build their faith." Its Healing School continues to be held free
of charge twice daily on the RHEMA campus. Theology. Physical Healing: It is
always God's will that a believer be physically healed of any sickness or
infirmity. (; ). Hagin based the belief of healing for all on the understanding
that healing for the physical body was included in redemption. If redemption
was available to all, then healing would also be available to all. ("Word of
Faith" magazine, 6/90; 7/92; 8/92; 12/92, Kenneth Hagin, "Redeemed from
Poverty, Sickness and Death" and "Healing Belongs to Us"). Material Wealth: It
is always God's will that every believer be 'financially blessed' through
faith. Although Hagin emphasized that material prosperity was a redemptive
blessing, he never taught that living by faith excluded hard work and wise
business practices. In his later years he wrote a book entitled, "The Midas
Touch" in which he wrote sharply and correctively about the so-called
prosperity gospel and many of the extreme teachings that were being circulated
under this heading. He warned the body of Christ of the dangers of greed and
explained that the purpose of financial blessing is for the furtherance of the
work of the gospel. (Kenneth Hagin, "How God Taught Me About Prosperity" and
"The Midas Touch"). Faith and Authority: Hagin believed that the believer
through his position in Christ had authority over elements of this world and
elements of the satanic world. By faith the believer can exercise the authority
of God to change impossible situations into possibilities (1:37) (). Faith, to
Hagin, is a matter of belief in God's word which also entails a vocal
expression of God's Will or confession thereof. According to Hagin, God has
promised to answer believing prayer and respond positively to the believer's
exercise of faith (Kenneth Hagin, "I Believe in Visions", "What Faith Is",
"Bible Faith; A Study Guide"). Salvation: Hagin claimed in several of his books
that he physically died three times as a child. Each time he descended to hell
but was brought back to life when a voice spoke. On the third trip to hell,
Hagin claims to have asked Jesus for forgiveness and salvation. Crying, 'God! I
belong to the church! I've been baptized in water' twice, to no avail, he cried
out a third time. It is at that point, he claims, that he was saved and brought
back to life a final time. Hagin goes on to say that his mother was praying so
loud when he arrived back in his body that "traffic was lined up for two blocks
on either side of our house!" After this dramatic experience, Hagin came to
believe that church membership and water baptism were not sufficient to save
but rather the 'new birth worked by the power of the Holy Spirit' in response
to a personal confession of faith in the Lordship and resurrection of Jesus
Christ. Even though it seems that this new birth could apparently be had even
after death, it is only through that he was already 'coming back to life' that
he was saved.' (ibid., "Word of Faith" magazine, 10/01, Kenneth Hagin, "The New
Birth"; "I Went to Hell"). Substitutionary Act: Hagin spoke of Jesus' death in
substituionary terms. The doctrine of 'Substitution' as taught by Hagin differs
widely from the same doctrine as taught by many other branches of Christianity.
The normal theory of Substitutionary atonement is that the son Jesus paid our
debts, previous, current and future to the Father within the Godhead. Hagin
claimed that Jesus died as the substitute for all of humanity, as do most
Christians (Bible, ), but also believes that Jesus suffered the torments of
hell for three days and that He 'defeated the devil', stripped him of all
authority and was resurrected after being 'quickened in spirit' or 'born
again'. Hagin held that those who received Christ were born again and shared in
the benefits of Christ's resurrection and power through their identification
with His death, burial and resurrection. (Kenneth Hagin,"The Name of Jesus";
"The Triumphant Church"). Sacred Scriptures: Hagin's beliefs followed in the
reformed tradition in that the Bible is viewed to be the literally true,
inerrant word of God as written by men under the guidance of the Spirit of God.
Although Hagin often spoke of the dramatic spiritual encounters he claimed to
have had, he always insisted that faith was to be established upon the word of
God alone and not upon the experiences of man. Many times in his ministry he
made the statement, "Don't believe anything because I said it. Search the
scriptures and prove it out for yourself" (Kenneth Hagin, "How You Can Know the
Will of God" and "The Believer's Authority"). RHEMA Bible Training Center.
Hagin founded Rhema Bible Training Center (RBTC) in 1974. RBTC is an
educational accreditation Bible institute located on in Broken Arrow, a suburb
of Tulsa, Oklahoma (USA). The curriculum is taught from a Charismatic/
Pentecostal heritage. There are seven ministry concentrations specializing in
Children's Ministry, Youth Ministry, Evangelism, Pastoral Care, Missions,
Biblical Studies, and Supportive Ministry. RBTC has also established training
centers in Austria, Brazil, Colombia, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Mexico,
Peru, Romania, Singapore, South Africa, the South Pacific, Thailand, Nigeria,
Zambia, and Egypt. After Hagin's death in 2003, his son Kenneth W. Hagin
continued to run the institution. RBTC has trained over 40,000 graduates who
reside and minister in more than 100 countries.
