Roman mythology Roman mythology is the body of traditional stories pertaining
to ancient Rome's legendary origins and religious system, as represented in the
literature and visual arts of the Romans. "Roman mythology" may also refer to
the modern study of these representations, and to the subject matter as
represented in the literature and art of other cultures in any period. The
Romans usually treated their traditional narratives as historical, even when
these have miraculous or supernatural elements. The stories are often concerned
with politics and morality, and how an individual's personal integrity relates
to his or her responsibility to the community or Roman state. Heroism is an
important theme. When the stories illuminate Roman religious practices, they
are more concerned with ritual, augury, and institutions than with theology or
cosmogony. The study of Roman religion and myth is complicated by the early
influence of Greek religion on the Italian peninsula during Rome's
protohistory, and by the later artistic imitation of Greek literary models by
Roman authors. The Romans were curiously eager to identify their own gods with
those of the Greeks (see "interpretatio graeca"), and reinterpret stories about
Greek deities under the names of their Roman counterparts. Rome's early myths
and legends also have a dynamic relationship with Etruscan religion, less
documented than that of the Greeks. While Roman mythology may lack a body of
divine narratives as extensive as that found in Greek literature, Romulus and
Remus suckling the she-wolf is as famous as any image from Greek mythology
except for the Trojan Horse. Because Latin literature was more widely known in
Europe throughout the Middle Ages and into the Renaissance, the interpretations
of Greek myths by the Romans often had the greater influence on narrative and
pictorial representations of "classical mythology" than Greek sources. In
particular, the versions of Greek myths in Ovid's "Metamorphoses", written
during the reign of Augustus, came to be regarded as canonical. The nature of
Roman myth. Wiseman, "The Myths of Rome", preface. Major sources for Roman myth
include the "Aeneid" of Vergil and the first few books of Livy's history. Other
important sources are the "Fasti" of Ovid, a six-book poem structured by the
Roman religious calendar, and the fourth book of elegies by Propertius. Scenes
from Roman myth also appear in Roman wall painting, coins, and sculpture,
particularly reliefs. Founding myths. The "Aeneid" and Livy's early history are
the best extant sources for Rome's founding myths. Material from Greek heroic
legend was grafted onto this native stock at an early date. The Trojan prince
Aeneas was cast as husband of Lavinia, daughter of King Latinus, patronymical
ancestor of the Latini, and therefore through a convoluted revisionist
genealogy as forebear of Romulus and Remus. By extension, the Trojans were
adopted as the mythical ancestors of the Roman people. Other myths. The
characteristic myths of Rome are often political or moral, that is, they deal
with the development of Roman government in accordance with divine law, as
expressed by Roman religion, and with demonstrations of the individual's
adherence to moral expectations "(mos maiorum)" or failures to do so. Religion
and myth. Divine narrative played a more important role in the system of Greek
religious belief than among the Romans, for whom ritual and cult were primary.
Although Roman religion was not based on scriptures and exegesis, priestly
literature was one of the earliest written forms of Latin prose. The books "
(libri)" and commentaries "(commentarii)" of the College of Pontiffs and of the
augurs contained religious procedures, prayers, and rulings and opinions on
points of religious law. Although at least some of this archived material was
available for consultation by the Roman senate, it was often "occultum genus
litterarum", an arcane form of literature to which by definition only priests
had access. Prophecies pertaining to world history and Rome's destiny turn up
fortuitously at critical junctures in history, discovered suddenly in the
nebulous Sibylline books, which according to legend were purchased by Tarquin
the Proud in the late 6th century BC from the Cumaean Sibyl. Some aspects of
archaic Roman religion were preserved by the lost theological works of the 1st-
century BC scholar Varro, known through other classical and Christian authors.
At the head of the earliest pantheon were the so-called Archaic Triad of
Jupiter, Mars, and Quirinus, whose flamens were of the highest order, and Janus
and Vesta. According to tradition, the founder of Roman religion was Numa
Pompilius, the Sabine second king of Rome, who was believed to have had as his
consort and adviser a Roman goddess or nymph of fountains and prophecy, Egeria.
The Etruscan-influenced Capitoline Triad of Jupiter, Juno and Minerva later
became central to official religion, replacing the Archaic Triad â€” an unusual
example within Indo-European religion of a supreme triad formed of two female
deities and only one male. The cult of Diana was established on the Aventine
Hill, but the most famous Roman manifestation of this goddess may be Diana
Nemorensis, owing to the attention paid to her cult by J.G. Frazer in the
mythographical classic "The Golden Bough". The gods represented distinctly the
practical needs of daily life, and they were scrupulously accorded the rites
and offerings considered proper. Early Roman divinities included a host of
"specialist gods" whose names were invoked in the carrying out of various
specific activities. Fragments of old ritual accompanying such acts as plowing
or sowing reveal that at every stage of the operation a separate deity was
invoked, the name of each deity being regularly derived from the verb for the
operation. Tutelary deities were particularly important in ancient Rome. Thus,
Janus and Vesta guarded the door and hearth, the Lares protected the field and
house, Pales the pasture, Saturn the sowing, Ceres the growth of the grain,
Pomona the fruit, and Consus and Ops the harvest. Even the majestic Jupiter,
the ruler of the gods, was honored for the aid his rains might give to the
farms and vineyards. In his more encompassing character he was considered,
through his weapon of lightning, the director of human activity and, by his
widespread domain, the protector of the Romans in their military activities
beyond the borders of their own community. Prominent in early times were the
gods Mars and Quirinus, who were often identified with each other. Mars was a
god of war; he was honored in March and October. Quirinus is thought by modern
scholars to have been the patron of the armed community in time of peace. The
19th-century scholar Georg Wissowa thought that the Romans distinguished two
classes of gods, the "di indigetes" and the "di novensides" or "novensiles":
the "indigetes" were the original gods of the Roman state, their names and
nature indicated by the titles of the earliest priests and by the fixed
festivals of the calendar, with 30 such gods honored by special festivals; the
"novensides" were later divinities whose cults were introduced to the city in
the historical period, usually at a known date and in response to a specific
crisis or felt need. Arnaldo Momigliano and others, however, have argued that
this distinction cannot be maintained. During the war with Hannibal, any
distinction between "indigenous" and "immigrant" gods begins to fade, and the
Romans embraced diverse gods from various cultures as a sign of strength and
universal divine favor. Foreign gods. The absorption of neighboring local gods
took place as the Roman state conquered the surrounding territory. The Romans
commonly granted the local gods of the conquered territory the same honors as
the earlier gods of the Roman state religion. In addition to Castor and Pollux,
the conquered settlements in Italy seem to have contributed to the Roman
pantheon Diana, Minerva, Hercules, Venus, and deities of lesser rank, some of
whom were Italic divinities, others originally derived from the Greek culture
of Magna Graecia. In 203 BC, the cult object embodying Cybele was brought from
Pessinus in Phrygia and welcomed with due ceremony to Rome, centuries before
the territory was annexed formally. Both Lucretius and Catullus, poets
contemporary in the mid-1st century BC, offer disapproving glimpses of her
wildly ecstatic cult. In some instances, deities of an enemy power were
formally invited through the ritual of "evocatio" to take up their abode in new
sanctuaries at Rome. Communities of foreigners "(peregrini)" and former slaves
"(libertini)" continued their own religious practices within the city. In this
way Mithras came to Rome and his popularity within the Roman army spread his
cult as far afield as Roman Britain. The important Roman deities were
eventually identified with the more anthropomorphic Greek gods and goddesses,
and assumed many of their attributes and myths.
