Sabbath in seventh-day churches The seventh-day Sabbath, observed from Friday
sunset to Saturday sunset, is an important part of the beliefs and practices of
seventh-day churches. These churches emphasize biblical references such as the
ancient Hebrew practice of beginning a day "at the going down of the sun", and
the scriptural account of creation in Genesis wherein an "evening and morning"
established a day, predating the giving of the Ten Commandments (thus the
command to "remember" the sabbath). Seventh-day Sabbatarianism was the practice
of all or most of the early Christian church through the 4th century. The
seventh day of the week is recognized in many languages and calendars as
"Sabbath", and is still observed as such in modern Judaism. Christian seventh-
day Sabbatarians seek to reestablish the practice of the early apostolic
Christians who kept the sabbath. They usually believe that all humanity is
obliged to keep the Ten Commandments, including the sabbath, and that keeping
all the commandments is a moral responsibility that honors, and shows love
towards, God as creator, sustainer, and redeemer. The majority of Christians do
not observe the sabbath on the seventh day, but instead honor Sunday, the first
day of the week, as the Lord's Day and the day of Christ's resurrection, and
(in some traditions) as the Christian Sabbath. The sabbath is one of the
defining characteristics of seventh-day denominations, including Seventh Day
Baptists, Seventh-day Adventists, the Seventh-Day Evangelist Church, the Church
of God (7th Day) headquartered in Salem, West Virginia and the Church of God
(Seventh Day) conferences, and the United Church of God, among many others.
Biblical Sabbath. The sabbath was first described in the biblical account of
the seventh day of creation. Observation and remembrance of the sabbath is one
of the Ten Commandments (the fourth in the Eastern Orthodox and most Protestant
traditions, the third in Roman Catholic and Lutheran traditions). Most people
who observe first-day or seventh-day sabbath regard it as having been
instituted as a perpetual covenant: "Wherefore the children of Israel shall
keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a
perpetual covenant." () (see also , )) This rule also applies to strangers
within their gates, a sign in respect for the day during which God rested after
having completed creation in six days (, ). History. Early church. According to
R. J. Bauckham, the post-apostolic church contained diverse practices regarding
the sabbath. In the first centuries, the first day of the week, being made a
festival in honor of Christ's resurrection, received attention as a day of
religious services and recreation, but seventh-day sabbath rest was still
observed by "almost all churches". Early Christian observance of both spiritual
seventh-day sabbath and Lord's Day assembly is evidenced in Ignatius's letter
to the Magnesians ca. 110. The Pseudo-Ignatian additions amplified this point
by combining weekly observance of spiritual seventh-day sabbath with the Lord's
assembly. If Pseudo-Ignatius dates as early as 140, its admonition must be
considered important evidence on 2nd-century sabbath and Lord's Day observance.
According to classical sources, widespread seventh-day sabbath rest by gentile
Christians was also the prevailing mode in the 3rd and 4th centuries. On March
7, 321, the Roman emperor Constantine issued a decree making Sunday a day of
rest from labor, stating: Ellen G. White states that ecumenical councils
generally each pressed the sabbath down slightly lower and exalted Sunday
correspondingly, and that the bishops eventually urged Constantine to
syncretize the worship day to promote the nominal acceptance of Christianity by
pagans. But "while many God-fearing Christians were gradually led to regard
Sunday as possessing a degree of sacredness, they still held [seventh-day]
Sabbath." Bauckham also states some church authorities continued to oppose this
as a judaizing tendency. In the 4th century, Socrates Scholasticus ("Church
History, Book V") stated: Thus both early church historians, Socrates and
Sozomen, cite the seventh day as the Christian day of rest and corporate
worship, with the exception of the Christians in Rome and Alexandria. Middle
ages. The "Sabbath in Africa Study Group" (SIA), founded by Charles E. Bradford
in 1991, holds that the sabbath has existed in Africa since the beginning of
recorded history. Taddesse Tamrat has argued that this practice predates Saint
Ewostatewos's advocacy of observing both Saturday and Sunday as days of
sabbath, which led to his eventual exile from Ethiopia around 1337. Emperor
Zara Yaqob convened a synod at Tegulet in 1450 to discuss the sabbath question.
In Bohemia, as much as one quarter of the population kept seventh-day the
sabbath in 1310. This practice continued until at least the 16th century, when
Erasmus wrote about the practice. The Unitarian Church condemned Sabbatarianism
as innovation (forbidden by the Transylvanian law on religious toleration) in
1618. The last Sabbatarian congregation in Transylvania disappeared in the 19th
century and the remaining Sabbatarians, who were known as "Somrei Sabat" (the
Hungarian transliteration of the Hebrew words for "Sabbath observers") joined
the existing Jewish communities, into which they were eventually absorbed.
Sabbatarianism also expanded into Russia, where its adherents were called
Subbotniks, and, from there, the movement expanded into other countries. Some
of the Russian Subbotniks maintained a Christian identity doctrinally, while
others formally converted to Judaism and assimilated within the Jewish
communities of Russia. Some of the latter, however, who had become Jewish,
although they and their descendants practiced Judaism and had not practiced
Christianity for nearly two centuries, still retained a distinct identity as
ethnic Russian converts to Judaism until later. A small number of the anti-
Trinitarian Socinian churches of Eastern Europe and the Netherlands adopted the
seventh day as the day of worship and rest. Reformation. Sects such as the
Waldenses, Albigenses, and Leonists appear to have retained sabbath observance
in Europe during the Middle Ages. A report of an inquisition, before which were
brought some Waldenses of Moravia in the middle of the 15th century, declares
that among the Waldenses "not a few indeed celebrate the Sabbath with the
Jews." The Taiping Rebellion kept the sabbath in China. The Goa Inquisition
attacked Sabbatarian Saint Thomas Christians. At the time of the Protestant
Reformation some Anabaptists, such as Oswald Glait, argued that the seventh day
should be observed as the sabbath and that Sunday sabbath was an invention of
the Pope. Seventh-day Sabbatarianism was revived in 17th-century England. Early
advocates included the Elizabethan Seventh-Day Men, the Traskites (after John
Traske, 1586â€“1636), and Thomas Brabourne. The majority of seventh-day
Sabbatarians were part of the Seventh Day Baptist church and experienced harsh
opposition from Anglican authorities and Puritans. The first Seventh Day
Baptist church in the United States was established in Rhode Island in 1671.
Modern churches. Seventh Day Baptists. Seventh Day Baptists are Christian
Baptists who observe seventh-day Sabbath. The Seventh Day Baptist World
Federation today represents over 50,000 Baptists in 22 countries. It is the
oldest modern Sabbatarian denomination. The first recorded Seventh Day Baptist
meeting was held at The Mill Yard Church in London in 1651 under the leadership
of Peter Chamberlen. Seventh-day Adventism. The Seventh-day Adventist Church is
the largest modern seventh-day Sabbatarian denomination, with about 16 million
members, and holds the sabbath as one of the Pillars of Adventism. Seventh-day
Adventism grew out of the Millerite movement in the 1840s, and its founders
were converted to Sabbatarianism under the influence of Rachel Oakes Preston, a
young Seventh Day Baptist laywoman living in New Hampshire. Seventh-day
Adventists observe the sabbath from Friday sunset to Saturday sunset. In places
where the sun does not appear or does not set for several months, such as
northern Scandinavia, the tendency is to regard an arbitrary time such as 6
p.m. as "sunset". During the sabbath, Adventists avoid secular work and
business, although medical, relief, and humanitarian work is accepted. Though
there are cultural variations, most Adventists also avoid activities such as
shopping, sport, and certain forms of entertainment. Adventists typically
gather for church services on Saturday morning. Some also gather on Friday
evening to welcome in the sabbath hours (sometimes called "vespers" or "opening
Sabbath"), and some similarly gather at "closing Sabbath". Traditionally,
Seventh-day Adventists hold that the Ten Commandments (including the fourth
commandment concerning the sabbath) are part of the moral law of God, not
abrogated by the teachings of Jesus Christ, which apply equally to Christians.
This was a common Christian understanding before the Sabbatarian controversy
led Sunday-keepers to adopt a more radical antinomian position. Adventists have
traditionally distinguished between "moral law" and "ceremonial law", arguing
that moral law continues to bind Christians, while events predicted by the
ceremonial law were fulfilled by Christ's death on the cross. History.
"Sabbatarian Adventists" emerged between 1845 and 1849 from within the
Adventist movement of William Miller, later to become the Seventh-day
Adventists. Frederick Wheeler began keeping the seventh day as the sabbath
after personally studying the issue in March 1844 following a conversation with
Rachel Preston, according to his later report. He is reputed to be the first
ordained Adventist minister to preach in support of the sabbath. Several
members of the church in Washington, New Hampshire, to which he occasionally
ministered, also followed his decision, forming the first Sabbatarian Adventist
church. These included William Farnsworth and his brother Cyrus. T. M. Preble
soon accepted it from either Wheeler, Oakes, or someone else at the church.
These events preceded the Great Disappointment, which followed shortly after,
when Jesus did not return as Millerites expected on October 22, 1844. Preble
was the first Millerite to promote the sabbath in print form, through the
February 28, 1845, issue of the Adventist "Hope of Israel" in Portland, Maine.
In March he published his sabbath views in tract form as "A Tract, Showing that
the Seventh Day Should be Observed as the Sabbath, Instead of the First Day;
"According to the Commandment"". This tract led to the conversion of John
Nevins Andrews and other Adventist families in Paris, Maine, as well as the
1845 conversion of Joseph Bates, who became the foremost proponent of the
sabbath among this group. These men in turn convinced James Springer White,
Ellen Harmon (later White), and Hiram Edson of New Hampshire. Preble is known
to have kept seventh-day sabbath until mid-1847. He later repudiated the
sabbath and opposed the Seventh-day Adventists, authoring "The First-Day
Sabbath". Bates proposed an 1846 meeting among the believers in New Hampshire
and Port Gibson, which took place at Edson's farm, where Edson and other Port
Gibson believers readily accepted the sabbath message and forged an alliance
with Bates, White, and Harmon. Between April 1848 and December 1850, 22 sabbath
conferences in New York and New England allowed White, Bates, Edson, and
Stephen Pierce to reach conclusions about doctrinal issues. Also in 1846, a
pamphlet written by Bates created widespread interest in the sabbath. Bates,
White, Harmon, Edson, Wheeler, and S. W. Rhodes led the promotion of the
sabbath, partly through regular publications. "Present Truth" magazine was
largely devoted to the sabbath at first. J. N. Andrews was the first Adventist
to write a book-length defense of the sabbath, first published in 1861. Two of
Andrews' books include "Testimony of the Fathers of the First Three Centuries
Concerning the Sabbath and the First Day" and "History of the Sabbath".
Eschatology. The pioneers of the church have traditionally taught that the
seventh-day sabbath will be a test, leading to the sealing of God's people
during the end times, though there is little consensus about how this will play
out. The church has traditionally taught that there will be an international
Sunday law enforced by a coalition of religious and secular authorities, and
that all who do not observe it will be persecuted and killed. This is taken
from the church's interpretation, following Ellen G. White, of , , , , and .
Where the subject of persecution appeared in prophecy, it was thought to be
about the sabbath. Some early Adventists were jailed for working on Sunday, in
violation of various local blue laws that legislated Sunday as a day of rest.
It was expected that a universal Sunday law would soon be enforced, as a sign
of the end times. Armstrongism. Seventh-day Sabbatarianism was a key feature of
the former Worldwide Church of God, founded by Herbert W. Armstrong, and its
various descendent movements. Armstrong, who began the Radio Church of God, was
in 1931 ordained by the Oregon Conference of the Church of God (Seventh Day),
an Adventist group, and began serving a congregation in Eugene, Oregon. The
broadcast was essentially a condensed church service on the air, with
hymnsinging featured along with Armstrong's message, and was the launching
point for what would become the Worldwide Church of God. Other groups. The
primarily Chinese True Jesus Church supports the seventh-day sabbath, and has
approximately 2 million believers worldwide. Initial founder Ling-Sheng Zhang
accepted the sabbath after studying Seventh-day Adventist theology, and co-
founder Paul Wei was originally a Seventh-day Adventist. An American missionary
named Berntsen, who was from a sabbath-keeping Church of God, was also
influential upon the founders.
