Sacrifice Sacrifice is the offering of food, objects or the lives of animals to
a higher purpose or to God or the gods as an act of propitiation or worship.
While "sacrifice" often implies ritual killing, the term offering (Latin
"oblatio") can be used for bloodless sacrifices of cereal food or artifacts.
For offerings of liquids (beverages) by pouring, the term libation is used.
Terminology. The Latin term came to be used of the Christian eucharist in
particular, sometimes named a "bloodless sacrifice" to distinguish it from
blood sacrifices. In individual pre-Christian ethnic religions, terms
translated as "sacrifice" include the Indic "yajna", the Greek "thusia", the
Germanic "bl≈çtan", the Semitic "qorban"/"qurban", etc. The term is also used
metaphorically to describe selfless good deeds for others or a short term loss
in return for a greater power gain, such as in a game of chess. Recently it has
also come into use as meaning 'doing without something' or 'giving something
up' (see also self-sacrifice). Animal sacrifice. Animal sacrifice is the ritual
killing of an animal as part of a religion. It is practiced by adherents of
many religions as a means of appeasing a god or gods or changing the course of
nature. It also served a social or economic function in those cultures where
the edible portions of the animal were distributed among those attending the
sacrifice for consumption. Animal sacrifice has turned up in almost all
cultures, from the Hebrews to the Greeks and Romans (particularly the purifying
ceremony Lustratio), Ancient Egyptians (for example in the cult of Apis) and
from the Aztecs to the Yoruba. Animal sacrifice is still practiced today by the
followers of Santer√≠a and other lineages of Orisa as a means of curing the
sick and giving thanks to the Orisa (gods). However in Santeria, such animal
offerings constitute an extremely small portion of what are termed
"ebos"‚Äîritual activities that include offerings, prayer and deeds. Christians
from some villages in Greece also sacrifice animals to Orthodox saints in a
practice known as kourb√ nia. The practice, while publicly condemned, is often
tolerated. Walter Burkert theory on origins of Greek sacrifice. According to
Walter Burkert, a scholar on sacrifice, Greek sacrifices derived from hunting
practices. Hunters, feeling guilty for having killed another living being so
they could eat and survive, tried to repudiate their responsibility in these
rituals. The primary evidence used to suggest this theory is the Dipolieia,
which is an Athenian festival, in limited circulation, during which an ox was
sacrificed. The protagonist of the ritual was a plough ox, which it had, at one
point, been a crime to kill in Athens. According to his theory, the killer of
the ox eased his conscience by suggesting that everybody should participate in
the killing of the sacrificial victim. In the expansion of the Athenian state,
numerous oxen were needed to feed the people at the banquets and were
accompanied by state festivals. The hecatomb (‚Äúhundred oxen‚Äù) became the
general designation for the great sacrifices offered by the state. These
sacrificial processions of hundreds of oxen remove the original ties, which the
farmers of an earlier and smaller Athens will have felt with their one ox.
Human sacrifice. Human sacrifice was practiced by many ancient cultures. People
would be ritually killed in a manner that was supposed to please or appease a
god or spirit. Human sacrifices were practiced by various Pre-Columbian
civilizations of Mesoamerica. The Aztec practiced human sacrifice on an
unusually large scale; a sacrifice would be made every day to aid the sun in
rising, the dedication of the great temple at Tenochtitl√°n was reportedly
marked with the sacrificing of thousands, and there are multiple accounts of
captured Conquistadores being sacrificed during the wars of the Spanish
conquest of Mexico. In Scandinavia, the old Scandinavian religion contained
human sacrifice, and both the Norse sagas and German historians relate of this,
see e.g. Temple at Uppsala and Bl√≥t. There is evidence to suggest Pre-Hellenic
Minoan cultures practiced human sacrifice. Sacrificed corpses were found at a
number of sites in the citadel of Knossos in Crete. The north house at Knossos
contained the bones of children who appeared to have been butchered. It is
possible they may have been for human consumption as was the tradition with
sacrificial offerings made in Pre-Hellenic Civilization. [http://
projectsx.dartmouth.edu/history/bronze_age/lessons/les/15.html] The myth of
Theseus and the Minotaur (set in the labyrinth at Knossos) provides evidence
that human sacrifice was commonplace. In the myth, we are told that Athens sent
seven young men and seven young women to Crete as human sacrifices to the
Minotaur. This ties up well with the archaeological evidence that most
sacrifices were of young adults or children. Human sacrifice still happens
today as an underground practice in some traditional religions, for example in
muti killings. Human sacrifice is no longer officially condoned in any country,
and these cases are regarded as murder. In the "Aeneid" by Virgil, the
character Sinon claims (falsely) that he was going to be a human sacrifice to
Poseidon to calm the seas. Judaism. The centrality of sacrifices in Ancient
Israel is clear, with much of the Bible, particularly the opening chapters of
the book Leviticus, detailing the exact method of bringing sacrifices.
Sacrifices were either blood sacrifices (animals) or bloodless offerings (grain
and wine). Blood sacrifices were divided into the burnt offerings (Hebrew:
◊¢◊ú◊î¬ ◊ß◊®◊ë◊ ◊ï◊™) in which the whole animal was burnt, guilt offerings (in
which part was burnt and part left for the priest) and peace offerings (in
which similarly only part of the animal was burnt and the rest eaten in
ritually pure conditions). The prophets point out that prayer and sacrifices
are only a part of serving God and need to be accompanied by inner morality and
goodness. In contrast, many others such as Nachmanides (in his Torah commentary
on Leviticus 1:9) disagreed, contending that sacrifices are an ideal in
Judaism, completely central. The teachings of the Torah and Tanakh reveal the
Israelites's familiarity with human sacrifices, as exemplified by the near-
sacrifice of Isaac by his father Abraham (Genesis 22:1-24) and some believe,
the actual sacrifice of Jephthah's daughter (Judges 11:31-40), while many
believe that Jephthah's daughter was committed for life in service equivalent
to a nunnery of the day, as indicated by her lament over her "weep for my
virginity" and never having known a man (v37). The king of Moab gives his
firstborn son and heir as a whole burnt offering ("olah", as used of the Temple
sacrifice). It is apparently effective, as his enemy is promptly repelled by a
'great wrath' (). In the book of Micah, one asks, 'Shall I give my firstborn
for my sin, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?' (), and receives a
response, 'It hath been told thee, O man, what is good, and what the LORD doth
require of thee: only to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God.' () Abhorrence of the practice of child sacrifice is emphasized by
Jeremiah. See Jeremiah 7:30-32. Christianity. In trinitarian Christian
teaching, God became incarnate in Jesus Christ, sacrificing his first-born son
to accomplish the reconciliation of God and humanity, which had separated
itself from God through sin (see the concept of original sin). According to a
view that has featured prominently in Western theology since early in the 2nd
millennium, God's justice required an atonement for sin from humanity if human
beings were to be restored to their place in creation and saved from damnation.
However, God knew limited human beings could not make sufficient atonement, for
humanity's offense to God was infinite, so God created a covenant with Abraham,
which he fulfilled when he sent his only Son to become the sacrifice for the
broken covenant. In Christian theology, this sacrifice replaced the
insufficient animal sacrifice of the Old Covenant; Christ the "Lamb of God"
replaced the lambs' sacrifice of the ancient Korban Todah (the Rite of
Thanksgiving), chief of which is the Passover in the Mosaic law. Geza Vermes
argues that the title "Lamb of God" does not necessarily refer to the metaphor
of a sacrificial animal. He points out that in Galilean Aramaic, the word
"talya", literally "lamb", had the common meaning of "male child". This is akin
to "kid" meaning "child" in modern colloquial English. The female equivalent of
"talya" was "talitha", literally "ewe lamb" and figuratively "girl" (the word
is found in the narrative of the daughter of Jairus). In the Roman Catholic
Church, the Eastern Orthodox Churches, as well as among some High Church
Anglicans, the Eucharist or Mass, and the Divine Liturgy of the Eastern
Catholic Churches and Eastern Orthodox Church, it is seen as a sacrifice. It is
however, not a separate or additional sacrifice to that Christ on the cross; it
is rather exactly the same sacrifice, which transcends time and space ("the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world") (Rev. 13:8), renewed and made
present, the only distinction being that it is offered in an unbloody manner.
The sacrifice is made present without Christ dying or being crucified again; it
is a re-presentation to God, of the "once and for all" sacrifice of Calvary by
the now risen Christ, who continues to offer himself and what he has done on
the cross as an oblation to the Father. The complete identification of the Mass
with the sacrifice of the cross is found in Christ's words at the last supper
over the bread and wine: "This is my body, which is given up for you," and
"This is my blood of the new covenant, which is shed...unto the forgiveness of
sins." The bread and wine, offered by Melchizedek in sacrifice in the old
covenant (Genesis 14:18; Psalm 110:4), are transformed through the Mass into
the body and blood of Christ (see transubstantiation; note: the Orthodox Church
does not hold as dogma, as do Catholics, the doctrine of transubstantiation,
preferring rather to not make an assertion regarding the "how" of the
sacraments), and the offering becomes one with that of Christ on the cross. In
the Mass as on the cross, Christ is both priest (offering the sacrifice) and
victim (the sacrifice he offers is himself), though in the Mass in the former
capacity he works through a solely human priest who is joined to him through
the sacrament of Holy Orders and thus shares in Christ's priesthood. Through
the Mass, the merits of the one sacrifice of the cross can be applied to the
redemption of those present, to their specific intentions and prayers, and to
the release of the souls from purgatory. The concept of self-sacrifice and
martyrs are central to Christianity. Often found in Roman Catholicism is the
idea of joining one's own sufferings to the sacrifice of Christ on the cross.
Thus one can offer up involuntary suffering, such as illness, or purposefully
embrace suffering in acts of penance. Some Protestants criticize this as a
denial of the all-sufficiency of Christ's sacrifice, but it finds support in
St. Paul: "Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and in my flesh I
complete what is lacking in Christ's afflictions for the sake of his body, that
is, the church" (Col 1:24). Pope John Paul II explained in his Apostolic Letter
"Salvifici Doloris" (11 February 1984):"In the Cross of Christ not only is the
Redemption accomplished through suffering, but also human suffering itself has
been redeemed...Every man has his own share in the Redemption. Each one is also
called to share in that suffering through which the Redemption was
accomplished...In bringing about the Redemption through suffering, Christ has
also raised human suffering to the level of the Redemption. Thus each man, in
his suffering, can also become a sharer in the redemptive suffering of
Christ...The sufferings of Christ created the good of the world's redemption.
This good in itself is inexhaustible and infinite. No man can add anything to
it. But at the same time, in the mystery of the Church as his Body, Christ has
in a sense opened his own redemptive suffering to all human suffering"
("Salvifici Doloris" 19; 24).Some Protestants reject the idea of the Eucharist
as a sacrifice, inclining to see it as merely a holy meal (even if they believe
in a form of the real presence of Christ in the bread and wine, as Lutherans
do). The more recent the origin of a particular tradition, the less emphasis is
placed on the sacrificial nature of the Eucharist. The Catholic/Orthodox
response is that the sacrifice of the Mass in the New Covenant is that one
sacrifice for sins on the cross which transcends time offered in an unbloody
manner, as discussed above, and that Christ is the real priest at every Mass
working through mere human beings to whom he has granted the grace of a share
in his priesthood. As "priest" carries connotations of "one who offers
sacrifice", Protestants usually do not use it for their clergy. Evangelical
Protestantism emphasizes the importance of a decision to accept Christ's
sacrifice on the Cross consciously and personally as atonement for one's
individual sins if one is to be saved‚Äîthis is known as "accepting Christ as
one's personal Lord and Savior". The Orthodox Church sees the celebration of
the Eucharist as a continuation, rather than a reenactment, of the Last Supper,
as Fr. John Matusiak (of the OCA) says: "The Liturgy is not so much a
reenactment of the Mystical Supper or these events as it is a continuation of
these events, which are beyond time and space. Unlike many of the Protestant
bodies, the Orthodox also see the Eucharistic Liturgy as a bloodless sacrifice,
during which the bread and wine we offer to God become the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ through the descent and operation of the Holy Spirit, Who effects
the change." This view is witnessed to by the prayers of the Divine Liturgy of
St. John Chrysostom, when the priest says: "Accept, O God, our supplications,
make us to be worthy to offer unto thee supplications and prayers and bloodless
sacrifices for all thy people," and "Remembering this saving commandment and
all those things which came to pass for us: the cross, the grave, the
resurrection on the third day, the ascension into heaven, the sitting down at
the right hand, the second and glorious coming again, Thine own of Thine own we
offer unto Thee on behalf of all and for all," and "‚Ä¶ Thou didst become man
and didst take the name of our High Priest, and deliver unto us the priestly
rite of this liturgical and bloodless sacrifice‚Ä¶" Islam. An animal sacrifice
in Arabic is called "·∏èabi·∏•a" (ÿ∞Ÿéÿ®ŸêŸäŸíÿ≠Ÿéÿ©) or "Qurban"
(ŸÇŸèÿ±Ÿíÿ®ŸéÿßŸÜ) . The term may have roots from the Jewish term "Korban"; in
some places such as in Pakistan, "qurbani" is always used for Islamic animal
sacrifice. In the Islamic context, an animal sacrifice referred to as
"·∏èabi·∏•a" (ÿ∞Ÿéÿ®ŸêŸäŸíÿ≠Ÿéÿ©) meaning "sacrifice as a ritual" is offered
only in Eid ul-Adha. The sacrificial animal may be a lamb, a sheep, a goat, a
camel, or a cow. The animal must be healthy and conscious. ..."Therefore to the
Lord turn in Prayer and Sacrifice. " (Surat Al-Kawthar) Quran, 108.2 Qurban is
an Islamic prescription for the affluent to share their good fortune with the
needy in the community. On the occasion of Eid ul Adha (Festival of Sacrifice),
affluent Muslims all over the world perform the Sunnah of Prophet Ibrahim
(Abraham) by sacrificing a cow or sheep. The meat is then divided into three
equal parts. One part is retained by the person who performs the sacrifice. The
second is given to his relatives. The third part is distributed to the poor.
The Qur'an states that the sacrifice has nothing to do with the blood and gore
(Qur'an 22:37: "It is not their meat nor their blood that reaches God. It is
your piety that reaches Him..."). Rather, it is done to help the poor and in
remembrance of Abraham's willingness to sacrifice his son Ishmael at God's
command. The Urdu and Persian word "Qurbani" comes from the Arabic word
'Qurban'. It suggests that associate act performed to hunt distance to Almighty
God and to hunt His sensible pleasure. Originally, the word 'Qurban' enclosed
all acts of charity as a result of the aim of charity is nothing however to
hunt Allah's pleasure. But, in precise non secular nomenclature, the word was
later confined to the sacrifice of associate animal slaughtered for the sake of
God. http://onlinequrbani2012.webs.com/apps/blog/ Hinduism. The Sanskrit
"Yagya" is often translated as "sacrifice" (also "offering, oblation", or more
generically as "worship"). It is especially used to describe the offering of
ghee (clarified butter), grains, spices, and wood into a fire along with the
chanting of sacred mantras. The fire represents Agni, the divine messenger who
carries offerings to the Devas. The offerings can represent devotion,
aspiration, and seeds of past karma. In Vedic times, "Yagya" commonly included
the sacrifice of milk, ghee, curd, grains, and the "soma" plant‚Äîanimal
offerings were less common. In modern times, "Yagya" is often performed at
weddings and funerals, and in personal worship. Sacrifice in Hinduism can also
refer to personal surrender through acts of inner and outer worship.
