Samael Samael () (also Sammael and Samil) is an important archangel in Talmudic
and post-Talmudic lore, a figure who is accuser, seducer and destroyer, and has
been regarded as both good and evil. It is said that he was the guardian angel
of Esau and a patron of the Roman empire. He is considered in legend a member
of the heavenly host (with often grim and destructive duties), in the New
Testament named Satan and the chief of the evil spirits. One of Samael's
greatest roles in Jewish lore is that of the angel of death. He remains one of
the Lord's servants even though he appears to want men to do evil. As a good
angel, Samael resides in the seventh heaven, although he is declared to be the
chief angel of the fifth heaven. In Judaism. In Jewish lore, Samael is said to
be the angel of death, the chief ruler of the Fifth Heaven and one of the seven
regents of the world served by two million angels; he resides in the Heaven.
"Yalkut I, 110" of the Talmud speaks of Samael as Esau's guardian angel. In
"Sotah 10b", Samael is Esau's guardian angel, and in the "Sayings of Rabbi
Eliezer", he is charged with being the one who tempted Eve, then seduced and
impregnated her with Cain. Though some sources identify Gadreel as the angel
that seduced Eve, other Hebrew scholars say that it was Samael who tempted Eve
in the guise of the Serpent. Samael is also sometimes identified as being the
angelic antagonist who wrestled with Jacob, and also the angel who held back
the arm of Abraham as he was about to sacrifice his son. In "The Holy Kabbalah"
(Arthur Edward Waite, 255), Samael is described as the "severity of God", and
is listed as fifth of the archangel of the world of Briah. Samael is said to
have taken Lilith as his bride after she left Adam. According to Zoharistic
cabala, Samael was also mated with Eisheth Zenunim, Na'amah, and Agrat Bat
Mahlat â€” all angels of "sacred prostitution". Samael is sometimes confused in
some books with Camael, an archangel of God, whose name means "He who sees
God".Also " He who is like God " . Kemo (Like), (El),God. Aramaic/Hebrew. It is
also said that the Baal Shem once summoned Samael, to make him do his bidding.
("Tales of the Hasidim", by Martin Buber. Book 1, page 77.) In Gnosticism. In
the Apocryphon of John, found in the Nag Hammadi library, Samael is the third
name of the demiurge, whose other names are Yaldabaoth and Saklas. In this
context, Samael means "the blind god", the theme of blindness running
throughout gnostic works. His appearance is that of a lion-faced serpent. In On
the Origin of the World in the Nag Hammadi library texts, he is also referred
to as Ariael. In anthroposophy. Saint Gregory gives the seven archangels as
Anael, Gabriel, Michael, Oriphiel, Raphael, Samael and Zachariel. They are all
imagined to have a special assignment to act as a global "zeitgeist" ("time-
spirit"), each for periods of about 380 years. Since 1879, anthroposophists
posit, Michael has been the leading time spirit. Four important archangels are
also supposed to display periodic spiritual activity over the seasons: Raphael
during the spring, Uriel during the summer, Michael during the autumn, and
Gabriel during the winter. In anthroposophy, archangels may be good or evil; in
particular, some of their rank are collaborators of Ahriman, whose purpose
(anthroposophists believe) is to alienate humanity from the spiritual world and
promote materialism and heartless technical control.
