Saturday Saturday ( or ) is the day of the week following Friday and preceding
Sunday. Saturday is the seventh and therefore last day of the week according to
many commonly used calendars, but it is the second-to-last (sixth) day of the
week according to ISO 8601 (see below). Its Latin name "dies Saturni"
("Saturn's Day") entered into Old English as "Saeternesdaeg". Saturday was
named no later than the 2nd century for the planet Saturn, which controlled the
first hour of that day according to Vettius Valens. Origins in antiquity. The
weekday heptagram, i.e. the association of the days of the seven-day week with
the seven classical planets, probably dates to the Hellenistic period. Between
the 1st and 3rd centuries AD, the Roman Empire gradually replaced the eight day
Roman nundinal cycle with the seven-day week. The astrological order of the
days was explained by Vettius Valens and Dio Cassius (and Chaucer gave the same
explanation in his "Treatise on the Astrolabe"). According to these authors, it
was a principle of astrology that the heavenly bodies presided, in succession,
over the hours of the day. The association of the weekdays with the respective
deities is thus indirect, the days are named for the planets, which were in
turn named for the deities. In the Eastern Orthodox Church Saturdays are days
on which the Theotokos (Mother of God) and All Saints are commemorated, The day
is also a general day of prayer for the dead, because it was on a Saturday that
Jesus is believed by some to have laid dead in the tomb. The Octoechos contains
hymns on these themes, arranged in an eight-week cycle, that are chanted on
Saturdays throughout the year. At the end of services on Saturday, the
dismissal begins with the words: "May Christ our True God, through the
intercessions of his most-pure Mother, of the holy, glorious and right
victorious Martyrs, of our reverend and God-bearing Fathers‚Ä¶". For the
Orthodox, Saturday‚Äîwith the sole exception of Holy Saturday‚Äìis never a
strict fast day. When a Saturday falls during one of the fasting seasons (Great
Lent, Nativity Fast, Apostles' Fast, Dormition Fast) the fasting rules are
always lessened to an extent. The Great Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross
and the Beheading of St. John the Baptist are normally observed as strict fast
days, but if they fall on a Saturday or Sunday, the fast is lessened. Saturday
Sabbath. For Jews, Messianics and Seventh-day Adventists, the seventh day of
the week, known as Shabbat (or Sabbath for SDA), stretches from sundown Friday
to sundown Saturday and is the day of rest. Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox
churches distinguish between Saturday (Sabbath) and the Lord's Day (Sunday).
While other Protestant groups, such as SDA, hold that the Lord's Day is the
Sabbath and not Sunday. From Scriptures, Jesus rested in the grave on the
Sabbath day, which is the day after the day of preparation. In this way, Jesus
rested as God did in the beginning during the creation. Quakers traditionally
refer to Saturday as "Seventh Day", eschewing the "pagan" origin of the name.
In Islamic countries, Fridays are considered as the last day of the week and
are holidays along with Thursdays; Saturday is called "Sabt" (cognate to
Sabbath) and it is the first day of the week in many Arabic countries. Name and
associations in European cultures. In Scandinavian countries, Saturday is
called "l√∂rdag," "l√∏rdag," or "laurdag," the name being derived from the old
word "laugr/laug" (hence Icelandic name "Laugardagur"), meaning bath, thus
"L√∂rdag" equates to bath-day. This is due to the Viking practice of bathing on
Saturdays. Today, Saturday is officially called "Samstag" in all German-
speaking countries, but there it has two names in modern Standard German.
"Samstag" is always used in Austria, Liechtenstein, and the German speaking
part of Switzerland, and generally used in southern and western Germany. It
derives from Old High German "sambaztac", which itself derives from Greek
"Œ£Œ¨Œ≤Œ≤Œ±œÑŒø", and this Greek word derives from Hebrew "◊©◊ë◊™" (Shabbat).
However, the current German word for Sabbath is "Sabbat". The second name for
Saturday in German is "Sonnabend", which derives from Old High German
"sunnunaband", and is closely related to the Old English word "sunnan√¶fen". It
means literally "Sun eve", i.e., "The day before Sunday". "Sonnabend" is
generally used in northern and eastern Germany, and was also the official name
for Saturday in East Germany. In the Westphalian dialects of Low Saxon, in East
Frisian Low Saxon and in the Saterland Frisian language, Saturday is called
"Satertag", also akin to Dutch "Zaterdag", which has the same linguistic roots
as the English word Saturday. The origin of the Old English word "Satur" is
obscure but thought to refer to a particular deity named "S√¶tere" who was
venerated by the pre-Christian peoples of north-western Germany, some of whom
were the ancestors of the Anglo-Saxons. S√¶tere has been identified as either a
god associated with the harvest of possible Slav origin, or alternately S√¶tere
could be another name for Loki a complex deity associated with both good and
evil. In West Frisian there are also two words for Saturday. In Wood Frisian it
is " saterdei" and in Clay Frisian it is "sneon", derived from "snjoen", a
combination of Old Frisian "sunne", meaning "sun" and "joen", meaning eve. All
Slavic languages derive their name for Saturday from the name for Sabbath:
(Czech/Slovak/Polish/Slovene: "sobota"; Russian: "—Å—É–±–±–æ—Ç–∞" "subbota",
Serbian/Ukrainian "—Å—É–±–æ—Ç–∞" "subota"). A similar numbering trend is also
exhibited by the Baltic languages. Similarly, the Romance languages follow the
Greek usage, so that their word for "Saturday" is also a variation on
"Sabbath": the Italian is "sabato," the French is "samedi," the Spanish and
Portuguese is "s√°bado" and the Romanian is "s√¢mbƒÉtƒÉ." The Celtic languages
also name this day for Saturn: Irish "an Satharn" or "dia Sathuirn", Scottish
Gaelic "Disathairne", Welsh "dydd Sadwrn", Breton "Sadorn" or "disadorn".
Outside Europe. The modern Maori name for Saturday, "rahoroi", literally means
"washing-day" - a vestige of early colonized life when MƒÅori converts would
set aside time on the Saturday to wash their whites for Church on Sunday. A
common alternative MƒÅori name for Saturday is the transliteration "Hatarei".
The Chinese-based Korean word for Saturday is ÌÜ ÏöîÏùº (To-Yo-Il Earth - day)
from the Chinese character meaning Earth, or Ground but more significantly
makes reference to ÌÜ ÏÑ± (To-Sung ÂúüÊòü) which means Saturn. In India,
Saturday is Shanivar, based on Shani, the Vedic god manifested in the planet
Saturn. In the Thai solar calendar of Thailand, the day is named from the Pali
word for Saturn, and the color associated with Saturday is purple. Position in
the week. The international standard ISO 8601 sets Saturday as the sixth day of
the week. The three Abrahamic religions (Judaism, Christianity and Islam)
regard Saturday as the seventh day of the week. As a result, many refused the
ISO 8601 standards and continue to use Saturday as their seventh day. This is
concordant with the European pagan tradition, which named the days of the week
after the seven Classical planets (in order Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus, Saturn), naming the first day of the week for the Sun, perceived as most
important, and moving to those perceived as lesser. Astrology. In astrology,
Saturday is associated with the planet Saturn and symbolized by that planet's
symbol .
