Khatam an-Nabuwwah KhƒÅtam al-Nabiyyƒ´n (), or Seal of the Prophets (sometimes
rendered as Khatam an-Nabuwwah) is a title used by the Qur'an to designate the
Islamic prophet Muhammad. It is often understood to mean that Muhammad is the
last in a series of prophets which, according to Muslim beliefs, were chosen by
God to deliver the divine message of Islam. Other interpretations of the Arabic
word "KhƒÅtam" are a seal (of approval), a seal as a means of authentication,
and/or superiority,(see Ahmadiyya), all Muslims generally agree that Muhammad
received the final revelation from God, in the form of the Qur'an, and that it
was intended for all mankind, for all time. Origin. The term "Khatam an-
nabuwwah" is derived from the Quranic phrase "Khatamun Nabiyyƒ´n" ‚Äúseal of
the prophets‚Äù. Khatama al-'Amala is equivalent to 'Faragha min al-'Almali'
which means 'to get over with the task.' 'Khatama al-Ina' bears the meaning
'The vessel has been closed and sealed so that nothing can go into it, nor can
its contents spill out.' 'Khatam-al-kitab' conveys the meaning 'The letter has
been enclosed and sealed so that it is finally secured.' 'Khatama-'Ala-al-Qalb'
means 'The heart has been sealed so that it cannot perceive anything new nor
can it forswear what it has already imbibed.' 'Khatamul Auliya means 'Seal of
the believers - a title bestowed upon Ali by Muhammad 'Khitamu-Kulli-Mashrubin'
implies 'the final taste that is left in the mouth when the drink is over.'
Katimatu Kulli Shaiinn 'Aqibatuhu wa Akhiratuhu means "The end in the case of
everything denotes its doom and ultimate finish." Khatm-ul-Shaii Balagha
Akhirahu conveys the sense, "To end a thing means to carry it to its ultimate
limit." The term Khatam-i-Qur'an is used in the similar sense and the closing
verses of Qur'anic Surahs are referred to as Khawatim. Khatim-ul-Qaum Akhirhuum
means "The last man in the tribe." For this reason all linguists and
commentators agree that Khatam-ul-Nabiyyin means 'The Last in the line of
Prophets.' The word Khatam in its dictionary meaning and linguistic usage does
not refer to the post office stamp which is affixed on the outgoing mail. Its
literal meaning is the 'seal' which is but on the envelope to secure its
contents. Classical Lexicons. 'Khatam-al-kitab' conveys the meaning 'The letter
has been enclosed and sealed so that it is finally secured.' 'Khatama-'Ala-al-
Qalb' means 'The heart has been sealed so that it cannot perceive anything new
nor can it forswear what it has already imbibed.' 'Khatamul Auliya means 'Seal
of the believers - a title bestowed upon Ali by Muhammad 'Khitamu-Kulli-
Mashrubin' implies 'the final taste that is left in the mouth when the drink is
over.' Katimatu Kulli Shaiinn 'Aqibatuhu wa Akhiratuhu means "The end in the
case of everything denotes its doom and ultimate finish." Khatm-ul-Shaii
Balagha Akhirahu conveys the sense, "To end a thing means to carry it to its
ultimate limit." The term Khatam-i-Qur'an is used in the similar sense and the
closing verses of Qur'anic Surahs are referred to as Khawatim. Khatim-ul-Qaum
Akhirhuum means "The last man in the tribe." For this reason many linguists and
commentators agree that Khatam-ul-Nabiyyin means 'The Last in the line of
Prophets.' The word Khatam in its dictionary meaning and linguistic usage does
not refer to the post office stamp which is affixed on the outgoing mail. Its
literal meaning is the 'seal' which is but on the envelope to secure its
contents. Another interpretation of the word khatam However, it has been argued
by various popular scholars of Islam that the real meaning of Khatam is a seal
(see Tajul Aroos taj ul Aroos, Lisanul Arab, and Qamoos), and the phrase should
be interpreted in the light of this meaning. Khaldun Ibn Khaldun says it is
wrong to interpret the word Khatam in this verse to mean the last or the end
(see Muqaddama Vol. II, p.¬ 54, Paris) (Muqaddimah). He holds that the word
Khatam denotes the consummation and completion of a thing, which he further
explains by the words, authenticity, perfection and validity. When a seal is
put to a letter it becomes authentic and complete. The seal may be put in the
end or in the beginning. According to him, therefore, Khataman Nabiyyeen would
mean the truest and the most perfect of prophets and not the last in point of
time. It refers to his status and place among the prophets and not to the time
of his advent. In one of his sayings Muhammad calls his uncle, Hadhrat Abbasra,
Khatamul Muhajireen (see Kanzul Ommal, Vol. VI, p.¬ 178)( Kanz al-Ummal). But
it does not mean that Abbas was the last Muhajir (refugee) of the whole Muslim
world. Similarly, Hadhrat Alira is called Khatamul Auliya (see Tafsir Safi
under the Quranic verse 33:41). Ibn Khaldun says this phrase is understood to
mean that Ali was a perfect saint and not the last (see Muqaddama, Vol. II
pp.¬ 165‚Äì167). An Arab poet, Hasan bin Wahab, called Abu Tamam (the compiler
of Himasa) Khatamush-Shu'ara (see Wafiyatul A'ayan Li Ibn Khallikan, Vol. I,
p.¬ 123, Cairo). Obviously Abu Tamam was not the last poet. The word Khatam,
therefore, used in such phrases means the best and not the last.
Interpretations. The most commonly held view about the phrase ‚ÄúSeal of the
Prophets‚Äù is that ‚Äúseal‚Äù means finality and end. Some scholars have
translated and interpreted the word ‚Äúseal‚Äù in terms of honour and
superiority, instead of the finality of the prophethood. But the consensus of
the Muslim community regards the denial or doubt on finality of prophethood as
apostasy. Various views. Views of various school of thoughts among majority of
sects have slight difference on the basis of ayat and Hadith. However most are
of the same view on the finality of Muhammad as prophet. Hadith and traditions
of Muhammad. Sunnis claim to quote the Hadith of Umar and prophecy as proof of
Muhammad being the last prophet, while both Shi‚Äòƒ´ and Sunni Muslims quote
the Hadith of position. "The tribe of Israel was guided by prophets. When a
prophet passed away, another prophet succeeded him. no prophet will come after
me; only "caliphs" (literally, "successors") will succeed me." Muhammad
affirmed: "My position in relation to the prophets who came before me can be
explained by the following example: A man erected a building and adorned this
edifice with great beauty, but he left an empty niche, in the corner where just
one brick was missing. People looked around the building and marvelled at its
beauty, but wondered why a brick was missing from that niche? I am like unto
that one missing brick and I am the last in the line of the Prophets." "So I
came and in me the line of Prophets has ended." The very same tradition in
similar words has been incorporated among other traditions reported by Jabir
ibn Abd-Allah; and its last sentence reads, "It is in me that line of Prophets
came to its final end." Musnad Ahmad contains traditions reported by Ubay ibn
Ka'b, Abu Sa`id al-Khudri and Abu Hurairah on the same subject with a slight
variation of words here and there. Muhammad affirmed: "The chain of Messengers
and Prophets has come to an end. There shall be no Messenger nor Prophet after
me." Muhammad observed: "I am Muhammad, I am Ahmad, I am the Effacer and
infidelity shall be erased through me; I am the Assembler. People shall be
assembled on Doomsday after my time. And I am the last in the sense that no
prophet shall succeed me." Muhammad observed: "God Almighty hath sent unto the
world no apostle who did not warn his people about the appearance of Dajjal
(Anti-Christ, but Dajjal did not appear in their time). I am the last in the
line of Prophets and ye are the last community of believers. Without
doubt,then, Dajjal shall appear from amongst ye". 'Abdur Rahman bin Jubair
reported: "I heard Abdullah bin 'Amr ibn-'As narrating that one day the Holy
Prophet came out of his house and joined our company. His manner gave us the
impression as if he were leaving us.' He said, 'I am Muhammad, the unlettered
prophet of Allah' and repeated this statement three times. Then he affirmed:
"There will be no prophet after me'." Muhammad said: "Allah will send no
Apostle after me, but only Mubashshirat. It was said: what is meant by al-
Mubashshirat. He said : Good vision or pious vision". (In other words there is
no possibility of Divine revelation in future. At the most if some one receives
an inspiration from Allah he will receive it in the form of "pious dream."
Muhammad said: "If an Apostle were to succeed me, it would have been 'Umar bin
Khattab." Muhammad told Ali, "You are related to me as Aaron was related to
Moses. But no Apostle will come after me." This tradition is recorded in
Bukhari and Muslim in the account of the battle of Tabouk also. Musnad records
two traditions narrated by Sa`d ibn Abi Waqqas on this subject. The last
sentence in one of these traditions runs as follows: "Behold there is no
prophethood after me." Detailed accounts of the traditions report that on the
eve of his departure for the battle of Tabouk, Muhammad had resolved to leave
Ali behind him in order to look after the defense and supervise the affairs of
Medina. The hypocrites thereupon began to spread insinuations and rumours about
Ali. Ali went to Muhammad and said: "'O Prophet of Allah, are you leaving me
behind among women and children?'" On this occasion in order to set his mind at
peace Muhammad observed: "You are related to me as was Aaron with Moses." In
other words "as Hadrat Moses on the Mount Tur had left Hadrat Aaron behind to
look after the tribe of Israel, so I (Muhammad) leave you behind to look after
the defense of Medina." At the same time apprehending that this comparative
allusion to Aaron might later on give rise to heresies, Muhammad immediately
made it clear that "There will be no Prophet after me." Thauban reports:
"Muhammad observed: And there will arise Thirty imposters in my Ummah and each
one of them will pronounce to the world that he is a prophet, but I am the last
in the line of the Prophets of God and no Apostle will come after me." Abu
Dawood in "Kitab-ul-Malahim" has recorded another tradition reported by Abu
Hurairah in the same subject. Tirmidhi has also recorded these two traditions
as reported by Thauban and Abu Hurairah. The text of the second tradition runs
thus: "It will come to this that thirty imposters will arise and each one of
them will put forth his claim to be the Apostle of God." Muhammad observed:
"Among the tribe of Israel who went before you there indeed were such people
who held communion with God, even though they were not his Prophets. If ever
there arose a person from among my people who would hold communion with God, it
would be none else but 'Umar." A version of this same tradition in Muslim
contains Muhaddithuna instead of Yukallimuna. But then Mukalima and Muhaddith
bear identical meaning i.e., a man enjoys the privilege of holding direct
communion with God or a person who is addressed by the Almighty from the
unseen. Thus we conclude that if there had been any person among the followers
of Muhammad who could hold communion with God without being raised to the
dignity of prophethood, it would have been `Umar. Muhammad said: "No Prophet
will come after me and there will, therefore, be no other community of
followers of any new prophet." Muhammad observed: "I am the last in line of the
prophets of God and my Masjid is the last Masjid (referring the holy Masjid of
the Prophet)." A large number of such traditions of Muhammad have been reported
by the "Sahabah" (companions) and a great many compilers have recorded them
from authoritative sources. A study of these traditions shows that Muhammad on
several occasions, and in various ways and in different words made it
explicitly clear that he was the last Prophet of God; that no prophet would
follow him and that the line of prophets had ended in him. Furthermore, those
would claim to be prophets and messengers of God after his time would be
impostors and liars. There can be no authentic, creditable and conclusive
interpretation of the words of the Qur'an, Khatam-un-Nabiyyin, than that given
by Muhammad for the credentials of Muhammad need no proof and the authority of
his words is unassailable. His words are authentic and a proof in itself. When
Muhammad is explaining a "Nass" of the Qur'an, his explanation is the most
authentic and a proof positive. Scholars of Islamic jurisprudence, Tafseer &
Hadith. A majority of Sunni scholars have adhered to the view that "khatam"
means last. `Abd Allah ibn `Abbas detailed in his commentary of Qur'an mentions
Ab≈´ ·∏§anƒ´fa, the founder of the Sunni Hanafi school of "fiqh" (Islamic
jurisprudence), comments on one of the incident of his life Fakhr al-Din al-
Razi also known as Fakhruddin Razi or Imam Razi, was a Persian polymath: a
Sunni Islamic theologian of the Ash'ari school, Islamic legal scholar of the
Shafi`i school, Madrasah professor, and expert in a wide variety of
disciplines, including the traditional Islamic fields of "Sharia" law, Fiqh
jurisprudence, Islamic literature, Tafsir exegesis, Kalam theology, Arabic
grammar and Muslim history; the Islamic philosophies of ethics and metaphysics;
the formal sciences of logic and mathematics says in his Tafsir: Ibn Kathir in
his commentary states: The 12th century Islamic philosopher, Raghib Isfahani,
says in his Al-Mufradat fi Gharib al-Quran: He further explainthis epithet in
these words: Ibn Hajar, a medieval Shafi`ite Sunni scholar of Islam who
represents the entire realm of the Sunni world in the field of Hadith commented
A majority of Salafi and Sunni scholars have adhered to the view that khatam
means last. Ibn Kathir in his commentary states. Khatama al-'Amala is
equivalent to 'Faragha min al-'Almali' which means 'to get over with the task.'
'Khatama al-Ina' bears the meaning 'The vessel has been closed and sealed so
that nothing can go into it, nor can its contents spill out.' 'Khatam-al-kitab'
conveys the meaning 'The letter has been enclosed and sealed so that it is
finally secured.' 'Khatama-'Ala-al-Qalb' means 'The heart has been sealed so
that it cannot perceive anything new nor can it forswear what it has already
imbibed.' 'Khitamu-Kulli-Mashrubin' implies 'the final taste that is left in
the mouth when the drink is over.' Katimatu Kulli Shaiinn 'Aqibatuhu wa
Akhiratuhu means "The end in the case of everything denotes its doom and
ultimate finish." Khatm-ul-Shaii Balagha Akhirahu conveys the sense, "To end a
thing means to carry it to its ultimate limit." The term Khatam-i-Qur'an is
used in the similar sense and the closing verses of Qur'anic Surahs are
referred to as Khawatim. Khatim-ul-Qaum Akhirhuum means "The last man in the
tribe." For this reason all linguists and commentators agree that Khatam-ul-
Nabiyyin means 'The Last in the line of Prophets.' The word Khatam in its
dictionary meaning and linguistic usage does not refer to the post office stamp
which is affixed on the outgoing mail. Its literal meaning is the 'seal' which
is but on the envelope to secure its contents. Khatam meaning honour, high
status and not last Aisha, the wife of the Muhammad states; Raghib Isfahani
states; Abdul-Qadir Gilani wrote; Muhammad Qasim Nanotvi, the founder of
Deoband seminary seems to conform to the Sufi idea of Seal i.e. honour and not
last. He writes, Abdul Kareem Jilani, states; Abdul Wahhab She'raani states;
Muhammad Tahir, who commented on Aisha's statement "say he is Khataman
Nabiyyeen but do not say there is not prophet after him" said; Ali al-Qari, an
Imam of the Hanafi school and a renowned interpreter of Hadith, wrote; Shah
Waliullah who lived in India during the Mughal Empire and is sometimes known as
a Mujaddid held the following opinion; Ahmad Farooqi states; Mohiyyiud Din ibni
Arabi states; Abu Ja'far Sadiq states; Ahmadiyya Interpretation. The Ahmadiyya
Muslim Community while accepting Muhammad as the 'seal of Prophets' and the
last prophet to have brought a complete and comprehensive universal law for
humanity, believe that prophethood subordinate to Muhammad is still open.
Muhammad is believed to have brought prophethood to perfection and was the last
law-bearing prophet, the apex of man's spiritual evolution. New prophets can
come but they must be subordinate to Muhammad and cannot exceed him in
excellence nor alter his teaching or bring any new law or religion. The
Ahmadiyya community believes Mirza Ghulam Ahmad to be the promised Messiah and
Mahdi, who claimed a certain kind of prophethood but never claimed to have
brought a new divine law or change the law of Muhammad, but to have been
Divinely appointed to revive and universally establish the law/religion of
Muhammad. The Ahmadiyya community draws upon various opinions of Islamic
scholars throughout the history of Islam to show the possibility of non-law
bearing prophethood within Islam. Many orthodox Muslims argue that the Ahmadi
position is essentially a misrepresentation of otherwise simple expressions
which prove that Muhammad was the final prophet. However many orthodox have not
yet recognised that some learned and respected scholars like Ibn Arabi, Raghib
Isfahani and the Deobandi, Muhammad Qasim Nanotvi agree that the term "khatam"
means superior instead of last. There seems to be confusion among the orthodox
regarding the real meaning of word khatm. But still it should be noted that
there are many other well known Islamic scholars who take the meaning of the
word "khatam" as last. Besides a certain Arabic word can have many different
meanings. An example is the word 'Alaq' in sura Al-Alaq of the Qur'an. The word
"Alaq" has different meanings like "that which clings", "clot of blood" and so
on. On types of prophethood General Prophethood talks about the Good vision or
pious vision to the pious people not in the sense that any other Prophet with
revelations in any form is coming. Ahmadis contend that the Qur'an itself
clears up the meaning of the term "Khatamun Nabiyeen" in Chapter 4, verse 69:
"And whoso obeys Allah and this Messenger of His shall be among those on whom
Allah has bestowed His blessings, namely, the Prophets, the Truthful, the
Martyrs, and the Righteous. And excellent companions are these." In recent
history, the interpretation of the term "seal of the prophets" has been a cause
of much contention between traditional Islam and the Ahmadiyya movement. The
differences arose due to differences in the definition and usage of the terms
"seal" and "prophet". Ahmadis contend that the Qur'an itself clears up the
meaning of the term "Khatamun Nabiyeen" in Chapter 4, verse 70: "And whoso
obeys Allah and this Messenger of His shall be among those on whom Allah has
bestowed His blessings, namely, the Prophets, the Truthful, the Martyrs, and
the Righteous. And excellent companions are these." Ahmadis claim that this
verse clearly lays down that Prophethood can be obtained still but only by
becoming a perfect model of obedience to "Allah and this Messenger". As the
word "min" meaning "one of" in Arabic occurs before the word "Nabiyeen",
Ahmadis argue that this is a categorical statement in the Qur'an that there
shall be at least one from among the followers of Muhammad who would attain
this rank of subordinate prophethood-whose prophethood would be obtained only
through becoming a mirror of obedience to Muhammad. As Ahmadis believe that
Jesus is dead according to the Qur'an and believe that the prophesy of his
second coming as a Muslim refers to the coming of one from among the followers
of Muhammad in the power and spirit of Jesus, Ahmadis claim that this "second
Jesus" has come in the person of Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, founder of the Ahmadiyya
community in Islam. This is of course argued against by both Sunni and Shia
sects. Sunnis especially argue that the Qur'an was revealed in seven ahruf,
many of which have "Khatam" as "Khatim", meaning last or final. The Ahmadi view
is that the seven "ahruf" were only differences in Arabic dialect, not meaning.
Furthermore, the standardisation of the Qur'an by the 3rd Caliph of Muhammad,
Othman, and the destruction of all ahrufs other than that given forth by
Muhammad means that any argument based on the ahrufs has been nullified.
Additionally, Ahmadiyya understanding of the term Seal of the Prophets also
accommodates the concept of "last". Ahmadis believe that Muhammad is the last
prophet in the sense that any prophet to come after him must attain the rank of
prophethood by following him, as indicated by chapter 4, verse 69. Ahmadis
contend that this is truly the meaning of "last" and that the belief that Jesus
of 2000 years ago, who had attained his status of prophethood independently of
following Muhammad or obedience to him, would come back and revive the faith of
the world and that the world would benefit from a prophethood whose origin was
in no way linked to the prophet Muhammad, would be a blatant contravention of
Seal of Prophethood. Sufi interpretations. Most commonly held view about the
phrase Seal of Prophets is that "seal" means finality and end. Ghazali says
Rumi in his famous Masnavi writes, Further he says Ahmad Sirhindi an Indian
Islamic scholar from Punjab and a prominent member of the Naqshbandi Sufi order
says of this subject in one of his letters Further he explained his views
regarding any one claim to be Muslim but also a messenger All those who claim
that non law bearing prophet can come they believe in Return of Prophet Jesus
Over all there is a complete agreement that none of any scholars or sufis of
Sunni or Shia sects (including the one who had differences of opinion on
declinations of word Seal or Khatam) of Islam believed in any such person who
claimed to be messenger or Prophet after Muhammad, although in history there
are many instances where people came with such claims. In fact they objected
and opposed such claims. Distinction between "messenger" and "prophet". Most
Islamic commentators agree that "messenger" ("ras≈´l") refers to those who
bring a divine revelation which includes a new doctrinal system, while a
"prophet" ("nabƒ´") is one who explains ethical teachings on the basis of an
existing religion. Every messenger is a prophet, but not every prophet is a
messenger. Academic view. According to A.C. Welch, Muslim interpretation of
"khatim an-nabiyyin" as the "last and greatest of the prophets" is most likely
based on a later interpretation. Carl W. Ernst considers this phrase to mean
that Muhammad's "imprint on history is as final as a wax seal on a letter".
According to Arabic lexicon and the linguistic usage Khatam means to affix
seal; to close, to come to an end; and to carry something to its ultimate end.
Wilferd Madelung states that the meaning of this term is not certain. Muslims
also believe that a messenger is a prophet who received a book from God. Views
of other religions. Bah√°'√≠ view. The Bah√°'√≠ Faith regards Muhammad as the
seal of the prophets, but does not interpret this term as meaning that no
further messengers from God are possible. In particular, Bah√°'√≠s regard the
end-times prophecies of Islam (and other faiths) as being symbolic, and see the
B√°b and Bah√°'u'll√°h as symbolically fulfilling these prophetic expectations.
The latter of these is the founder of the Bah√°'√≠ religion, which considers
Islamic law to have been superseded by its own. Muhammad is seen as ending the
"Adamic cycle", also known as the "Prophetic cycle", which is stated to have
begun approximately 6,000 years ago, and the B√°b and Bah√°'u'll√°h as starting
the "Bah√°'√≠ cycle", or "Cycle of Fulfillment", which will last at least five
hundred thousand years with numerous Manifestations of God appearing throughout
that time. Bah√°'u'll√°h gave the Title "King of the Messengers" ("sult√°n al-
rusul") to the B√°b, and the "Sender of the Messengers" ("mursil al-rusul") to
himself. In the Kit√°b-i-√çq√°n, he uses the Islamic concept of the oneness of
the prophets to show that the term "seal of the prophets" does not apply to
Muhammad only, but to all the prophets. He also makes a direct link between
Qur'an 33:40, about the seal of the prophets, and 33:44, about the promise of
the "attainment of the divine Presence" on the day of resurrection, which he
interprets as the meeting with the Manifestation of God. The day of
resurrection is interpreted as the day of the advent of the Qa'im or Mahdi.
These interpretive and legal differences have caused the Bah√°'√≠s to be seen
as heretics and apostates by many Muslims. Controversies. The concept of the
finality of prophethood of Muhammad has caused controversy in recent times. The
Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, hold Mirza Ghulam Ahmad to be a prophet subordinate
to Muhammad. Ahmed claimed to be the Promised Messiah and Mahdi in 1889 and
founded a movement in Qadian, India. His claims resulted in a violent reaction
among many Muslims of the India subcontinent. The Salafi and Sunni scholars
vehemently opposed him and in subsequent years a movement for the Majlis
Tahafuz-e-Khatam-e-Nabuwwat was founded. This movement, at times violent, is
still very active in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and other countries where
Ahmadiyya adherents are present.
