Secular humanism The philosophy or life stance secular humanism (alternatively
known by some adherents as Humanism, specifically with a capital H to
distinguish it from other forms of humanism) embraces human reason, ethics,
social justice and philosophical naturalism, whilst specifically rejecting
religious dogma, supernaturalism, pseudoscience or superstition as the basis of
morality and decision making. It posits that human beings are capable of being
ethical and moral without religion or a god. It does not, however, assume that
humans are either inherently evil or innately good, nor does it present humans
as being superior to nature. Rather, the humanist life stance emphasizes the
unique responsibility facing humanity and the ethical consequences of human
decisions. Fundamental to the concept of secular humanism is the strongly held
viewpoint that ideologyâ€”be it religious or politicalâ€”must be thoroughly
examined by each individual and not simply accepted or rejected on faith. Along
with this, an essential part of secular humanism is a continually adapting
search for truth, primarily through science and philosophy. Many Humanists
derive their moral codes from a philosophy of utilitarianism, ethical
naturalism or evolutionary ethics, and some advocate a science of morality. The
International Humanist and Ethical Union (IHEU) is the world union of more than
one hundred Humanist, rationalist, irreligious, atheistic, Bright, secular,
Ethical Culture, and freethought organizations in more than 40 countries. The
"Happy Human" is the official symbol of the IHEU as well as being regarded as a
universally recognised symbol for those who call themselves Humanists. Secular
humanist organizations are found in all parts of the world. Those who call
themselves humanists are estimated to number between four and five million
people worldwide. Terminology. The meaning of the phrase "secular humanism" has
evolved over time. The phrase has been used since at least the 1930s, and in
1943, the then Archbishop of Canterbury, William Temple, was reported as
warning that the "Christian tradition... was in danger of being undermined by a
"Secular Humanism" which hoped to retain Christian values without Christian
faith." During the 1960s and 1970s the term was embraced by some humanists who
considered themselves anti-religious, as well as those who, although not
critical of religion in its various guises, preferred a non-religious approach.
The release in 1980 of "A Secular Humanist Declaration" by the newly formed
Council for Democratic and Secular Humanism (CODESH, now the Council for
Secular Humanism) gave secular humanism an organisational identity within the
United States. However, many adherents of the approach reject the use of the
word "secular" as obfuscating and confusing, and consider that the term
"secular humanism" has been "demonized by the religious right... All too often
secular humanism is reduced to a sterile outlook consisting of little more than
secularism slightly broadened by academic ethics. This kind of 'hyphenated
humanism' easily becomes more about the adjective than its referent". Adherents
of this view, including the International Humanist and Ethical Union and the
American Humanist Association, consider that the unmodified but capitalised
word Humanism should be used. The endorsement by the IHEU of the capitalization
of the word "Humanism", and the dropping of any adjective such as "secular", is
quite recent. The American Humanist Association began to adopt this view in
1973, and the IHEU formally endorsed the position in 1989. In 2002 the IHEU
General Assembly unanimously adopted the Amsterdam Declaration, which
represents the official defining statement of World Humanism for Humanists.
This declaration makes exclusive use of capitalized "Humanist" and "Humanism",
which is consistent with IHEU's general practice and recommendations for
promoting a unified Humanist identity. To further promote Humanist identity,
these words are also free of any adjectives, as recommended by prominent
members of IHEU. Such usage is not universal among IHEU member organizations,
though most of them do observe these conventions. History. The term secularism
was coined in 1851 by George Jacob Holyoake to describe "a form of opinion
which concerns itself only with questions, the issues of which can be tested by
the experience of this life." Once a staunch Owenite, Holyoake was strongly
influenced by Auguste Comte, the founder of positivism and of modern sociology.
Comte believed human history would progress in a "law of three stages" from a
theological phase, to the "metaphysical", toward a fully rational "positivist"
society. In later life, Comte had attempted to introduce a "religion of
humanity" in light of growing anti-religious sentiment and social malaise in
revolutionary France. This "religion would necessarily fulfil the functional,
cohesive role that supernatural religion once served. Whilst Comte's religious
movement was unsuccessful, the positivist philosophy of science itself played a
major role in the proliferation of secular organizations in the 19th century.
Historical use of the term humanism (reflected in some current academic usage),
is related to the writings of pre-Socratic philosophers. These writings were
lost to European societies until Renaissance scholars rediscovered them through
Muslim sources and translated them from Arabic into European languages. Thus
the term humanist can mean a humanities scholar, as well as refer to The
Enlightenment/ Renaissance intellectuals, and those who have agreement with the
pre-Socratics, as distinct from secular humanists. In the 1930s, "humanism" was
generally used in a religious sense by the Ethical movement in the United
States, and not much favoured among the non-religious in Britain. Yet "it was
from the Ethical movement that the non-religious philosophical sense of
"Humanism" gradually emerged in Britain, and it was from the convergence of the
Ethical and Rationalist movements that this sense of "Humanism" eventually
prevailed throughout the Freethought movement". As an organized movement,
Humanism itself is quite recent â€“ born at the University of Chicago in the
1920s, and made public in 1933 with the publication of the first Humanist
Manifesto. The American Humanist Association was incorporated as an Illinois
non-profit organization in 1943. The International Humanist and Ethical Union
was founded in 1952, when a gathering of world Humanists met under the
leadership of Sir Julian Huxley. The British Humanist Association took that
name in 1967, but had developed from the Union of Ethical Societies which had
been founded by Stanton Coit in 1896. Manifestos and declarations. Humanists
have put together various Humanist Manifestos, in attempts to unify the
Humanist identity. The original signers of the first Humanist Manifesto of
1933, declared themselves to be religious humanists. Because, in their view,
traditional religions were failing to meet the needs of their day, the signers
of 1933 declared it a necessity to establish a religion that was a dynamic
force to meet the needs of the day. However, this "religion" did not profess a
belief in any god. Since then two additional Manifestos were written to replace
the first. In the Preface of Humanist Manifesto II, in 1973, the authors Paul
Kurtz and Edwin H. Wilson assert that faith and knowledge are required for a
hopeful vision for the future. Manifesto II references a section on Religion
and states traditional religion renders a disservice to humanity. ManifestoÂ II
recognizes the following groups to be part of their naturalistic philosophy:
"scientific", "ethical", "democratic", "religious", and "Marxist" humanism.
International Humanist and Ethical Union. In 2002, the IHEU General Assembly
unanimously adopted the Amsterdam Declaration 2002 which represents the
official defining statement of World Humanism. All member organisations of the
International Humanist and Ethical Union are required by bylaw 5.1 to accept
the "Minimum Statement on Humanism": Council for Secular Humanism. "A Secular
Humanist Declaration" was issued in 1980 by the Council for Secular Humanism's
predecessor, CODESH. It lays out ten ideals: Free inquiry as opposed to
censorship and imposition of belief; separation of church and state; the ideal
of freedom from religious control and from jingoistic government control;
ethics based on critical intelligence rather than that deduced from religious
belief; moral education; religious skepticism; reason; a belief in science and
technology as the best way of understanding the world; evolution; and education
as the essential method of building humane, free, and democratic societies.
American Humanist Association. General doctrines of Humanism are also set out
in the "Humanist Manifesto" prepared by the American Humanist Association.
Ethics and relationship to religious belief. In the 20th and 21st centuries,
members of Humanist organizations have disagreed as to whether Humanism is a
religion. They categorize themselves in one of three ways. Religious Humanism,
in the tradition of the earliest Humanist organizations in the UK and US,
attempts to fulfill the traditional social role of religion. Secular humanism
considers all forms of religion, including religious Humanism, to be
superseded. In order to sidestep disagreements between these two factions,
recent Humanist proclamations define Humanism as a "life stance"; proponents of
this view making up the third faction. All three types of Humanism (and all
three of the American Humanist Association's manifestos) reject deference to
supernatural beliefs; promoting the practical, methodological naturalism of
science, but also going further and supporting the philosophical stance of
metaphysical naturalism. The result is an approach to issues in a secular way.
Humanism addresses ethics without reference to the supernatural as well,
attesting that ethics is a human enterprise (see naturalistic ethics). Secular
humanism does not prescribe a specific theory of morality or code of ethics. As
stated by the Council for Secular Humanism, Secular humanism affirms that with
the present state of scientific knowledge, dogmatic belief in an absolutist
moral/ethical system (e.g. Kantian, Islamic, Christian) is unreasonable.
However, it affirms that individuals engaging in rational moral/ethical
deliberations can discover some universal "objective standards". Many Humanists
adopt principles of the Golden Rule. Some believe that universal moral
standards are required for the proper functioning of society. However, they
believe such necessary universality can and should be achieved by developing a
richer notion of morality through reason, experience and scientific inquiry
rather than through faith in a supernatural realm or source. Humanism is
compatible with atheism and agnosticism, but being atheist or agnostic does
not, itself, make one a Humanist. Nevertheless, humanism is diametrically
opposed to state atheism. According to Paul Kurtz, considered by some to be the
founder of the American secular humanist movement, one of the differences
between Marxist-Leninist atheists and humanists is the latter's commitment to
"human freedom and democracy" while stating that the militant atheism of the
Soviet Union consistently violated basic human rights. Kurtz also stated that
the "defense of religious liberty is as precious to the humanist as are the
rights of the believers". Greg M. Epstein states that, "modern, organized
Humanism began, in the minds of its founders, as nothing more nor less than a
religion without a God". Many Humanists address ethics from the point of view
of ethical naturalism, and some support an actual science of morality. Some
philosophers like Peter Singer see Humanism as speciesist and lend themselves
to more of a Personism. Modern context. Secular humanist organizations are
found in all parts of the world. Those who call themselves humanists are
estimated to number between four and five million people worldwide in 31
countries, but there is uncertainty because of the lack of universal definition
throughout censuses. Humanism is a non-theistic belief system and, as such, it
could be a sub-category of "Religion" only if that term is defined to mean
"Religion and (any) belief system". This is the case in the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on freedom of religion "and" beliefs.
Many national censuses contentiously define Humanism as a further sub-category
of the sub-category "No Religion", which typically includes atheist,
rationalist and agnostic thought. In England, Wales and Australia, around 15%
of the population specifies "No Religion" in the national census. However, in
its 2006 and 2011 census Australia used Humanism as an example of "other
religions". In the USA, the decennial census does not inquire about religious
affiliation or its lack; surveys report the figure at roughly 13%. In the 2001
Canadian census, 16.5% of the populace reported having no religious
affiliation. In Scotland, the figure is 28%. One of the largest Humanist
organizations in the world (relative to population) is Norway's "Human-Etisk
Forbund", which had over 70,000 members out of a population of around 4.6
million in 2004 (1.5% of the population). This popularity is partly
attributable to a unique set of Church-State relations. The International
Humanist and Ethical Union (IHEU) is the worldwide umbrella organization for
those adhering to the Humanist life stance. It represents the views of over
three million Humanists organized in over 100 national organizations in 30
countries. Originally based in the Netherlands, the IHEU now operates from
London. Some regional groups that adhere to variants of the Humanist life
stance, such as the humanist subgroup of the Unitarian Universalist
Association, do not belong to the IHEU. Although the European Humanist
Federation is also separate from the IHEU, the two organisations work together
and share an agreed protocol. Starting in the mid-20th century, religious
fundamentalists and the religious right began using the term "secular humanism"
in hostile fashion. Francis A. Schaeffer, an American theologian based in
Switzerland, seizing upon the exclusion of the divine from most humanist
writings, argued that rampant secular humanism would lead to moral relativism
and ethical bankruptcy in his book "How Should We Then Live: The Rise and
Decline of Western Thought and Culture" (1976). Schaeffer portrayed secular
humanism as pernicious and diabolical, and warned it would undermine the moral
and spiritual tablet of America. His themes have been very widely repeated in
Fundamentalist preaching in North America. Toumey (1993) found that secular
humanism is typically portrayed as a vast evil conspiracy, deceitful and
immoral, responsible for feminism, pornography, abortion, homosexuality, and
New Age spirituality. In certain areas of the world, Humanism finds itself in
conflict with religious fundamentalism, especially over the issue of the
separation of church and state. Many Humanists see religions as superstitious,
repressive and closed-minded, while religious fundamentalists may see Humanists
as a threat to the values set out in their sacred texts. Humanist celebrations.
Some Humanists celebrate official religion-based public holidays, such as
Christmas or Easter, but as secular holidays rather than religious ones. Many
Humanists also celebrate the winter and summer solstice, the former of which
(in the northern hemisphere) is the root of the celebration of Christmas, and
the equinoxes, of which the vernal equinox is associated with Christianity's
Easter and indeed with all other springtime festivals of renewal. The Society
for Humanistic Judaism celebrates most Jewish holidays in a secular manner. The
IHEU endorses World Humanist Day (21 June), Darwin Day (12 February), Human
Rights Day (10 December) and HumanLight (23 December) as official days of
Humanist celebration, though none are yet a public holiday. In many countries,
Humanist officiants (or celebrants) perform celebrancy services for weddings,
funerals, child namings, coming of age ceremonies, and other rituals. Legal
mentions in the United States. The issue of whether and in what sense secular
humanism might be considered a religion, and what the implications of this
would be has become the subject of legal maneuvering and political debate in
the United States. The first reference to "secular humanism" in a US legal
context was in 1961, although church-state separation lawyer Leo Pfeffer had
referred to it in his 1958 book, "Creeds in Competition". Hatch amendment. The
Education for Economic Security Act of 1984 included a section, Section 20
U.S.C.A. 4059, which initially read: "Grants under this subchapter ['Magnet
School Assistance'] may not be used for consultants, for transportation or for
any activity which does not augment academic improvement." With no public
notice, Senator Orrin Hatch tacked on to the proposed exclusionary subsection
the words "or for any course of instruction the substance of which is Secular
Humanism". Implementation of this provision ran into practical problems because
neither the Senator's staff, nor the Senate's Committee on Labor and Human
Resources, nor the Department of Justice could propose a definition of what
would constitute a "course of instruction the substance of which is Secular
Humanism". So, this determination was left up to local school boards. The
provision provoked a storm of controversy which within a year led Senator Hatch
to propose, and Congress to pass, an amendment to delete from the statute all
reference to secular humanism. While this episode did not dissuade
fundamentalists from continuing to object to what they regarded as the
"teaching of Secular Humanism", it did point out the vagueness of the claim.
Case law. "Torcaso v. Watkins". The phrase "secular humanism" became prominent
after it was used in the United States Supreme Court case "Torcaso v. Watkins."
In the 1961 decision, Justice Hugo Black commented in a footnote, "Among
religions in this country which do not teach what would generally be considered
a belief in the existence of God are Buddhism, Taoism, Ethical Culture, Secular
Humanism, and others." "Fellowship of Humanity v. County of Alameda". The
footnote in "Torcaso v. Watkins" referenced "Fellowship of Humanity v. County
of Alameda", a 1957 case in which an organization of humanists sought a tax
exemption on the ground that they used their property "solely and exclusively
for religious worship." Despite the group's non-theistic beliefs, the court
determined that the activities of the "Fellowship of Humanity", which included
weekly Sunday meetings, were analogous to the activities of theistic churches
and thus entitled to an exemption. The "Fellowship of Humanity" case itself
referred to "Humanism" but did not mention the term "secular humanism".
Nonetheless, this case was cited by Justice Black to justify the inclusion of
secular humanism in the list of religions in his note. Presumably Justice Black
added the word "secular" to emphasize the non-theistic nature of the
"Fellowship of Humanity" and distinguish their brand of humanism from that
associated with, for example, Christian humanism. "Washington Ethical Society
v. District of Columbia". Another case alluded to in the "Torcaso v. Watkins"
footnote, and said by some to have established secular humanism as a religion
under the law, is the 1957 tax case of "", 249 F.2d 127 (D.C. Cir. 1957). The
"Washington Ethical Society" functions much like a church, but regards itself
as a non-theistic religious institution, honoring the importance of ethical
living without mandating a belief in a supernatural origin for ethics. The case
involved denial of the Society's application for tax exemption as a religious
organization. The U.S. Court of Appeals reversed the Tax Court's ruling,
defined the Society as a religious organization, and granted its tax exemption.
The Society terms its practice Ethical Culture. Though Ethical Culture is based
on a humanist philosophy, it is regarded by some as a type of religious
humanism. Hence, it would seem most accurate to say that this case affirmed
that a religion need not be theistic to qualify as a religion under the law,
rather than asserting that it established generic secular humanism as a
religion. In the cases of both the "Fellowship of Humanity" and the "Washington
Ethical Society," the court decisions turned not so much on the particular
beliefs of practitioners as on the function and form of the practice being
similar to the function and form of the practices in other religious
institutions. "Peloza v. Capistrano School District". The implication in
Justice Black's footnote that secular humanism is a religion has been seized
upon by religious opponents of the teaching of evolution, who have made the
argument that teaching evolution amounts to teaching a religious idea. The
claim that secular humanism could be considered a religion for legal purposes
was examined by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in
"Peloza v. Capistrano School District", 37 F.3d 517 (9th Cir. 1994), "cert.
denied", 515 U.S. 1173 (1995). In this case, a science teacher argued that, by
requiring him to teach evolution, his school district was forcing him to teach
the "religion" of secular humanism. The Court responded, "We reject this claim
because neither the Supreme Court, nor this circuit, has ever held that
evolutionism or Secular Humanism are 'religions' for Establishment Clause
purposes." The Supreme Court refused to review the case. Controversy. Some
religious groups argue that secular humanismâ€”and, by association,
secularismâ€”have a religion-like legal status despite the separation of church
and state, that secularism in government and in the schools constitutes state
favoritism towards a particular religion (namely, the denial of theism), and a
double standard is used in granting protections to these groups. The U.S.
courts, however, have consistently rejected this interpretation. Decisions
about tax status have been based on whether an organization functions like a
church. On the other hand, Establishment Clause cases turn on whether the ideas
or symbols involved are inherently religious. An organization can function like
a church while advocating beliefs that are not necessarily inherently
religious. Author Marci Hamilton has pointed out: "Moreover, the debate is not
between secularists and the religious. The debate is believers and non-
believers on the one side debating believers and non-believers on the other
side. You've got citizens who are [...] of faith who believe in the separation
of church and state and you have a set of believers who do not believe in the
separation of church and state." In a mockery of William Brevard Hand, a
federal judge in Alabama, who ruled secular humanism as a religion, the
musician Frank Zappa, who was also a free speech advocate, established the
"Church of American Secular Humanism". The fact that the initials of the
organization formed the acronym "CASH" was part of the joke. In 1981, the
humorous columnist Art Buchwald wrote a piece entitled, "Secular Humanists:
Threat or Menace?" In it, he poked fun at alarm about secular humanism.
