Septuagint The Septuagint () (or "LXX", or "Greek Old Testament") is a
translation of the Hebrew Bible and some related texts into Greek, begun in the
late 3rd century BCE. The Septuagint is quoted by the New Testament
(particularly by St. Paul), and by the Apostolic Fathers. The traditional story
is that Ptolemy II sponsored the translation for use by the many Alexandrian
Jews who were fluent in Koine Greek (the "lingua franca" of the Eastern
Mediterranean from the death of Alexander the Great in 323¬ BCE, until the
development of Byzantine Greek around 600¬ CE), but not in Hebrew. The
Septuagint should not to be confused with the seven or more "other" Greek
versions of the Old Testament, most of which do not survive except as
fragments. (Some of these other Greek versions are known from Origen's Hexapla,
a comparison of six translations in adjacent columns, now almost wholly lost.)
Of these, the most important are "the three:" those by Aquila, Symmachus, and
Theodotion. Name. The Septuagint derives its name from the Latin "versio
septuaginta interpretum", "translation of the seventy interpreters," (Greek:
"·º° ŒºŒµœÑŒ¨œÜœÅŒ±œÉŒπœÇ œÑ·ø∂ŒΩ ·ºëŒ≤Œ¥ŒøŒºŒÆŒ∫ŒøŒΩœÑŒ±", "hƒì met√°phrasis
t≈çn hebdomƒìkonta", "translation of the seventy ". However, it was not until
the time of Augustine of Hippo (354‚Äì430¬ CE) that the Greek translation of
the Jewish scriptures came to be called by the Latin term "Septuaginta". The
Roman numeral LXX (seventy) is commonly used as an abbreviation, as are
formula_1 or G. Composition. Legend. These titles refer to a legendary story,
according to which seventy or seventy-two Jewish scholars were asked by the
Greek King of Egypt Ptolemy II Philadelphus to translate the Torah from
Biblical Hebrew into Greek, for inclusion in the Library of Alexandria. This
legend is first found in the pseudepigraphic Letter of Aristeas to his brother
Philocrates, and is repeated with embellishments by Philo of Alexandria,
Josephus Tractate Megillah, pages 9a-9b. The Talmud identifies fifteen specific
unusual translations made by the scholars, but only two of these translations
are found in the extant LXX. Philo of Alexandria, who relied extensively on the
Septuagint, says that the number of scholars was chosen by selecting six
scholars from each of the 12 tribes of Israel. This legend, with its miraculous
details, underlines the fact that some Jews in antiquity wished to present the
translation as authoritative. A 2012 issue of "Free Inquiry" magazine argued
that this legend was a fabrication. History. The date of the 3rd century BCE,
given in the legend, is confirmed (for the Torah translation) by a number of
factors, including the Greek being representative of early Koine, citations
beginning as early as the 2nd century BCE, and early manuscripts datable to the
2nd century. After the Torah, other books were translated over the next two to
three centuries. It is not altogether clear which was translated when, or
where; some may even have been translated twice, into different versions, and
then revised. The quality and style of the different translators also varied
considerably from book to book, from the literal to paraphrasing to
interpretative. The translation process of the Septuagint can be broken down
into several distinct stages, during which the social milieu of the translators
shifted from Hellenistic Judaism to Early Christianity. The translation began
in the 3rd century BCE and was completed by 132¬ BCE, initially in Alexandria,
but in time elsewhere as well. The Septuagint is the basis for the Old Latin,
Slavonic, Syriac, Old Armenian, Old Georgian and Coptic versions of the
Christian Old Testament. Language. Some sections of the Septuagint may show
Semiticisms, or idioms and phrases based on Semitic languages like Hebrew and
Aramaic. Other books, such as the Daniel and Proverbs, show Greek influence
more strongly. The Septuagint is also useful for elucidating pre-Masoretic
Hebrew: many proper nouns are spelled out with Greek vowels in the LXX, while
contemporary Hebrew texts lacked vowel pointing. One must, however, evaluate
such evidence with caution since it is extremely unlikely that all ancient
Hebrew sounds had precise Greek equivalents. Disputes over canonicity. As the
work of translation progressed, the canon of the Greek Bible expanded. The
Torah (Pentateuch in Greek) always maintained its pre-eminence as the basis of
the canon; but the collection of prophetic writings, based on the Jewish
Nevi'im, had various hagiographical works incorporated into it. In addition
some newer books were included in the Septuagint: those called
"anagignoskomena" in Greek, because they are not included in the Jewish canon.
Among these are the Maccabees and the Wisdom of Ben Sira. Also, the Septuagint
version of some Biblical books, like Daniel and Esther, are longer than those
in the Jewish canon. Some of these "apocryphal" books (e.g. the Wisdom of
Solomon, and the second book of Maccabees) were not translated, but composed
directly in Greek. The canonicity of the larger group of "writings" (the Jewish
"ketuvim") had not yet been established, although some sort of selective
process must have been employed because the Septuagint did not include other
well-known Jewish documents such as Enoch or Jubilees or other writings that
are not part of the Jewish canon. (These are now classified as Pseudepigrapha).
Since Late Antiquity, once attributed to a Council of Jamnia, mainstream
rabbinic Judaism rejected the Septuagint as valid Jewish scriptural texts.
Several reasons have been given for this. First, some mistranslations were
claimed. Second, the Hebrew source texts used for the Septuagint differed from
the Masoretic tradition of Hebrew texts, which was chosen as canonical by the
Jewish rabbis. Third, the rabbis wanted to distinguish their tradition from the
newly emerging tradition of Christianity. Finally, the rabbis claimed for the
Hebrew language a divine authority, in contrast to Aramaic or Greek - even
though these languages were the lingua franca of Jews during this period (and
Aramaic would eventually be given the same holy language status as Hebrew). In
time the LXX became synonymous with the "Greek Old Testament", i.e. a Christian
canon of writings which incorporated all the books of the Hebrew canon, along
with additional texts. The Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches use
most of the books of the Septuagint; however, Protestant churches usually do
not. After the Protestant Reformation, many Protestant Bibles began to follow
the Jewish canon and exclude the additional texts, which came to be called
"Apocrypha" (i.e. of questionable authenticity). The Apocrypha are included
under a separate heading in the King James Version of the Bible, the basis for
the Revised Standard Version. Final form. All the books of western canons of
the Old Testament are found in the Septuagint, although the order does not
always coincide with the Western ordering of the books. The Septuagint order
for the Old Testament is evident in the earliest Christian Bibles (4th
century). Some books that are set apart in the Masoretic text are grouped
together. For example the Books of Samuel and the Books of Kings are in the LXX
one book in four parts called ŒíŒ±œÉŒπŒªŒµŒπ·ø∂ŒΩ ("Of Reigns"). In LXX, the
Books of Chronicles supplement Reigns and it is called Paraleipom√©non
(Œ Œ±œÅŒ±ŒªŒµŒπœÄŒøŒºŒ≠ŒΩœâŒΩ‚Äîthings left out). The Septuagint organizes the
minor prophets as twelve parts of one Book of Twelve. Some scripture of ancient
origin are found in the Septuagint but are not present in the Hebrew. These
additional books are Tobit, Judith, Wisdom of Solomon, Wisdom of Jesus son of
Sirach, Baruch, Letter of Jeremiah (which later became chapter 6 of Baruch in
the Vulgate), additions to Daniel (The Prayer of Azarias, the Song of the Three
Children, Susanna and Bel and the Dragon), additions to Esther, 1 Maccabees, 2
Maccabees, 3 Maccabees, 4 Maccabees, 1 Esdras, Odes, including the Prayer of
Manasseh, the Psalms of Solomon, and Psalm 151. The canonical acceptance of
these books varies among different Christian traditions, and there are
canonical books not derived from the Septuagint. For more information regarding
these books, see the articles Biblical apocrypha, Biblical canon, Books of the
Bible, and Deuterocanonical books. Incorporations from Theodotion. In most
ancient copies of the Bible which contain the Septuagint version of the Old
Testament, the Book of Daniel is not the original Septuagint version, but
instead is a copy of Theodotion's translation from the Hebrew, which more
closely resembles the Masoretic text. The Septuagint version was discarded in
favour of Theodotion's version in the second to 3rd centuries CE. In Greek-
speaking areas, this happened near the end of the 2nd century, and in Latin-
speaking areas (at least in North Africa), it occurred in the middle of the 3rd
century. History does not record the reason for this, and St. Jerome reports,
in the preface to the Vulgate version of Daniel, "This thing 'just' happened."
One of two Old Greek texts of the Book of Daniel has been recently rediscovered
and work is ongoing in reconstructing the original form of the book. The
canonical Ezra-Nehemiah is known in the Septuagint as "Esdras B", and 1 Esdras
is "Esdras A". 1 Esdras is a very similar text to the books of Ezra-Nehemiah,
and the two are widely thought by scholars to be derived from the same original
text. It has been proposed, and is thought highly likely by scholars, that
"Esdras B" ‚Äì the canonical Ezra-Nehemiah ‚Äì is Theodotion's version of this
material, and "Esdras A" is the version which was previously in the Septuagint
on its own. Use. Jewish use. Starting approximately in the 2nd century CE,
several factors led most Jews to abandon use of the LXX. The earliest gentile
Christians of necessity used the LXX, as it was at the time the only Greek
version of the Bible, and most, if not all, of these early non-Jewish
Christians could not read Hebrew. The association of the LXX with a rival
religion may have rendered it suspect in the eyes of the newer generation of
Jews and Jewish scholars. Instead, Jews used Hebrew/Aramaic Targum manuscripts
later compiled by the Masoretes; and authoritative Aramaic translations, such
as those of Onkelos and Rabbi Yonathan ben Uziel. What was perhaps most
significant for the LXX, as distinct from other Greek versions, was that the
LXX began to lose Jewish sanction after differences between it and contemporary
Hebrew scriptures were discovered (see above). Even Greek-speaking Jews tended
less to the LXX, preferring other Jewish versions in Greek, such as that of the
2nd century Aquila translation, which seemed to be more concordant with
contemporary Hebrew texts. While Jews have not used the LXX in worship or
religious study since the 2nd century CE, recent scholarship has brought
renewed interest in it in the field of Judaic Studies. Christian use. The Early
Christian Church used the Greek texts since Greek was a lingua franca of the
Roman Empire at the time, and the language of the Greco-Roman Church (Aramaic
was the language of Syriac Christianity, which used the Targums). The
relationship between the apostolic use of the Old Testament, for example, the
Septuagint and the now lost Hebrew texts (though to some degree and in some
form carried on in Masoretic tradition) is complicated. The Septuagint seems to
have been a major source for the Apostles, but it is not the only one. St.
Jerome offered, for example, Matt 2:15 and 2:23, John 19:37, John 7:38, 1 Cor.
2:9. as examples not found in the Septuagint, but in Hebrew texts. (Matt 2:23
is not present in current Masoretic tradition either, though according to St.
Jerome it was in Isaiah 11:1.) Furthermore, the New Testament writers, when
citing the Jewish scriptures or when quoting Jesus doing so, freely used the
Greek translation, implying that Jesus, his Apostles and their followers
considered it reliable. In the Early Christian Church, the presumed fact was
that the Septuagint was translated by Jews before the era of Christ, and that
the Septuagint at certain places gives itself more to a christological
interpretation than (say, 2nd century) Hebrew texts, was taken as evidence,
that "Jews" had changed the Hebrew text in a way that made them less
christological. For example Irenaeus concerning : The Septuagint clearly writes
of a "virgin" that shall conceive. While the Hebrew text was, according to
Irenaeus, at that time interpreted by Theodotion and Aquila (both proselytes of
the Jewish faith) as a "young woman" that shall conceive. And, according to
Irenaeus, the Ebionites used this to claim that Joseph was the (biological)
father of Jesus: From Irenaeus' point of view that was pure heresy, facilitated
by (late) anti-Christian alterations of the scripture in Hebrew, as evident by
the older, pre-Christian, Septuagint. When Jerome undertook the revision of the
Old Latin translations of the Septuagint, he checked the Septuagint against the
Hebrew texts that were then available. He came to believe that the Hebrew text
better testified to Christ than the Septuagint. He broke with church tradition
and translated most of the Old Testament of his Vulgate from Hebrew rather than
Greek. His choice was severely criticized by Augustine, his contemporary; a
flood of still less moderate criticism came from those who regarded Jerome as a
forger. But with the passage of time, acceptance of Jerome's version gradually
increased until it displaced the Old Latin translations of the Septuagint. The
Eastern Orthodox Church still prefers to use the LXX as the basis for
translating the Old Testament into other languages. The Eastern Orthodox also
use LXX untranslated where Greek is the liturgical language, e.g. in the
Orthodox Church of Constantinople, the Church of Greece and the Cypriot
Orthodox Church. Critical translations of the Old Testament, while using the
Masoretic Text as their basis, consult the Septuagint as well as other versions
in an attempt to reconstruct the meaning of the Hebrew text whenever the latter
is unclear, undeniably corrupt, or ambiguous.. For example, the Jerusalem Bible
Foreword says, "... only when this (the Masoretic Text) presents insuperable
difficulties have emendations or other versions, such as the ... LXX, been
used." The Translator's Preface to the New International Version says: "The
translators also consulted the more important early versions (including) the
Septuagint ... Readings from these versions were occasionally followed where
the MT seemed doubtful ..." Textual history. Textual analysis. Modern
scholarship holds that the LXX was written during the 3rd through 1st centuries
BCE. But nearly all attempts at dating specific books, with the exception of
the Pentateuch (early- to mid-3rd century BCE), are tentative and without
consensus. Later Jewish revisions and recensions of the Greek against the
Hebrew are well attested, the most famous of which include "the Three:" Aquila
(128¬ CE), Symmachus, and Theodotion. These three, to varying degrees, are more
literal renderings of their contemporary Hebrew scriptures as compared to the
Old Greek. Modern scholars consider one or more of the 'three' to be totally
new Greek versions of the Hebrew Bible. Around 235¬ CE, Origen, a Christian
scholar in Alexandria, completed the Hexapla, a comprehensive comparison of the
ancient versions and Hebrew text side-by-side in six columns, with diacritical
markings (a.k.a. "editor's marks", "critical signs" or "Aristarchian signs").
Much of this work was lost, but several compilations of the fragments are
available. In the first column was the contemporary Hebrew, in the second a
Greek transliteration of it, then the newer Greek versions each in their own
columns. Origen also kept a column for the Old Greek (the Septuagint) and next
to it was a critical apparatus combining readings from all the Greek versions
with diacritical marks indicating to which version each line (Gr.
œÉœÑ·º∞œáŒøœÇ) belonged. Perhaps the voluminous Hexapla was never copied in its
entirety, but Origen's combined text ("the fifth column") was copied
frequently, eventually without the editing marks, and the older uncombined text
of the LXX was neglected. Thus this combined text became the first major
Christian recension of the LXX, often called the "Hexaplar recension". In the
century following Origen, two other major recensions were identified by Jerome,
who attributed these to Lucian and Hesychius. Manuscripts. The oldest
manuscripts of the LXX include 2nd century BCE fragments of Leviticus and
Deuteronomy (Rahlfs nos. 801, 819, and 957), and 1st century BCE fragments of
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, and the Minor Prophets
(Alfred Rahlfs nos. 802, 803, 805, 848, 942, and 943). Relatively complete
manuscripts of the LXX postdate the Hexaplar rescension and include the Codex
Vaticanus from the 4th century CE and the Codex Alexandrinus of the 5th
century. These are indeed the oldest surviving nearly complete manuscripts of
the Old Testament in any language; the oldest extant complete Hebrew texts date
some 600¬ years later, from the first half of the 10th century. The 4th century
Codex Sinaiticus also partially survives, still containing many texts of the
Old Testament. While there are differences between these three codices,
scholarly consensus today holds that one LXX ‚Äî that is, the original pre-
Christian translation ‚Äî underlies all three. The various Jewish and later
Christian revisions and recensions are largely responsible for the divergence
of the codices. Differences with the Latin Vulgate and the Masoretic text. The
sources of the many differences between the Septuagint, the Latin Vulgate and
the Masoretic text have long been discussed by scholars. Following the
Renaissance, a common opinion among some humanists was that the LXX translators
bungled the translation from the Hebrew and that the LXX became more corrupt
with time. The most widely accepted view today is that the original Septuagint
provided a reasonably accurate record of an early Hebrew textual variant that
differed from the ancestor of the Masoretic text as well as those of the Latin
Vulgate, where both of the latter seem to have a more similar textual heritage.
This instance illustrates the complexity of assessing differences between the
LXX and the Masoretic Text as well as the Vulgate. Despite the striking
divergence of meaning here between the Septuagint and later texts, nearly
identical consonantal Hebrew source texts can be reconstructed. The readily
apparent semantic differences result from alternative strategies for
interpreting the difficult verse and relate to differences in vowelization and
punctuation of the consonantal text. The differences between the LXX and the MT
thus fall into four categories. Dead Sea Scrolls. The textual sources present a
variety of readings. For example, Bastiaan Van Elderen compares three
variations of Deuteronomy 32:43, the last of the Song of Moses. The Dead Sea
Scrolls, with its 5% connection to the Septuagint, provides significant
information for scholars studying the Greek text of the Hebrew Bible. Printed
editions. The texts of all printed editions are derived from the three
recensions mentioned above, that of Origen, Lucian, or Hesychius. English
translations. The Septuagint has been translated a few times into English, the
first one (though excluding the Apocrypha) being that of Charles Thomson in
1808; his translation was later revised and enlarged by C. A. Muses in 1954.
The translation of Sir Lancelot C. L. Brenton, published in 1851, is a long-
time standard. For most of the time since its publication it has been the only
one readily available, and has continually been in print. It is based primarily
upon the Codex Vaticanus and contains the Greek and English texts in parallel
columns. There also is a revision of the Brenton Septuagint available through
Stauros Ministries, called "The Apostles' Bible", released in January 2008.
[http://www.majoritytext.com] There is presently a translation of the
Septuagint based on Brenton's English Translation of the Septuagint in
development, called LXX2012: Septuagint in English 2012 that is being developed
by the creator the World English Bible, (WEB) Michael Paul Johnson. The
International Organization for Septuagint and Cognate Studies (IOSCS) has
produced "A New English Translation of the Septuagint and the Other Greek
Translations Traditionally Included Under that Title" (NETS), an academic
translation based on standard critical editions of the Greek texts. It was
published by Oxford University Press in October 2007. The Apostolic Bible
Polyglot, published in 2003, includes the Greek books of the Hebrew canon along
with the Greek New Testament, all numerically coded to the AB-Strong numbering
system, and set in monotonic orthography. Included in the printed edition is a
concordance and index. The Orthodox Study Bible was released in early 2008 with
a new translation of the Septuagint based on the Alfred Rahlfs edition of the
Greek text. To this base they brought two additional major sources. First the
Brenton translation of the Septuagint from 1851. Second, Thomas Nelson
Publishers granted use of the New King James Version text in the places where
the translation of the LXX would match that of the Hebrew Masoretic text. This
edition also includes the New Testament as well which was also uses the New
King James version. It also includes extensive commentary from an Eastern
Orthodox perspective. The Eastern / Greek Orthodox Bible (EOB) is an extensive
revision and correction of Brenton‚Äôs translation which was primarily based on
Codex Vaticanus. Its language and syntax have been modernized and simplified.
It also includes extensive introductory material and footnotes featuring
significant inter-LXX and LXX/MT variants. Promotion. The International
Organization for Septuagint and Cognate Studies (IOSCS), a nonprofit, learned
society formed to promote international research in and study of the Septuagint
and related texts, has established February 8 annually as International
Septuagint Day, a day to promote the discipline on campuses and in communities.
