Sermon on the Mount The Sermon on the Mount (anglicized from the Matthean
Vulgate Latin section title: "Sermo in monte") is a collection of sayings and
teachings of Jesus, which emphasizes his moral teaching found in the Gospel of
Matthew (chapters 5, 6 and 7). It is the first of the Five Discourses of
Matthew and takes place relatively early in the Ministry of Jesus after he has
been baptized by John the Baptist and preached in Galilee. The Sermon is the
longest piece of teaching from Jesus in the New Testament, and has been one of
the most widely quoted elements of the Canonical Gospels. It includes some of
the best known teachings of Jesus such as the Beatitudes, and the widely
recited Lord's Prayer. To most believers in Jesus, the Sermon on the Mount
contains the central tenets of Christian discipleship. The is considered to be
a focal point that summarizes the teaching of the sermon: "be perfect, as your
heavenly Father is perfect", advising the disciples or students to seek the
path towards perfection and the Kingdom of God. Context and components.
Background and setting. The Sermon on the Mount is the longest piece of
teaching from Jesus in the New Testament, and occupies chapters 5, 6 and 7 of
the Gospel of Matthew. The Sermon has been one of the most widely quoted
elements of the Canonical Gospels. To most believers in Jesus, the Sermon
contains the central tenets of Christian discipleship. This is the first of the
"Five Discourses of Matthew", the other four being Matthew 10, Matthew 13 (1-
53), Matthew 18 and the Olivet discourse in Matthew 24. The Sermon takes place
relatively early in the Ministry of Jesus, after he has been baptized by John
the Baptist in chapter 3 of Matthew and gathered his first disciples in chapter
4. Before this episode, Jesus had been "all about Galilee" preaching, as in ,
and "great crowds followed him" from all around the area. The setting for the
sermon is given in -. Jesus sees the multitudes, goes up into the mountain, is
followed by his disciples, and begins to preach. Components. While the issue of
the exact theological structure and composition of the Sermon on the Mount is
subject to debate among scholars, specific components within it, each
associated with particular teachings, can be identified. discusses the
Beatitudes. These describe the character of the people of the Kingdom of God,
expressed as "blessings". In Matthew, there are eight (or nine) blessings,
while in Luke there are four, followed by four woes. In almost all cases the
phrases used in the Beatitudes are familiar from an Old Testament context, but
in the sermon Jesus elevates them to new teachings. Together, the Beatitudes
present a new set of ideals that focus on love and humility rather than force
and exaction; they echo the highest ideals of Jesus' teachings on spirituality
and compassion. In Christian teachings, the Works of Mercy, which have corporal
and spiritual components, have resonated with the theme of the Beatitude for
mercy. These teachings emphasize that these acts of mercy provide both temporal
and spiritual benefits. presents the metaphors of Salt and Light. This
completes the profile of God's people presented in the beatitudes, and acts as
the introduction to the next section. There are two parts in this section,
using the terms "salt of the earth" and Light of the World to refer to the
disciples - implying their value. Elsewhere in Jesus applies Light of the World
to himself. The longest discourse in the Sermon is , traditionally referred to
as "the Antitheses" or "Matthew's Antitheses" though Gundry disputes that
title. In the discourse Jesus fulfills and reinterprets the Old Covenant and in
particular its Ten Commandments, contrasting with what "you have heard" from
others, e.g. turning the other cheek compared to taking an eye for an eye.
According to most interpretations of , , , and , and most Christian views of
the Old Covenant, these new interpretations of the Law and Prophets are not
opposed to the Old Testament, which was the position of Marcion, but form
Jesus' new teachings which bring about salvation, and hence must be adhered to,
as emphasized in towards the end of the sermon. In Matthew 6 Jesus condemns
doing what would normally be "good works" simply for recognition and not from
the heart, such as those of alms (6:1-4), prayer (6:5-15), and fasting (6:16-
18). The discourse goes on to condemn the superficiality of materialism and
call the disciples not to worry about material needs, but to "seek" God's
kingdom first. Within the discourse on ostentation, Matthew presents an example
of correct prayer. Luke places this in a different context. The Lord's prayer
(6:9-13) contains parallels to . The first part of Matthew 7, i.e. deals with
judging. Jesus condemns those who judge others before first judging themselves:
"Judge not, that ye be not judged." In the last part in Jesus concludes the
sermon by warning against false prophets, and emphasizing that humans are
unable to do right ("bear fruit") apart from God. Teachings and theology. The
teachings of the Sermon on the Mount have been a key element of Christian
ethics, and for centuries the sermon has acted as a fundamental recipe for the
conduct of the followers of Jesus. Various religious and moral thinkers (e.g.
Tolstoy and Gandhi) have admired its message, and it has been one of the main
sources of Christian pacifism. The last verse of chapter 5 of Matthew, () is a
focal point of the sermon that summarizes its teachings by advising the
disciples to seek perfection." The Greek word "telios" used to refer to
perfection also implies an end, or destination, advising the disciples to seek
the path towards perfection and the Kingdom of God. It teaches that God's
children are those who act like God. The teaching of the sermon are often
referred to as the "Ethics of the Kingdom": they place a high level of emphasis
on "purity of the heart" and embody the basic standard of Christian
righteousness. Theological structure. The issue of the theological structure
and composition of the Sermon on the Mount remains unresolved. One group of
theologians ranging from Saint Augustine in the 5th century to Michael Goulder
in the 20th century, see the Beatitudes as the central element of the Sermon.
Others such as Bornkamm see the Sermon arranged around the Lord's prayer, while
Daniel Patte, closely followed by Ulrich Luz, see a chiastic structure in the
sermon. Dale Allison has proposed a structure based on triads. Jack Kingsbury
and Hans Dieter Betz see the sermon as composed of theological themes, e.g.
righteousness or way of life. Analysis and interpretation. Debate over
literalness. One of the most common debates over the sermon is how directly it
should be applied to everyday life. Many of the rules Jesus calls for are
considered by some to be extreme. At Jesus appears to state that if your vision
is leading you to adultery, then you should remove your eye. At Jesus seems to
say that if you're sued, you should not fight, but rather give up more than was
asked for. These are considered by some to be challenging rules to apply to
life. Many Christian groups have developed nonliteral ways to interpret and
apply the sermon. Denominations like the Amish, Old Order Mennonites, and
Conservative Mennonites believe in a literal interpretation of the Sermon on
the Mount. Comparison with the Sermon on the Plain. While Matthew groups Jesus'
teachings into sets of similar material, the same material is scattered when
found in Luke. The Sermon on the Mount may be compared with the similar but
more succinct Sermon on the Plain as recounted by the Gospel of Luke (6:
17â€“49), which occurs at the same moment in Luke's narrative, and also
features Jesus heading up a mountain, but giving the sermon on the way down at
a level spot. Some scholars believe that they are the same sermon, while others
hold that Jesus frequently preached similar themes in different places.
Comparison with other teachings. Although modern parallels between the
teachings of Jesus such as the Sermon on the Mount and some Buddhist teachings
have been drawn, these comparisons emerged after missionary contacts in the
19th century, and there is no historically reliable evidence of contacts
between Buddhism and Jesus during his life. Modern scholarship has almost
unanimously agreed that claims of the travels of Jesus to Tibet, Kashmir or
India and the influence of Buddhism on his teachings are without historical
basis.
