Seven-day week The seven-day week is used by the majority of the world and is
the international standard as specified in ISO 8601. Origins. The origin of the
seven-day week is the religious significance that was placed on the seventh day
by ancient cultures, including the Babylonian and Jewish civilizations. Jews
celebrated every seventh day, within a continuous cycle of seven-day weeks, as
a holy day of rest from their work, in remembrance of the creation week.
Similarly, the Babylonians celebrated the seventh day of each seven-day week as
a holy day, but adjusted the number of days of the final week in their month so
that their monthly calendar would always commence on the new moon. This may
further be reflected in the contemporary and traditional Zoroastrian calendars
that relates to the first, seventh and so on days of the month as pertaining to
Ahura Mazda (God). Historically, a number of other cultural groups, such as
Christians and Muslims, have continued to regularly hold religious events on a
specific day within each seven-day week. The seven-day week is approximately a
quarter of a lunation, so it has been proposed that this is the implicit,
astronomical origin of the seven-day week. However, there are a number of
problems with the proposal. The seven-day week is actually only 23.7% of a
lunation, which means that a continuous cycle of seven-day weeks rapidly loses
synchronisation with the lunation. The problem is compounded by the fact that a
lunation is only the mean time for the lunar phase cycle, with each individual
lunar phase varying in length. Also, the duodecimal (base-12) and sexagesimal
(base-60) numeral systems have historically been the primary systems used to
divide other chronological and calendar units. Therefore, it is not immediately
apparent why the seven-day week was selected by ancient cultures, rather than a
week that included a number of days that was a factor of these numeral systems,
such as a six-day or a twelve-day week, or a week that divided the lunation
more accurately using a factor of these number systems, such as a five-day or
ten-day week. There are no historical Jewish or Babylonian records that confirm
that these cultures explicitly defined the seven-day week as a quarter of a
lunation. Ancient Near East. [[File:Baylonianmaps.JPG|thumb|150px| The
Babylonian "Imago Mundi", dated to the 6th century BC (Neo-Babylonian Empire).
The map shows Babylon on the Euphrates, surrounded by a circular landmass
showing Assyria, Armenia and several cities, in turn surrounded by a "bitter
river" (Oceanus), with seven islands arranged around it so as to form a seven-
pointed star.]] Counting from the new moon, the Babylonians celebrated the 7th,
14th, 21st, and 28th as "holy-days", also called "evil days" (meaning
"unsuitable" for prohibited activities). On these days officials were
prohibited from various activities and common men were forbidden to "make a
wish", and at least the 28th was known as a "rest-day". On each of them,
offerings were made to a different god and goddess. Tablets from the 6th-
century BC reigns of Cyrus the Great and Cambyses indicate these dates were
sometimes approximate. The lunation of 29 or 30 days basically contained three
seven-day weeks, and a final week of eight or nine days inclusive, breaking the
continuous seven-day cycle. The Babylonians additionally celebrated the 19th as
a special "evil day", the "day of anger", because it was roughly the 49th day
of the (preceding) month, completing a "week of weeks", with sacrifices and
prohibitions. Reconstruction of a broken tablet seems to define the rarely
attested "Sapattum" or "Sabattum" as the 15th day of the lunation: this word is
cognate with Hebrew "Shabbat", but is monthly rather than weekly. It is
regarded as a form of Sumerian "sa-bat" ("mid-rest"), attested in Akkadian as
"um nuh libbi" ("day of mid-repose"). The seven-day week appears in the
Creation story in the Book of Genesis, in the Hebrew Bible, where Elohim (God)
is said to have created the heavens and the earth in six days and rested on the
seventh (). In the Book of Exodus, the fourth of the ten commandments is to
rest on the seventh day, the Sabbath, which can be seen as implicating a seven-
day week social institution (). Classical Antiquity. Frank C. Senn in his book
"Christian Liturgy: Catholic and Evangelical" points to data suggesting
evidence of an early continuous use of a seven-day week; referring to the Jews
during the Babylonian Captivity in the 6th century BCE, after the destruction
of the Temple of Solomon. The ancient Romans traditionally used the eight-day
nundinal cycle, but after the adoption of the Julian calendar, in the time of
Augustus, the seven-day week came into use. For a while, the week and the
nundinal cycle coexisted, but by the time the week was officially adopted by
Constantine in AD 321 the nundinal cycle had fallen out of use. The association
of the days of the week with the Sun, the Moon, and the five planets visible to
the naked eye dates to the Roman era (2nd century). Christian Europe. The
seven-day weekly cycle is reputed to have remained unbroken in Europe for
almost two millennia, despite changes to the Alexandrian, Julian, and Gregorian
calendars. The date of Easter Sunday can be traced back through numerous
computistic tables to an Ethiopic copy of an early Alexandrian table beginning
with the Easter of 311 AD. Adoption after other systems. China. The earliest
known reference in Chinese writings to a seven-day week is attributed to Fan
Ning, who lived in the late 4th century in the Jin Dynasty, while diffusions
from the Manichaeans are documented with the writings of the Chinese Buddhist
monk Yi Jing and the Ceylonese or Central Asian Buddhist monk Bu Kong of the
7th century (Tang Dynasty). Japan. The Chinese transliteration of the planetary
system was soon brought to Japan by the Japanese monk Kobo Daishi. Surviving
diaries of the Japanese statesman Fujiwara Michinaga show the seven-day system
in use in Heian Japan as early as 1007. In Japan, the seven-day system was kept
in use for astrological purposes until its promotion to a full-fledged Western-
style calendrical basis during the Meiji era. Hindu. The seven-day week may
have been in use during the Vedic Period, although according to Pandurang Vaman
Kane, author of History of Dharmasastra, "this is not conclusive". The
Pañcasiddhāntikā mentions 'Monday'. The Garga dated 1st Century BCE, refers
to the seven-day week, Sunday to Saturday. He concludes "the above references
furnish a terminus ad quem (viz. 1st century BCE–1st century CE) The terminus
a quo cannot be stated with certainty". France. France discontinued the seven-
day week for a ten-day week with the introduction of the republican calendar in
1793. The Concordat of 1801, which re-established the Roman Catholic Church in
France, also restored the seven-day week, beginning with Easter Sunday, 18
April 1802. Soviet Union. In 1929, the USSR discontinued the seven-day week for
a five-day week, then a six-day week. While the days were still named according
to the seven-day week, the work schedules were rotated in five- and six-day
periods. The seven-day week was reintroduced on 27 June 1940. Week numbering.
Weeks in a Gregorian calendar year can be numbered for each year. This style of
numbering is commonly used (for example, by schools and businesses) in some
European and Asian countries, but rare elsewhere. ISO 8601 includes the ISO
week date system, a numbering system for weeks – each week begins on a Monday
and is associated with the year that contains that week's Thursday (so that if
a year starts in a long weekend Friday–Sunday, week number one of the year
will start after that). Facts and figures. In a Gregorian mean year there are
365.2425 days, and thus exactly or 52.1775 weeks (unlike the Julian year of
365.25 days or ≈ 52.1786 weeks, which cannot be represented by a finite
decimal expansion). There are exactly 20871 weeks in 400 Gregorian years, so 30
April 1611 was a Saturday just like 30 April 2011. A system of Dominical
letters has been used to determine the day of week in the Gregorian or the
Julian calendar.
