Shabbat (Talmud) Shabbat () is first tractate (book) in the Order (Mishnaic
section) of Moed, of the Mishnah and Talmud. The tractate consists of 24
chapters. The tractate primarily deals with laws relating to Shabbat (the
weekly day of rest), and the activities prohibited on Shabbat (the 39
prohibitions) and distinguishes between Biblical prohibitions and Rabbinic
prohibitions. It also discusses special Rabbinic decrees to reinforce the
concept of rest on Sabbath (see muktzah, articles that may not be used or moved
on Sabbath, chapters 3 and 17) and to enhance its sanctity, such as forbidding
pursuit of business and discussing forbidden matters (chapter 23) and pursuing
weekday activities. Transferring between domains. A large portion of this
tractate deals with the "melachah" of transferring from one domain to another,
commonly called "carrying" (chapters 1 and 11). The tractate distinguishes four
domains: private, public, semi-public and an exempt area. It holds that the
transfer of an article from a private to a public domain is Biblically
forbidden; transferring an article between a semi-public to a private or public
domain is Rabbinically prohibited; transferring of an article between an exempt
area and any other domain is permissible; carrying an article four "amos" may
be forbidden in public or semi-public domain and permitted in a private domain
or exempt area; and carrying inside a private domain or between private domains
may be permissible (see Eruv). For these purposes "transferring" means
"removing and depositing", so that carrying an article out of a domain and
returning to the same domain with it does not constitute transferring. This may
fall into the category of "wearing".
