Slain in the Spirit "Slain in the Spirit" is a term used in charismatic
Christianity to describe a religious behaviour in which an individual falls to
the floor. This usually happens during an event they perceive as a personal
encounter with the Holy Spirit, often associated with the practice of laying on
of hands. Description. Being slain in the Spirit is a practice where on
occasions of public prayer ministry when, in following the direction of the
scriptures, laying on of hands is practiced, church members or attendees may
come forward to the front of the church (or in other gatherings not necessarily
in a church service or building) to receive a special work of the Holy Spirit
from the Pastor, service leader or a team of ministers. Often a significant
amount of time is spent singing and praying during the church service before
this point. Attendees are then prayed over and touched by the service leader or
leaders. They perceive the Spirit of God upon them, and they fall, usually onto
their backs. In most cases, their fall is broken by deacons, catchers, ushers
or orderlies behind them to prevent injury. Beliefs associated with this
phenomenon include divine healing, receiving visions, being set free of demonic
spirits, hearing God speak. As Thomas Csordas says: "In Charismatic ritual
life, resting in the Spirit can serve the purposes of demonstrating divine
power; of exhibiting the faith of those who are "open" to such power; of
allowing a person to be close to, "touched by," or "spoken to" by God
(sometimes via embodied imagery); of preparing a person to receive and exercise
a spiritual gift; or of healing." History. Being slain in the Spirit was
extremely common in early American (late eighteenth-century) Methodism,
particularly at camp meetings and love feasts. Other names for the phenomenon
are "falling over", "falling under the Spirit's power", "falling before the
Lord", "slain under the power" or "resting in the Spirit". Biblical background.
Whether voluntary or involuntary, "falling before the Lord" as a human response
to the manifestation of the Holy Spirit is seen by many charismatics as a
phenomenon that is in harmony with the Scriptures. In the Bible, falling while
in the presence of God was at times also accompanied by manifestations of
trembling, convulsions, writhing, physical weakness or deep sleep. Instances of
voluntarily falling before the Lord to worship or pray may be found in Genesis
17:3 and Joshua 5:14. References to voluntarily falling as the result of
feeling overwhelmed by a divine presence are found in Numbers 22:31, Judges 13:
20, Ezekiel 1:28, Ezekiel 3:23, Ezekiel 43:3, Ezekiel 44:4, Daniel 8:17 and
Matthew 17:6. However, these verses seem to imply falling forward in humility,
and it would seem there are no verses to imply falling upon being touched by
someone. But there is one passage in the Bible where people "fall to the
ground" just by hearing the words "I am He". That is when Judas has betrayed
Jesus and the soldiers come to get Jesus. This is what it says in John 18:4-6;
(4) 'Jesus therefore, knowing all things that would come upon Him, went forward
and said to them "Whom are you seeking?" (5) They answered Him, "Jesus of
Nazareth." Jesus said to them "I am He." And Judas, who betrayed Him, also
stood with them. (6) Now when He said to them "I am He," they drew back and
fell to the ground.' (NKJV) But this passage is not really the same thing that
Charismatic Christians practice. And, there is much debate as to whether their
"fall" was a response to the Holy Spirit. Instances of involuntarily falling
before the Lord as the result of feeling overwhelmed by a divine presence are
found in 1 Kings 8:10-11, Daniel 8:27, Daniel 10:8-11 (possibly implied), Acts
9:3-4 (also Acts 26:14) and Revelation 1:17. Both voluntary and involuntary
falling before the Lord can also occur as the result of a power encounterâ€”a
person feels that the power of God is overtaking the power of a demonic force
that has sought to control or oppress him or her. References to falling in the
context of power encounters are found in Mark 3:11, Mark 9:20 and Luke 8:28
Criticism. Some Christians argue that the practice is neither described nor
prescribed specifically in the Bible, and that it is, at best, a psychological
phenomenon or, at worst, of satanic origin. David Pawson points out that the
closest Biblical reference is the story of Ananias and Sapphira, which has a
quite different connotation. Sociology of religion. Other sources of the
phenomenon can be autosuggestion, peer pressure, or a desire to experience what
others have experienced. Perhaps the most obvious sociological category is the
"possession trance." A similar state that could be described as religious
ecstasy may occur in the rituals and dances of other religious and cultural
traditions; for example Kundalini awakening through shaktipat. References in
culture. The 1967 film "Holy Ghost People" by Peter Adair documented an
Appalachian Pentecostal church service in which several people are slain in the
spirit.
