Solar deity A solar deity (also sun god/dess) is a sky deity who represents the
Sun, or an aspect of it, usually by its perceived power and strength. Solar
deities and sun worship can be found throughout most of recorded history in
various forms. Hence, many beliefs have formed around this worship, such as the
"missing sun" found in many cultures. Solar deities throughout cultures. In
different religions solar supreme deities carry different names and are
associated with different aspects of the cultural universe of the society, but
for the most part its raw image remains identical. The Neolithic concept of a
solar barge, the sun as traversing the sky in a boat, is found in the later
myths of ancient Egypt, with Ra and Horus. Earlier Egyptian myths imply that
the sun is within the lioness, Sekhmet, at night and can be seen reflected in
her eyes or that it is within the cow, Hathor during the night, being reborn
each morning as her son ("bull"). Proto-Indo-European religion has a solar
chariot, the sun as traversing the sky in a chariot. During the Roman Empire, a
festival of the birth of the "Unconquered Sun" (or "Dies Natalis Solis
Invicti") was celebrated on the winter solstice ‚Äî the "rebirth" of the sun.
In Germanic mythology this is "Sol", in Vedic Surya, and in Greek Helios
(occasionally referred to as Titan) and (sometimes) as Apollo. Mesopotamian
Shamash plays an important role during the Bronze Age, and "my Sun" is
eventually used as an address to royalty. Similarly, South American cultures
have emphatic Sun worship, see Inti. Svarog is the Slavic god sun and spirit of
fire. During the later periods of Roman history, sun worship gained in
importance and ultimately led to what has been called a ‚Äúsolar monotheism.‚Äù
Nearly all the gods of the period were possessed of solar qualities. The feast
of Sol Invictus (Unconquered Sun) on 25 December was celebrated with great joy,
and eventually this date was taken over by the Christians as Christmas, the
celebrated birthday of Christ. Africa. The Tiv people consider the Sun to be
the son of the supreme being Awondo and the Moon Awondo's daughter. The Barotse
tribe believes that the Sun is inhabited by the sky god Nyambi and the Moon is
his wife. Even where the sun god is equated with the supreme being, in some
African mythologies he or she does not have any special functions or privileges
as compared to other deities. Aztec mythology. In Aztec mythology, "Tonatiuh"
(, "Movement of the Sun") was the sun god. The Aztec people considered him the
leader of "Tollan" (heaven). He was also known as the fifth sun, because the
Aztecs believed that he was the sun that took over when the fourth sun was
expelled from the sky. According to their cosmology, each sun was a god with
its own cosmic era. According to the Aztecs, they were still in Tonatiuh's era.
According to the Aztec creation myth, the god demanded human sacrifice as
tribute and without it would refuse to move through the sky. It is said that
20,000 people were sacrificed each year to Tonatiuh and other gods, though this
number is thought to be inflated either by the Aztecs, who wanted to inspire
fear in their enemies, or the Spaniards, who wanted to vilify the Aztecs. The
Aztecs were fascinated by the sun and carefully observed it, and had a solar
calendar similar to that of the Maya. Many of today's remaining Aztec monuments
have structures aligned with the sun. In the Aztec calendar, Tonatiuh is the
lord of the thirteen days from 1 Death to 13 Flint. The preceding thirteen days
are ruled over by Chalchiuhtlicue, and the following thirteen by Tlaloc.
Buddhism. In Buddhist cosmology, the bodhisattva of the Sun is known as Ri Gong
Ri Guang Pu Sa (The Bright Solar Bodhisattva of the Solar Palace) / Ri Gong Ri
Guang Tian Zi (The Bright Solar Prince of the Solar Palace) / Ri Gong Ri Guang
Zun Tian Pu Sa (The Greatly Revered Bright Solar Prince of the Solar Palace /
one of the 20 or 24 guardian devas). In Sanskrit, He is known as Suryaprabha.
He is usually depicted with Yue Gong Yue Guang Pu Sa (The Bright Lunar
Bodhisattva of the Lunar Palace) / Yue Gong Yue Guang Tian Zi ( The Bright
Lunar Prince of the Lunar Palace) / Yue Gong Yue Guang Zun Tian Pu Sa (The
Greatly Revered Bright Lunar Prince of the Lunar Palace / one of the 20 or 24
guardian "devas" known as "Candraprabha" in Sanskrit. With Yao Shi Fo /
Bhaisajyaguru Buddha (Medicine Buddha), these two "bodhisattvas" create the
Dong Fang San Sheng or the Three Holy Sages of the East. Chinese mythology. In
Chinese mythology (cosmology), there were originally ten suns in the sky, who
were all brothers. They were supposed to emerge one at a time as commanded by
the Jade Emperor. They were all very young and loved to fool around. Once they
decided to all go into the sky to play, all at once. This made the world too
hot for anything to grow. A hero named Hou Yi shot down nine of them with a bow
and arrow to save the people of the earth. He is still honored this very day.
In another myth, the solar eclipse was caused by the magical dog of heaven
biting off a piece of the sun. The referenced event is said to have occurred
around 2,160BCE. There was a tradition in China to make lots of loud
celebratory sounds during a solar eclipse to scare the sacred "dog" away. The
Deity of the Sun in Chinese mythology is Ri Gong Tai Yang Xing Jun (Tai Yang
Gong / Grandfather Sun) or Star Lord of the Solar Palace, Lord of the Sun. In
some mythologies, Tai Yang Xing Jun is believed to be Hou Yi. Tai Yang Xing Jun
is usually depicted with the Star Lord of the Lunar Palace, Lord of the Moon,
Yue Gong Tai Yin Xing Jun (Tai Yin Niang Niang / Lady Tai Yin). Christianity.
Christ is associated with the Sun through Christmas, which occurs at the time
of the Winter solstice. Ancient Egypt. Sun worship was prevalent in ancient
Egyptian religion. The earliest deities associated with the sun are all
goddesses: Wadjet, Sekhmet, Hathor, Nut, Bast, Bat, and Menhit. First Hathor,
and then Isis, give birth to and nurse Horus and Ra. Hathor the horned-cow is
one of the 12 daughters of Ra, gifted with joy and is a wet-nurse to Horus. The
Sun's movement across the sky represents a struggle between the Pharaoh's soul
and an avatar of Osiris. Ra travels across the sky in his solar-boat; at dawn
he drives away the demon Apep of darkness. The "solarisation" of several local
gods (Hnum-Re, Min-Re, Amon-Re) reaches its peak in the period of the fifth
dynasty. Rituals to the god Amun who became identified with the sun god Ra were
often carried out on the top of temple pylons. A Pylon mirrored the hieroglyph
for 'horizon' or "akhet", which was a depiction of two hills "between which the
sun rose and set", associated with recreation and rebirth. On the first Pylon
of the temple of Isis at Philae, the pharaoh is shown slaying his enemies in
the presence of Isis, Horus and Hathor. In the eighteenth dynasty, Akhenaten
changed the polytheistic religion of Egypt to a monotheistic one, Atenism of
the solar-disk and is the first recorded state monotheism. All other deities
were replaced by the Aten, including Amun-Ra, the reigning sun god of
Akhenaten's own region. Unlike other deities, the Aten did not have multiple
forms. His only image was a disk‚Äîa symbol of the sun. Soon after Akhenaten's
death, worship of the traditional deities was reestablished by the religious
leaders (Ay the High-Priest of Amen-Ra, mentor of Tutankhaten/Tutankhamen) who
had adopted the Aten during the reign of Akhenaten. Hinduism. The ƒÄdityas are
one of the principal deities of the Vedic classical Hinduism belonging to Solar
class. In the Vedas, numerous hymns are dedicated to Mitra, Varuna, Savitr etc.
Even the Gayatri mantra, which is regarded as one of the most sacred of the
Vedic hymns is dedicated to Savitr, one of the principal ƒÄdityas. The Adityas
are a group of solar deities, from the Brahmana period numbering twelve. The
ritual of "sandhyavandanam", performed by Hindus, is an elaborate set of hand
gestures and body movements, designed to greet and revere the Sun. The sun god
in Hinduism is an ancient and revered deity. In later Hindu usage, all the
Vedic ƒÄdityas lost identity and metamorphosed into one composite deity, Surya,
the Sun. The attributes of all other ƒÄdityas merged into that of Surya and the
names of all other ƒÄdityas became synonymous with, or epithets of, Surya. The
Ramayana has Rama as a descendant of the Surya, thus belonging to the
Suryavansha or the clan of the Sun. The Mahabharata describes one of its
warrior heroes, Karna, as being the son of the Pandava mother Kunti and Surya.
The sun god is said to be married to the goddess Ranaadeh, also known as
Sanjnya. She is depicted in dual form, being both sunlight and shadow,
personified. The goddess is revered in Gujarat and Rajasthan. The charioteer of
Surya is Aruna, who is also personified as the redness that accompanies the
sunlight in dawn and dusk. The sun god is driven by a seven-horsed Chariot
depicting the seven days of the week. In India, at Konark, in the state of
Orissa, a temple is dedicated to Surya. The Konark Sun Temple has been declared
a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Surya is the most prominent of the "navagrahas"
or nine celestial objects of the Hindus. "Navagrahas" can be found in almost
all Hindu temples. There are further temples dedicated to Surya, one in
Arasavilli, Srikakulam District in AndhraPradesh, one in Gujarat at Modhera and
another in Rajasthan. The temple at Arasavilli was constructed in such a way
that on the day of Radhasaptami, the sun's rays directly fall on the feet of
the Sri Suryanarayana Swami, the deity at the temple. Chhath (Hindi: ‡§õ‡§ ,
also called "Dala Chhath") is an ancient Hindu festival dedicated to Surya, the
chief solar deity, unique to Bihar, Jharkhand and the Terai. This major
festival is also celebrated in the northeast region of India, Madhya Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh, and parts of Chhattisgarh. Hymns to the sun can be found in the
Vedas, the oldest sacred texts of Hinduism. Practiced in different parts of
India, the worship of the sun has been described in the Rigveda. There is
another festival called Sambha-Dasami, which is celebrated in the state of
Orissa (India) for the "surya". The Gurjars (or Gujjars), were Sun-worshipers
and are described as devoted to the feet of the sun god Surya. Their copper-
plate grants bear an emblem of the Sun and on their seals too, this symbol is
depicted. Indonesian mythology. Solar gods have a stronger presence in
Indonesian mythology. In some cases the Sun is revered as a "father" or
"founder" of the tribe. This may apply for the whole tribe or only for the
royal and ruling families. This practise is more common in Australia and on the
island of Timor, where the tribal leaders are seen as direct heirs to the sun
god. Some of the initiation rites include the second reincarnation of the
rite's subject as a "son of the Sun", through a symbolic death and a rebirth in
the form of a Sun. These rituals hint that the Sun may have an important role
in the sphere of funerary beliefs. Watching the Sun's path has given birth to
the idea in some societies that the deity of the Sun descends in to the
underworld without dying and is capable of returning afterward. This is the
reason for the Sun being associated with functions such as guide of the
deceased tribe members to the underworld, as well as with revival of perished.
The Sun is a mediator between the planes of the living and the dead. Theosophy.
The primary local deity in Theosophy is the Solar Logos, "the consciousness of
the sun". Solar myth. Three theories exercised great influence on nineteenth
and early twentieth century mythography, beside the Tree worship of Mannhardt
and the Totemism of J. F. McLennan, the "Sun myth" of Alvin Boyd Kuhn and Max
M√ºller. R. F. Littledale criticized the Sun myth theory when he illustrated
that Max M√ºller on his own principles was himself only a Solar myth, whilst
Alfred Lyall delivered a still stronger attack on the same theory and its
assumption that tribal gods and heroes, such as those of Homer, were mere
reflections of the Sun myth by proving that the gods of certain Rajput clans
were really warriors who founded the clans not many centuries ago, and were the
ancestors of the present chieftains. Solar barge. A "solar barge" (also "solar
bark", "solar barque", "solar boat" and "sun boat") is a mythological
representation of the sun riding in a boat. The "Khufu ship", a 43.6-meter-long
vessel that was sealed into a pit in the Giza pyramid complex at the foot of
the Great Pyramid of Giza around 2500 BC, is a full-size surviving example
which may have fulfilled the symbolic function of a solar barque. This boat was
rediscovered in May 1954 when archeologist Kamal el-Mallakh and inspector Zaki
Nur found two ditches sealed off by about 40 blocks weighing 17 to 20 tonnes
each. This boat was disassembled into 1,224 pieces and took over 10 years to
reassemble. A nearby museum was built to house this boat. Other sun boats were
found in Egypt dating to different pharonic dynasties. A "sun chariot" is a
mythological representation of the sun riding in a chariot. The concept is
younger than that of the solar barge, and typically Indo-European,
corresponding with the Indo-European expansion after the invention of the
chariot in the 2nd millennium BC. The sun itself also was compared to a wheel,
possibly in Proto-Indo-European, Greek "hƒìliou kuklos", Sanskrit "suryasya
cakram", Anglo-Saxon "sunnan hweogul" (PIE ). Male and female. Among modern
English speakers, solar deities are popularly thought of as male counterparts
of the lunar deity (usually female); however, sun goddesses are found on every
continent (e.g. Amaterasu in Japanese belief) paired with male lunar deities.
Among the earliest records of human beliefs, the early goddesses of the
Egyptian pantheon carried a sun above their head as a symbol of dignity (as
daughters of Ra). The sun was a major aspect of Egyptian symbols and
hieroglyphs, all the lunar deities of that pantheon were male deities. The
cobra (of Pharaoh Son of Ra), the lioness (daughter of Ra), the cow (daughter
of Ra), the dominant symbols of the most ancient Egyptian deities, carried
their relationship to the sun atop their heads; they were female and their
cults remained active throughout the history of the culture. Later a "sun god"
(Aten) was established in the eighteenth dynasty on top of the other solar
deities, before the "aberration" was stamped out and the old pantheon re-
established. When male deities became associated with the sun in that culture,
they began as the offspring of a mother (except Ra, King of the Gods who gave
birth to himself). Some mythologists, such as Brian Branston, Patricia Monaghan
and Janet McCrickard, contend that sun goddesses are as common as, or even more
common, worldwide than their male counterparts. They also claim that the belief
that solar deities are primarily male is linked to the fact that a few better
known mythologies (such as those of late classical Greece and late Roman
mythology) rarely break from this rule, although closer examination of the
earlier myths of those cultures reveal a very different distribution than the
contemporary popular belief. The dualism of sun/male/light and moon/female/
darkness is found in many (but not all) late southern traditions in Europe that
derive from Orphic and Gnostic philosophies. In Germanic mythology the Sun is
female and the Moon is male. The corresponding Old English name is Si»ùel ,
continuing Proto-Germanic *S√¥wil√¥ or *Saewel√¥. The Old High German Sun
goddess is Sunna. In the Norse traditions, every day, S√≥l rode through the sky
on her chariot, pulled by two horses named Arvak and Alsvid. S√≥l also was
called Sunna and Frau Sunne, from which are derived the words: Sun and Sunday.
Other cultures that have sun goddesses include: The Lithuanians and Latvians
(Saule), the Finns (Paivatar, Beiwe) and the related Hungarians (Xatel-Ekwa)
and the Slavic peoples (Solntse). Sun goddesses are found around the world; in
Arabia (Al-Lat), Australia (Bila, Walo), India (Bisal-Mariamna, Bomong, Kn
Sgni) and Sri Lanka (Pattini); among the Hittites (Wurusemu), Egyptians
(Sekhmet) and Babylonians (Shapash); in Native America, among the Cherokee
(Unelanuhi), Natchez (Wal Sil), Inuit (Malina) and Miwok (Hekoolas). Missing
sun. The missing sun is a theme in the myths of many cultures, sometimes
including the themes of imprisonment, exile, or death. The missing sun is often
used to explain various natural phenomena, including the disappearance of the
sun at night, shorter days during the winter, and solar eclipses. Some other
tales are similar, such as the Sumerian story of the goddess Inanna's descent
into the underworld. These may have parallel themes, but do not fit in this
motif unless they concern a solar deity. In late Egyptian mythology, Ra passes
through Duat (the underworld) every night. Apep has to be defeated in the
darkness hours for Ra and his solar barge to emerge in the east each morning.
In Japanese mythology, the sun goddess Amaterasu is startled by the behavior of
her brother Susanoo and hides in a cave, plunging the world into darkness until
she is willing to emerge. It has been suggested that the story is allegorical,
symbolising that the sun goddess hiding in a cave is a metaphor for the sun
exhibiting quiet periods such as the Maunder Minimum. This allegory has been
used in literature such as Masks of the Lost Kings. In Norse mythology, the
gods Odin and Tyr both have attributes of a sky father, and they are doomed to
be devoured by wolves (Fenrir and Garm, respectively) at Ragnarok. S√≥l, the
Norse sun goddess, will be devoured by the wolf Skoll. In Hindu astronomy, Rahu
and Ketu ate the sun or moon to cause lunars and solar eclipses. In later, more
scientific years, their names were given to the Lunar nodes.
