Superstition Superstition is a belief in supernatural causality: that one event
leads to the cause of another without any physical process linking the two
events, such as astrology, omens, witchcraft, etc., that contradicts natural
science. Opposition to superstition was a central concern of the intellectuals
during the 18th century Age of Enlightenment. The philosophes at that time
ridiculed any belief in miracles, revelation, magic, or the supernatural, as
"superstition," and typically included as well much of Christian doctrine. The
word is often used pejoratively to refer to religious practices (e.g., Voodoo)
other than the one prevailing in a given society (e.g., Christianity in western
culture), although the prevailing religion may contain just as many
supernatural beliefs. It is also commonly applied to beliefs and practices
surrounding luck, prophecy and spiritual beings, particularly the belief that
future events can be foretold by specific unrelated prior events. Etymology.
The word "superstition" is first used in English in the 15th century, modelled
after an earlier French "superstition". The earliest known use as an English
noun occurs in "Friar Daw's Reply" (ca. 1420), where the "foure general synnes"
are emumerated as "Cediciouns, supersticions, √æe glotouns, & √æe proude." The
French word, together with its Romance cognates (Italian "superstizione",
Spanish "supersticion", Portuguese "supersti√ß√£o", Catalan "superstici√≥")
continues Latin "superstitio". From its first use in the Classical Latin¬ of
Livy and Ovid (1st century BC), the term is used in the pejorative sense it
still holds today, of an excessive fear of the gods or unreasonable religious
belief, as opposed to "religio", the proper, reasonable awe of the gods. While
the formation of the Latin word is clear, from the verb "super-stare", "to
stand over, stand upon; survive", its original intended sense is less than
clear. It can be interpreted as "‚Äòstanding over a thing in amazement or awe",
but other possibilities have been suggested, e.g. the sense of "excess", i.e.
overscrupulousness or over-ceremoniousness in the performing of religious
rites, or else the "survival" of old, irrational religious habits. Cicero
derived the term from the term "superstitiosi", lit. those who are "left over",
i.e. "survivors", "descendants", connecting it with excessive anxiety of
parents in hoping that their children would survive them to perform their
necessary funerary rites. The Latin verb "superstare" itself is comparatively
young, being "perhaps not ante-Augustan", first found in Livy, and the meaning
"to survive" is even younger, found in late or ecclesiastical Latin, for the
first time in Ennodius. The use of the noun by Cicero and Horace thus predates
the first attestation of the verb. The term "superstitio", or "superstitio
vana" "vain superstition", was applied in the 1st century to those religious
cults in the Roman Empire which were officially outlawed. This concerned the
religion of the druids in particular, which was described as a "superstitio
vana" by Tacitus, and Early Christianity, outlawed as a "superstitio Iudaica"
in AD 80 by Domitian. Superstition and religion. Greek and Roman polytheists,
who modeled their relations with the gods on political and social terms,
scorned the man who constantly trembled with fear at the thought of the gods,
as a slave feared a cruel and capricious master. Such fear of the gods was what
the Romans meant by "superstition" (Veyne 1987, p.¬ 211). http://
www.godrules.net/library/luther/NEW1luther_b5.htm‚Äù The current "Catechism of
the Catholic Church" considers superstition to be sinful in the sense that it
denotes a lack of trust in the divine providence of God and, as such, is a
violation of the first of the Ten Commandments, defining superstition as "a
perverse excess of religion" (para. #2110). Superstition is a deviation of
religious feeling and of the practices this feeling imposes. It can even affect
the worship we offer the true God, e.g., when one attributes an importance in
some way magical to certain practices otherwise lawful or necessary. To
attribute the efficacy of prayers or of sacramental signs to their mere
external performance, apart from the interior dispositions that they demand is
to fall into superstition. Cf. "" (para. #2111) Superstition and folklore. As
discussed above, the term "superstition" contrasts with the term "religion", by
definition referring to what are seen as excessive or false religious behavior
as opposed to a standard of proper or accepted religious standard. In this
sense, European folk belief¬ fell under the definition of superstition inasmuch
as it contrasted with Christian theology and liturgy. With the development of
folklore studies¬ in the late 18th century, use of the derogatory term
"superstition" was sometimes replaced by the neutral term "folk belief". Both
terms remain in use; thus, describing a practice such as the crossing
fingers¬ to nullify a promise as "folk belief" implies a neutral description
from the perspective of ethnology or folklore studies, while calling the same
thing a "superstition" implies its rejection as irrational. Superstition and
psychology. In 1948, behavioural psychologist B.F. Skinner published an article
in the "Journal of Experimental Psychology", in which he described his pigeons
exhibiting what appeared to be superstitious behaviour. One pigeon was making
turns in its cage, another would swing its head in a pendulum motion, while
others also displayed a variety of other behaviours. Because these behaviours
were all done ritualistically in an attempt to receive food from a dispenser,
even though the dispenser had already been programmed to release food at set
time intervals regardless of the pigeons' actions, Skinner believed that the
pigeons were trying to influence their feeding schedule by performing these
actions. He then extended this as a proposition regarding the nature of
superstitious behaviour in humans. Skinner's theory regarding superstition
being the nature of the pigeons' behaviour has been challenged by other
psychologists such as Staddon and Simmelhag, who theorised an alternative
explanation for the pigeons' behaviour. Despite challenges to Skinner's
interpretation of the root of his pigeons' superstitious behaviour, his
conception of the reinforcement schedule has been used to explain superstitious
behaviour in humans. Originally, in Skinner's animal research, "some pigeons
responded up to 10,000 times without reinforcement when they had originally
been conditioned on an "intermittent reinforcement" basis." Compared to the
other reinforcement schedules (e.g., fixed ratio, fixed interval), these
behaviours were also the most resistant to extinction. This is called the
"partial reinforcement effect", and this has been used to explain superstitious
behaviour in humans. To be more precise, this effect means that, whenever an
individual performs an action expecting a reinforcement, and none seems
forthcoming, it actually creates a sense of persistence within the individual.
This strongly parallels superstitious behaviour in humans because the
individual feels that, by continuing this action, reinforcement will happen; or
that reinforcement has come at certain times in the past as a result of this
action, although not all the time, but this may be one of those times. From a
simpler perspective, natural selection will tend to reinforce a tendency to
generate weak associations. If there is a strong survival advantage to making
correct associations, then this will outweigh the negatives of making many
incorrect, "superstitious" associations.
