Anglican Diocese of Sydney The Diocese of Sydney is a diocese within the
Anglican Church of Australia. The majority of the diocese is Evangelical and
low church in tradition and committed to Reformed and Calvinist theology. The
diocese goes as far as Lithgow in the west and the Hawkesbury River in the
north, and it includes much of the New South Wales south coast. It encompasses
Australia's largest city as well as the city of Wollongong. It is,
geographically, among the larger Anglican dioceses in the world, though the
smallest diocese in the state of New South Wales and one of the smaller
dioceses in Australia. Around fifty per cent of Australian Anglicans live in
the Diocese of Sydney. History. Foundations. Richard Johnson. The Anglican
ministry has been present in Australia since 1788. An Evangelical cleric, the
Reverend Richard Johnson, was the first chaplain to the new colony of New South
Wales and was sponsored by the London Missionary Society. Other chaplains,
notably Samuel Marsden and William Cowper, were also sent. Their positions were
unusual as their stipends were paid partly by the colonial government and some
(Marsden among them) received large grants of land from the governor of the
colony. Some (again including Marsden) were also magistrates. But they were
responsible either to the Bishop of Calcutta (in whose diocese the Colony of
New South Wales lay from 1788 to 1836) or to the Missionary Society which
sponsored them, and not to the colonial governor, who could neither dismiss
them nor admonish them. This position led to some friction with both governor
and settlers. Thomas Hobbes Scott. In 1825 Thomas Hobbes Scott the former
secretary to J.T. Bigge, the Commissioner of the inquiry into the
administration of the colony of New South Wales by Governor Lachlan Macquarie,
was appointed the first Archdeacon of Australia while still under the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Calcutta. The archdeaconry was created as a
corporation sole. In his position as archdeacon, Scott was a member of the
Legislative Council (ranking next behind the Lieutenant Governor) and had
almost complete control of all church matters. The Colonial Office appointed
him King's Visitor to schools and so he became responsible for public education
throughout the colony. His educational policy was guided by the principle that
the church and education were inseparably connected and the funds to sustain
them were administered by the same trustees. Since this view was shared by the
Colonial Office, the Governor Bathurst, in March 1826, created the Corporation
of the Trustees of Church and School Lands, granting one-seventh of the lands
of New South Wales to the corporation for the purposes of the Church of England
and education in the colony. Scott became the ex officio Vice President (the
President being the Governor.) It was mainly the combination of Archdeacon
Scott's official positions as a member of the Legislative Council, as King's
Visitor and also as Vice President of the Corporation of Church and School
Lands and of the substantial nature of the granting of the lands to the
Corporation that led to Courts later holding that at this time the Church of
England was the established church in the Colony of New South Wales. Scott
retired in 1829 and was succeeded by William Grant Broughton. Scott was
shipwrecked while returning to England and assisted the Anglican ministry in
the new colony of Western Australia and then in establishing a Church of
England chaplaincy in Batavia in the then Dutch East Indies. William Grant
Broughton. William Grant Broughton succeeded Scott in 1828. During the time
that Broughton was the archdeacon the corporation was abolished and the Church
of England lost its favoured place and other Christian churches were also
awarded glebe land in towns in the colony. Broughton was enthroned as Bishop of
Australia on 5 June 1836 and the Diocese of Australia was formed. He then lost
the ex officio position on the Legislative Council (though regaining it briefly
later before the creation of a partly elected Council in 1842). He continued an
education policy and established The King's School, Sydney. Formation of the
diocese. The Diocese of Tasmania separated from the Diocese of Australia in
1842. In 1849 the Diocese of Australia was divided into the four separate
dioceses of Sydney, Adelaide, Newcastle and Melbourne. Broughton became
metropolitan and the Diocese of Sydney recognised as the metropolitical see.
The Diocese of Sydney has been led by an archbishop since 1897. Moore College.
The diocese initially relied upon priests and bishops who were trained in and
had migrated from England and Ireland. Broughton had attempted to found a
theological college but it closed in 1849. In 1856, Moore Theological College
opened, the official theological college (seminary) for Sydney Anglicans. Since
that time it has grown in size and stature. In 2006 it has in excess of 450
students, many of whom end up in ministry outside the ecclesiastical and
geographical boundaries of the Sydney diocese. Anglican Church League. Since
the beginning of the 20th century, Evangelicals within the diocese were
concerned about growing Anglo-Catholicism and Modernism within the church and
fought very hard to preserve Sydney's Evangelical natureâ€”especially as
Tractarian missionaries began arriving from England in the 19th century. Out of
this came the "Anglican Church League", a body of Evangelicals who worked
within the politics of the diocese to further the Evangelical cause. Currently,
all bishops and most senior officeholders in the diocese are members of the
Anglican Church League. Characteristics of Sydney Anglicanism. Evangelical
distinctives. Sydney Anglicans have been described as fundamentalist and sect-
like by their opponents. They respond by arguing that whereas fundamentalists
interpret all parts of the Bible literally Evangelicals in Sydney interpret the
Bible in the context of the literary genre. Affiliation with Anglican doctrine.
For most of the last 450 years Anglicans worldwide have used the Book of Common
Prayer framed by Archbishop of Canterbury Thomas Cranmer in 1549, revised
significantly in 1552 and modified slightly in 1662. They have also subscribed
to, or otherwise acknowledged as foundational, the Thirty-Nine Articles of
Religion as listed in the Book of Common Prayer. While the Book of Common
Prayer is no longer used in many Sydney churches, the diocese still fully
affirms the doctrine and principles embodied within it as they interpret them.
In keeping with the theologically reformed character of the 39 Articles, the
diocese holds the view that all church doctrine and traditions are subject to
the authority of Scripture. Disassociation from Anglican tradition. There are
some areas of church practice that are being challenged within the diocese that
have potential ramifications for the wider Anglican Communion. The system of
episcopal order is under review with some eager to redefine some of the roles
of the threefold order of deacons, priests and bishops. The diocese is
considering whether the laying on of hands at confirmation could be performed
by the rector of the parish. Although confirmation by a priest is common
practice in Orthodoxy and is permitted in certain circumstances in Roman
Catholicism, in the Anglican tradition confirmation can only be celebrated by a
bishop. In 2005, possibly as a precursor to this change, the diocese formally
removed the requirement of confirmation prior to partaking of communion for
those who have been baptised as adults. However, it is common practice
throughout the diocese to allow all adults who profess genuine repentance and
Christian faith to receive communion regardless of whether they have been
baptised or confirmed. Lay presidency (also known as "Lay Administration of
Holy Communion") is being considered, whereby the Lord's Supper could be
celebrated by deacons and authorised laity, including women. According to
current church law, only ordained priests and bishops are allowed to preside at
the Lord's Supper. An ordinance to permit lay presidency was not proceeded with
at the diocesan synod in 2005 due to concerns regarding its legality. However,
this issue hasn't died and new motions are being drafted ready to be put before
the next diocesan synod. In October 2008, the "Australian Church Record" and
the "Anglican Church League" published "The Lord's Supper in Human Hands. Who
Should Administer?", which describes the forty year discussion of this issue in
Sydney and summarises the debate. Although Sydney was not the first diocese,
nor the only one, in which this issue has been raised, it has been discussed
within the diocese for a number of years. This publication has been widely
distributed so that the Anglican Communion might examine and consider Sydney's
discussions. Despite the use of the term "priest" to describe the ordained
leader of the local parish church in Anglicanism, the term is generally avoided
in the Sydney diocese because of its association with the sacrificial
priesthood in the Old Testament and, also, its association with Roman
Catholicism. The view taught at the diocese's Moore Theological College is that
the priestly work has been completed, once for all, by the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ and that the local church leader is simply a
"minister" of God's people, rather than mediating between the people and God.
Sydney Anglicans believe that this is faithful to the heart of Anglicanism,
rather than a break from tradition, though there is little evidence of this
belief in the rest of the Anglican Communion. When a distinction must be made
from bishops, deacons and lay ministers, the term "presbyter" is often used.
Liturgical practice. Despite their adherence to the 39 articles, and with the
exception of the few churches that have High Church practices, the 1662 "Book
of Common Prayer" is rarely used. Likewise, few churches sing canticles and
responses, either from 1662 or "An Australian Prayer Book". The term "meeting"
is sometimes used interchangeably with "service". The most notable example of
this is St Andrew's Cathedral. Many meetings at Evangelical churches in the
diocese do not use a prayer book or a liturgical form of service. There is
often an early morning (e.g. 8.00 am) service that follows Morning Prayer or
Holy Communion from "An Australian Prayer Book". Even where no formal liturgy
is used many core elements of Anglican liturgy may still be used for
congregational participation, such as a corporate confession of sin, saying of
creeds and corporate prayers. A screen and projector may be used in place of
books. Lay or congregational participation in Sydney churches also occurs
through Bible readings, leading intercessory prayer, leading the meetings,
testimonies and interviews, singing and playing music. In many parishes
fermented communion wine has been replaced with grape juice. Predominantly, the
reason given for this is to be sensitive to people for whom alcohol could cause
a problem (cf. 1 Cor 8:13). Vestments. Since 1911 the diocese has prohibited
the wearing of the chasuble, a vestment now generally worn elsewhere in
Australia for the celebration of the Eucharist. Traditionally in Sydney most
clergy have worn the choir habit for all services but a few have also worn a
cope and stole when celebrating the Eucharist and at certain other services.
This prohibition against chasubles was originated by Archbishop Wright, an
English Evangelical, who did so on the basis that the vestment was deemed
illegal, relying on decisions of the English ecclesiastical courts as finally
upheld in the Privy Council in Reid v Bishop of Lincoln A C 664 (see also
Ritualist movement). The main objection to this vestment in the mind of Sydney
Anglicans is that it is associated with the high church idea of a "sacrificing"
priesthood. That idea is contrary to Sydney's low church views of both Holy
Communion and of the role and function of the ordained ministry. The
archbishop's practice has since been codified by a synod ordinance, making
Sydney the only diocese in the whole Anglican Communion that continues to ban
the wearing of chasubles, reinforcing the perceived ongoing disapproval of
Anglo-Catholics in the diocese. The cope, therefore, is often worn at Anglo-
Catholic churches where the celebrant at the Eucharist would conventionally
wear the chasuble. In general those clergy who robe wear a cassock, surplice,
scarf and, occasionally, also an academic hood. Since about 1990 there has
sometimes been a practice of wearing a long surplice without a cassock,
particularly through the summer. Most clergy in the diocese, however, dispense
even with these robes, conducting church services in street clothes ranging
from a suit and tie or clerical collar, to smart casual attire. Relationships,
politics and policy. Relationship with the rest of the Australian Anglican
Church. For most of the last century the uncompromisingly Evangelical positions
adopted by the leaders of the Sydney diocese have contrasted with that of most
other Anglican dioceses in Australia which have tended to be more Anglo-
Catholic in their style of worship. This contrast helped to delay the adoption
of a constitution for the Australian church and, in 1942, led to legal action
being taken, ostensibly by members of the parish of Canowindra, a small town in
the Diocese of Bathurst, but strongly supported by members of the Sydney
diocese, Broughton Knox and T.C. Hammond (who both gave evidence in the ensuing
proceedings) against the then Bishop of Bathurst, Arnold Lomas Wylde. In these
proceedings, which ended in a split decision in the High Court of Australia,
those bringing the action sought to prevent the parishes in the Bathurst
diocese from using "The Red Book", a devotional manual authorised by the
bishop. The action was partly successful but led to a bitterness and distrust
of the Sydney diocese by many Anglo-Catholics which has continued to the
present. These differences in teaching and style of worship have become more
marked in recent years as those leading the Diocese of Sydney allege that other
dioceses have become theologically liberal. This has placed continued strain on
relationships with those other dioceses. As a consequence of this some parishes
outside the Sydney diocese are reluctant to invite Sydney-trained clergy to
ministry positions and, conversely, clergy trained outside Sydney are rarely
invited to minister within the Sydney diocese. However, many of the large and
growing Evangelical churches in dioceses such as Adelaide and Perth continue to
recruit some clergy and lay staff trained at Moore College. Some Sydney
Anglicans have also been involved in planting independent evangelical churches
in other parts of Australia. Along with ministers from other Christian
traditions, eleven Anglican clergy have moved from Sydney to help establish
these independent Evangelical churches. Prominent Sydney clergy such as Phillip
Jensen and the Moore College Principal, John Woodhouse, have been on the boards
of some of these churches. At the 2005 synod links between Sydney Anglicans and
independent Evangelical churches were strengthened, with the possibility of
these independent churches becoming affiliated with the Sydney diocese.
Relationship with the charismatic movement. The Sydney diocese has been less
influenced by the charismatic movement than some other dioceses. While there
are some parishes with strong charismatic leanings most clergy support the
doctrinal position that Christians are "filled" with the Holy Spirit at the
time of conversion rather than as a separate Christian experience (as believed
by some Pentecostals). As with other orthodox Christian church traditions,
there is a fundamental belief in the central role of the Holy Spirit in
conversion and sanctification of believers. "Charismatic" manifestations of the
Holy Spirit like speaking in tongues are not considered normative for all
believers, whereas the Fruit of the Holy Spirit is expected to be exhibited by
all Christians. Relationships within the diocese. Within the Sydney diocese
there are parishes which support a range of doctrinal positions or use formal
liturgical styles of worship that differ from the Evangelicalism which is
dominant within the diocese. Differences can become politicised prior to the
election of an archbishop with a number of clergy coalescing into like-minded
groups. The two most visible groups are "The Anglican Church League" who
support the Diocese's majority Evangelical position and "Anglicans Together"
who are more theologically broad in their understanding of the Bible and
promote a diversity of liturgical practice, which they believe to be in line
with the Lambeth Quadrilateral. Anglican realignment. The diocese has been a
major force in the Anglican realignment movement, since the election of the
first openly non-celibate gay bishop in the Anglican Communion, Gene Robinson,
by the Episcopal Church of the United States in 2003. The Diocese of Sydney and
Archbishop Peter Jensen in particular have been active in the GAFCON meetings
and in the Global South (Anglican), seeking a renewed Anglican Communion, more
faithful to their understanding of Christian orthodoxy. In this way, the
Diocese of Sydney supported the birth of the Anglican Church in North America
as an alternative to the Episcopal Church and, in October 2009, their synod
approved a resolution calling for the admission of the new province into the
Anglican Communion. The resolution stated that the "Synod welcomes the creation
of the Province of the Anglican Church in North America (ACNA) under the
leadership of Archbishop Bob Duncan and notes the GAFCON Primates Council
recognition of the ACNA as genuinely Anglican and its recommendation that
Anglican Provinces affirm full communion with the ACNA. Synod therefore
expresses its desire to be in full communion with the ACNA". It was also
decided to seek a General Synod motion expressing the Anglican Church of
Australia purpose to be in full communion with the new province. Sydney diocese
and politics. Some external commentators (including the retired American bishop
John Shelby Spong, "Sydney Morning Herald" writer Chris McGillion and
journalist Muriel Porter) have attempted to link Sydney Evangelicals to the
conservative "right". While most Sydney clergy strongly support conservative
positions on controversial areas such as euthanasia, homosexuality and
abortion, they also strongly support social justice issues such as protection
of the rights of the underprivileged and the rights of unauthorised immigrants
seeking refugee status. This "left" wing element has a lengthy history.
Archdeacon R.B. Hammond (no relation to T.C. Hammond) who was the rector of St
Barnabas' Broadway operated soup kitchens during the 1930s and was then a
founders of a self-help community which became known as Hammondville where
unemployed people built homes, established market gardens and so found work.
More lately Sir Marcus Loane was noted for his criticisms of the then Liberal-
Country Party coalition governments on issues relating to Vietnamese refugees
after the end of the Vietnam War, seeking the ready admission of refugees to
Australia. Loane was also outspoken on issues involving uranium mining. There
have been clergy willing to speak out against the more conservative policies of
the Diocese of Sydney. In 2007 the Revd Keith Mascord (now of Mission
Australia) sent an open letter to the Standing Committee, revealing
disgruntlements of people within the church (both leaders and congregation
members) and suggesting alternative ways forward. The perception that Sydney
Anglicans have adopted fundamentalism (see comments under Evangelical
distinctives) has led to assumptions that the diocese gives implicit support
for "right leaning" politicians in Australia. Ecumenical relations. While the
Anglican communionâ€™s largest evangelical diocese has worked closely with its
Roman Catholic counterpart on social issues for many years, the doctrinal
divisions between Calvinists and Roman Catholics are too great to be overcome
by a common distaste for the agenda of liberal Anglicanism. On 28 October 2009,
the Diocese of Sydneyâ€™s synod adopted a resolution urging all Anglicans to
reject the Vaticanâ€™s proposal of personal ordinariates for disaffected Anglo-
Catholic traditionalists. Sexual abuse, incidence and policy. The diocese has
been disturbed by revelations of sexual abuse. One cleric, a member of the
standing committee and a former president of the Anglican Church League, was
named in the Paedophile Enquiry of the Royal Commission into the New South
Wales Police Service. Other cases were examined by the commission but not dealt
with in public hearings. In 1996 the diocese responded to the Royal Commission
by establishing the Church Discipline Ordinance which provides a mechanism for
allegations and complaints to be dealt with and wrongdoers to be removed from
their positions in the diocese. Women's ordination. One of the main differences
between Sydney and the majority of other Anglican dioceses in Australia has
been its unwillingness to allow the ordination of women to the priesthood
(itself a term infrequently used in the diocese) or presbyterate. This issue is
an indicator of Sydney's specificity in ecclesiology and theology to most other
dioceses within the Anglican Communion.
