Syllabus of Errors The Syllabus of Errors () was a document issued by Holy See
under Pope Pius IX on December 8, 1864, Feast of the Immaculate Conception, on
the same day as the Pope's encyclical "Quanta Cura". Format. The Syllabus was
made up of phrases and paraphrases from earlier papal documents, along with
index references to them, and presented as a list of "condemned propositions".
For instance, in condemning proposition 14, "Philosophy is to be treated
without taking any account of supernatural revelation", the Syllabus asserts
the truth of the contrary proposition â€” that philosophy should take account
of supernatural revelation. The Syllabus does not explain why each particular
proposition is wrong, but it cites earlier documents to which the reader can
refer for the Pope's reasons for saying each proposition is false. With the
exception of some propositions drawn from Pius' encyclical "Qui pluribus" of
November 9, 1846, all the propositions were based on documents that postdated
the shocks to the Pope and the papacy of the Revolutions of 1848 (see Italian
unification). Reactions. Non-Catholics. Within the Protestant world, reactions
were uniformly negative. In 1874 the British Leader of the Opposition William
Ewart Gladstone published a tract entitled "The Vatican Decrees in their
bearing on Civil Allegiance: A Political Expostulation", in which he said that
after the Syllabus: The government of France briefly tried to suppress the
circulation of the encyclical and the "Syllabus" within its borders; it forbade
priests to explain the Syllabus from the pulpit, though newspapers were allowed
to discuss it from a secular point of view. Catholics. The document met with a
mixed reception among Catholics; many accepted it wholeheartedly, others wanted
a clarification of some points, and still others were as shocked as their
Protestant neighbors by the apparent broad scope of the condemnations. The
Syllabus then has no dogmatic force; it addresses us, not in its separate
portions, but as a whole, and is to be received from the Pope by an act of
obedience, not of faith, that obedience being shown by having recourse to the
original and authoritative documents, (Allocutions and the like,) to which the
Syllabus pointedly refers. Moreover, when we turn to those documents, which are
authoritative, we find the Syllabus cannot even be called an echo of the
Apostolic Voice; for, in matters in which wording is so important, it is not an
exact transcript of the words of the Pope, in its account of the errors
condemned, just as would be natural in what is an index for reference. In the
wake of the controversy following the document's release, Pius IX referred to
it as "raw meat needing to be cooked." However, others within the church who
supported the syllabus disagreed that there was any misinterpretation of the
condemnations. Sources cited. The Syllabus cited a number of previous documents
that had been written during Pius' papacy. These include : Qui Pluribus, Maxima
quidem, Singulari quadam, Tuas libenter, Multiplices inter, Quanto conficiamur,
Noscitis, Nostis et nobiscum, Meminit unusquisque, Ad Apostolicae, Nunquam
fore, Incredibili, Acerbissimum, Singularis nobisque, Multis gravibusque,
Quibus quantisque, Quibus luctuosissimis, In consistoriali, Cum non sine, Cum
saepe, Quanto conficiamur, Jamdudum cernimus, Novos et ante, Quibusque vestrum
and Cum Catholica. Subsequent history. Further thoughts in the same vein were
expressed in Pius' encyclical of 21 November 1873, "Etsi multa" ("On the Church
in Italy, Germany, and Switzerland"), which is often appended to the
"Syllabus." There Pius condemned current liberalizing anti-clerical legislation
in South America as "a ferocious war on the Church." In 1907 Lamentabili Sane
was promulgated, a ""Syllabus condemning the errors of the Modernists"", being
a list of sins that might be made by scholars engaged in biblical criticism.
Some think that the political or dogmatic propositions of the Syllabus may be
abrogated by later documents coming from the Second Vatican Council in 1962.
Others argue that this view results from an excessively broad interpretation of
statements that had a narrower sense in their original context, and from
contrasting the infallible documents of the ecumenical council with papal
statements that were not infallible because they were not addressed to the
whole church.
