Talmud The Talmud (Hebrew: ' "instruction, learning", from a root ' "teach,
study") is a central text of Rabbinic Judaism, considered second to the Torah.
It is also traditionally referred to as (), a Hebrew abbreviation of "", the
"six orders" of the Oral Law of Judaism. The Talmud has two components: the
Mishnah (Hebrew: ◊û◊©◊ ◊î, c. 200 CE), the first written compendium of
Judaism's Oral Law, and the Gemara (c. 500 CE), an elucidation of the Mishnah
and related Tannaitic writings that often ventures onto other subjects and
expounds broadly on the Hebrew Bible. The terms "Talmud" and "Gemara" are often
used interchangeably. The whole Talmud consists of 63 tractates, and in
standard print is over 6,200 pages long. It is written in Tannaitic Hebrew and
Aramaic. The Talmud contains the opinions of thousands of rabbis on a variety
of subjects, including law, ethics, philosophy, customs, history, theology,
lore and many other topics. The Talmud is the basis for all codes of rabbinic
law and is much quoted in other rabbinic literature. History. Originally,
Jewish scholarship was oral. Rabbis expounded and debated the law (the written
law expressed in the Hebrew Bible) and discussed the Tanakh without the benefit
of written works (other than the Biblical books themselves), though some may
have made private notes (""), for example of court decisions. This situation
changed drastically, however, mainly as the result of the destruction of the
Jewish commonwealth and the Second Temple in the year 70 CE and the consequent
upheaval of Jewish social and legal norms. As the Rabbis were required to face
a new reality‚Äîmainly Judaism without a Temple (to serve as the center of
teaching and study) and Judea without at least partial autonomy‚Äîthere was a
flurry of legal discourse and the old system of oral scholarship could not be
maintained. It is during this period that Rabbinic discourse began to be
recorded in writing. The earliest recorded oral law may have been of the
midrashic form, in which halakhic discussion is structured as exegetical
commentary on the Pentateuch. But an alternative form, organized by subject
matter instead of by biblical verse, became dominant about the year 200 CE,
when Rabbi Judah haNasi redacted the Mishnah (). The Oral Law was far from
monolithic; rather, it varied among various schools. The most famous two were
the School of Shammai and the School of Hillel. In general, all valid opinions,
even the non-normative ones, were recorded in the Talmud. The oldest full
manuscript of the Talmud is from 1342, known as the Munich Talmud and was
purchased in a hotly contested auction from New York based Christies by Tyndale
House of the UK. Structure. The six orders ("sedarim"; singular: "seder") of
general subject matter in the Talmud are divided into 60 or 63 tractates
("masekhtot"; singular: "masekhet") of more focused subject compilations. Each
tractate is divided into chapters ("perakim"; singular: "perek"), 517 in total,
that are both numbered according to the Hebrew alphabet and given names,
usually using the first one or two words in the first mishnah. The "perek" may
continue over several (up to tens) of pages. Each "perek" will contain several
"mishnayot" with their accompanying exchanges that form the "building-blocks"
of the Gemara; the name for a passage of gemara is a ' (; plural '). A "",
including "baraita" or "tosefta", will typically comprise a detailed proof-
based elaboration of a Mishnaic statement, whether halakhic or aggadic. A
"sugya" may, and often does, range widely off the subject of the mishnah. The
"sugya" is not punctuated in the conventional sense used in the English
language, but by using specific expressions that help to divide the sugya into
components, usually including a statement, a question on the statement, an
answer, a proof for the answer or a refutation of the answer with its own
proof. In a given "", scriptural, Tannaic and Amoraic statements are cited to
support the various opinions. In so doing, the Gemara will highlight semantic
disagreements between Tannaim and Amoraim (often ascribing a view to an earlier
authority as to how he may have answered a question), and compare the Mishnaic
views with passages from the Baraita. Rarely are debates formally closed; in
some instances, the final word determines the practical law, but in many
instances the issue is left unresolved. There is a whole literature on the
procedural principles to be used in settling the practical law when
disagreements exist: see under #Logic and methodology below. Mishnah. The
"Mishnah" is a compilation of legal opinions and debates. Statements in the
Mishnah are typically terse, recording brief opinions of the rabbis debating a
subject; or recording only an unattributed ruling, apparently representing a
consensus view. The rabbis recorded in the Mishnah are known as Tannaim.[http:/
/www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Gemara] Since it sequences its laws by
subject matter instead of by biblical context, the Mishnah discusses individual
subjects more thoroughly than the Midrash, and it includes a much broader
selection of halakhic subjects than the Midrash. The Mishnah's topical
organization thus became the framework of the Talmud as a whole. But not every
tractate in the Mishnah has a corresponding talmud. Also, the order of the
tractates in the Talmud differs in some cases from that in the "Mishnah". In
addition to the Mishnah, other tannaitic teachings were current at about the
same time or shortly thereafter. The Gemara frequently refers to these
tannaitic statements in order to compare them to those contained in the Mishnah
and to support or refute the propositions of Amoraim. All such non-Mishnaic
tannaitic sources are termed "baraitot" (lit. outside material, "Works external
to the Mishnah"; sing. ). The "baraitot" cited in the Gemara are often
quotations from the Tosefta (a tannaitic compendium of halakha parallel to the
Mishnah) and the Halakhic Midrashim (specifically Mekhilta, Sifra and Sifre).
Some "baraitot", however, are known only through traditions cited in the
Gemara, and are not part of any other collection. Gemara. In the three
centuries following the redaction of the Mishnah, rabbis throughout Palestine
and Babylonia analyzed, debated, and discussed that work. These discussions
form the Gemara (). "Gemara" means ‚Äúcompletion‚Äù (from the Hebrew ' : "to
complete") or "learning" ( from the Aramaic: "to study"). The Gemara mainly
focuses on elucidating and elaborating the opinions of the Tannaim. The rabbis
of the Gemara are known as (sing. ' ). Much of the Gemara consists of legal
analysis. The starting point for the analysis is usually a legal statement
found in a Mishnah. The statement is then analyzed and compared with other
statements used in different approaches to Biblical exegesis in rabbinic
Judaism (or - simpler - interpretation of text in Torah study) exchanges
between two (frequently anonymous and sometimes metaphorical) disputants,
termed the ' (questioner) and ' (answerer). Another important function of
Gemara is to identify the correct Biblical basis for a given law presented in
the Mishnah and the logical process connecting one with the other: this
activity was known as "talmud" long before the existence of the "Talmud" as a
text. Halakha and Aggadah. The Talmud is a wide-ranging document that touches
on a great many subjects. Traditionally Talmudic statements are classified into
two broad categories, "halakhic" and "aggadic" statements. Halakhic statements
directly relate to questions of Jewish law and practice (halakha). Aggadic
statements are not legally related, but rather are exegetical, homiletical,
ethical, or historical in nature. Minor tractates. In addition to the six
Orders, the Talmud contains a series of short treatises of a later date,
usually printed at the end of Seder Nezikin. These are not divided into Mishnah
and Gemara. Bavli and Yerushalmi. The process of "Gemara" proceeded in what
were then the two major centers of Jewish scholarship, the Land of Israel and
Babylonia. Correspondingly, two bodies of analysis developed, and two works of
Talmud were created. The older compilation is called the Jerusalem Talmud or
the "Talmud Yerushalmi". It was compiled in the fourth century in Israel. The
Babylonian Talmud was compiled about the year 500 CE, although it continued to
be edited later. The word "Talmud", when used without qualification, usually
refers to the Babylonian Talmud. "Talmud Yerushalmi" (Jerusalem Talmud). The
Jerusalem Talmud was one of the two compilations of Jewish religious teachings
and commentary that was transmitted orally for centuries prior to its
compilation by Jewish scholars in Israel. It is a compilation of teachings of
the schools of Tiberias, Sepphoris and Caesarea. It is written largely in a
western Aramaic dialect that differs from its Babylonian counterpart. This
Talmud is a synopsis of the analysis of the Mishnah that was developed over the
course of nearly 200 years by the Academies in Israel (principally those of
Tiberias and Caesarea.) Because of their location, the sages of these Academies
devoted considerable attention to analysis of the agricultural laws of the Land
of Israel. Traditionally, this Talmud was thought to have been redacted in
about the year 350 CE by Rav Muna and Rav Yossi in the Land of Israel. It is
traditionally known as the "Talmud Yerushalmi" ("Jerusalem Talmud"), but the
name is a misnomer, as it was not prepared in Jerusalem. It has more accurately
been called "The Talmud of the Land of Israel". Its final redaction probably
belongs to the end of the fourth century, but the individual scholars who
brought it to its present form cannot be fixed with assurance. By this time
Christianity had become the state religion of the Roman Empire and Jerusalem
the holy city of Christendom. In 325 CE Constantine, the first Christian
emperor, said "let us then have nothing in common with the detestable Jewish
crowd." This policy made a Jew an outcast and pauper. The compilers of the
Jerusalem Talmud consequently lacked the time to produce a work of the quality
they had intended. The text is evidently incomplete and is not easy to follow.
The apparent cessation of work on the Jerusalem Talmud in the fifth century has
been associated with the decision of Theodosius II in 425 CE to suppress the
Patriarchate and put an end to the practice of formal scholarly ordination.
Some modern scholars have questioned this connection: for more detail see
Jerusalem Talmud: Place and date of composition. Despite its incomplete state,
the Jerusalem Talmud remains an indispensable source of knowledge of the
development of the Jewish Law in Israel. It was also an important resource in
the study of the Babylonian Talmud by the Kairouan school of Hananel ben
Hushiel and Nissim Gaon, with the result that opinions ultimately based on the
Jerusalem Talmud found their way into both the Tosafot and the Mishneh Torah of
Maimonides. There are traditions that hold that in the Messianic Age the
Jerusalem Talmud will have priority over the Babylonian. This may be
interpreted as meaning that, following the restoration of the Sanhedrin and the
line of ordained scholars, the work will be completed and "out of Zion shall go
the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem". Accordingly, following the
formation of the modern State of Israel there is some interest in restoring
"Eretz Yisrael" traditions. For example, Rabbi David Bar-Hayim of the "Makhon
Shilo" institute has issued a siddur reflecting "Eretz Yisrael" practice as
found in the Jerusalem Talmud and other sources. "Talmud Bavli" (Babylonian
Talmud). The Talmud Bavli consists of documents compiled over the period of
Late Antiquity (3rd to 5th centuries). The most important of the Jewish centres
in Mesopotamia during this time were Nehardea, Nisibis, Mahoza, Pumbeditha and
the Sura Academy. "Talmud Bavli" (the "Babylonian Talmud") comprises the
Mishnah and the Babylonian Gemara, the latter representing the culmination of
more than 300 years of analysis of the Mishnah in the Babylonian Academies. The
foundations of this process of analysis were laid by Rab, a disciple of Rabbi
Judah ha-Nasi. Tradition ascribes the compilation of the Babylonian Talmud in
its present form to two Babylonian sages, Rav Ashi and Ravina. Rav Ashi was
president of the Sura Academy from 375 to 427 CE. The work begun by Rav Ashi
was completed by Ravina, who is traditionally regarded as the final Amoraic
expounder. Accordingly, traditionalists argue that Ravina‚Äôs death in 499 CE
is the latest possible date for the completion of the redaction of the Talmud.
However, even on the most traditional view a few passages are regarded as the
work of a group of rabbis who edited the Talmud after the end of the Amoraic
period, known as the "Saboraim" or "Rabbanan Savora'e" (meaning "reasoners" or
"considerers"). The question as to when the Gemara was finally put into its
present form is not settled among modern scholars. Some, like Louis Jacobs,
argue that the main body of the Gemara is not simple reportage of
conversations, as it purports to be, but a highly elaborate structure contrived
by the "Saboraim", who must therefore be regarded as the real authors. On this
view the text did not reach its final form until around 700. Some modern
scholars use the term "Stammaim" (from the Hebrew "Stam", meaning "closed",
"vague" or "unattributed") for the authors of unattributed statements in the
Gemara. (See eras within Jewish law.) Comparison of style and subject matter.
There are significant differences between the two Talmud compilations. The
language of the Jerusalem Talmud is a western Aramaic dialect, which differs
from the form of Aramaic in the Babylonian Talmud. The Talmud Yerushalmi is
often fragmentary and difficult to read, even for experienced Talmudists. The
redaction of the Talmud Bavli, on the other hand, is more careful and precise.
The law as laid down in the two compilations is basically similar, except in
emphasis and in minor details. The Jerusalem Talmud has not received much
attention from commentators, and such traditional commentaries as exist are
mostly concerned with comparing its teachings to those of the Talmud Bavli. The
Babylonian Talmud records the opinions of the rabbis of Israel as well as of
those of Babylonia, while the Jerusalem Talmud only seldom cites the Babylonian
rabbis. The Babylonian version also contains the opinions of more generations
because of its later date of completion. For both these reasons it is regarded
as a more comprehensive collection of the opinions available. On the other
hand, because of the centuries of redaction between the composition of the
Jerusalem and the Babylonian Talmud, the opinions of early "amoraim" might be
closer to their original form in the Jerusalem Talmud. The influence of the
Babylonian Talmud has been far greater than that of the "Yerushalmi". In the
main, this is because the influence and prestige of the Jewish community of
Israel steadily declined in contrast with the Babylonian community in the years
after the redaction of the Talmud and continuing until the Gaonic era.
Furthermore, the editing of the Babylonian Talmud was superior to that of the
Jerusalem version, making it more accessible and readily usable. According to
Maimonides (whose life began almost a hundred years after the end of the Gaonic
era), all Jewish communities during the Gaonic era formally accepted the
Babylonian Talmud as binding upon themselves, and modern Jewish practice
follows the Babylonian Talmud's conclusions on all areas in which the two
Talmuds conflict. Language. Of the two main components of the Babylonian
Talmud, the Mishnah is written in Mishnaic Hebrew and the Gemara is written,
with a few exceptions, in a characteristic dialect of Jewish Babylonian
Aramaic. This difference in language is due to the long time period elapsing
between the two compilations. During the period of the Tannaim (rabbis cited in
the Mishna), the spoken vernacular of Jews in Judaea was a late form of Hebrew
known as Rabbinic or Mishnaic Hebrew, whereas during the period of the Amoraim
(rabbis cited in the Gemara), which began around 200 CE, the spoken vernacular
was Aramaic. Hebrew continued to be used for the writing of religious texts,
poetry, and so forth. Since the Mishnah and all of the Baraitas and verses of
Tanakh quoted and embedded in the Gemara are in Hebrew, Hebrew constitutes
somewhat less than half of the text of the Talmud. The rest, including the
discussions of the Amoraim and the overall framework of the Gemara, is in
Jewish Babylonian Aramaic. There are occasional quotations from older works in
other dialects of Aramaic, such as Megillat Taanit. Printing. Bomberg Talmud
1523. The first complete edition of the Babylonian Talmud was printed in Venice
by Daniel Bomberg 1520-23. In addition to the "Mishnah" and "Gemara", Bomberg's
edition contained the commentaries of Rashi and Tosafot. Almost all printings
since Bomberg have followed the same pagination. Bomberg's edition was
considered relatively free of censorship. Benveniste Talmud 1645. Following
Ambrosius Frobenius's publication of most of the Talmud in installments in
Basel, Immanuel Benveniste published the whole Talmud in installments in
Amsterdam 1644-1648, Though according to Raphael Rabbinovicz the Benveniste
Talmud may have been based on the Lublin Talmud and included many of the
censors' errors. Vilna Talmud, 1835. The edition of the Talmud published by the
Szapira brothers in Slavuta in 1795 is particularly prized by many hasidic
rebbes. In 1835, after an acrimonious dispute with the Szapira family, a new
edition of the Talmud was printed by Menachem Romm of Vilna. Known as the
"Vilna Shas", this edition (and later ones printed by his widow and sons) has
been used in the production of more recent editions of Talmud Bavli. A page
number in the Talmud refers to a double-sided page, known as a "daf"; each daf
has two "amudim" labeled and , sides A and B (Recto and Verso). The referencing
by "daf" is relatively recent and dates from the early Talmud printings of the
17th century. Earlier rabbinic literature generally only refers to the tractate
or chapters within a tractate. Nowadays, reference is made in format ["Tractate
daf a/b"] (e.g. Berachot 23b). In the Vilna edition of the Talmud there are
5,894 folio pages. Goldschmidt Talmud 1897-1909, and German translation.
Lazarus Goldschmidt published an edition from the "uncensored text" of the
Babylonian Talmud with a German translation in 9 vols. (commenced Leipzig,
1897‚Äì1909, edition completed, following emigration to England in 1933, by
1936). Critical editions. The text of the Vilna editions is considered by
scholars not to be uniformly reliable, and there have been a number of attempts
to collate textual variants. There have been critical editions of particular
tractates (e.g. Henry Malter's edition of "Ta'anit"), but there is no modern
critical edition of the whole Talmud. Modern editions such as those of the Oz
ve-Hadar Institute correct misprints and restore passages that in earlier
editions were modified or excised by censorship but do not attempt a
comprehensive account of textual variants. One edition, by Rabbi Yosef Amar,
represents the Yemenite tradition, and takes the form of a photostatic
reproduction of a Vilna-based print to which Yemenite vocalization and textual
variants have been added by hand, together with printed introductory material.
Collations of the Yemenite manuscripts of some tractates have been published by
Columbia University. Steinsaltz, Schottenstein, Metivta and Ehrman Talmuds.
There have been four editions aimed at bringing the Talmud to a wider audience.
One is , now published by Koren Publishers Jerusalem, which contains the text
with punctuation, detailed explanations and a modern Hebrew translation. The
Steinsaltz Edition is available in two formats: one with the traditional Vilna
page and one without. It is available in Hebrew, English, French, Russian and
other languages. A second edition is the Schottenstein Talmud, published by
ArtScroll. A third is the Metivta edition, published by the Oz ve-Hadar
Institute. This contains the full text in the same format as the Vilna-based
editions, with a full explanation in modern Hebrew on facing pages as well as
an improved version of the traditional commentaries. A previous project of the
same kind, called Talmud El Am, "Talmud to the people", was published in Israel
in 1960s-80s. The Talmud El Am contains Hebrew text, English translation and
commentary by Rabbi Dr A. Ehrman, with short 'realia', marginal notes, often
illustrated, written by experts in the field for the whole of Tractate
Berakhot, 2 chapters of Bava Mezia and the halachic section of Qiddushin,
chapter 1. Talmud scholarship. From the time of its completion, the Talmud
became integral to Jewish scholarship. A maxim in Pirkei Avot advocates its
study from the age of 15. This section outlines some of the major areas of
Talmudic study. Geonim. The earliest Talmud commentaries were written by the
Geonim (approximately 800-1000, CE) in Babylonia. Although some direct
commentaries on particular treatises are extant, our main knowledge of Gaonic
era Talmud scholarship comes from statements embedded in Geonic responsa that
shed light on Talmudic passages: these are arranged in the order of the Talmud
in Levin's "Otzar ha-Geonim". Also important are practical abridgments of
Jewish law such as Yehudai Gaon's "Halachot Pesukot", Achai Gaon's "Sheeltot"
and Simeon Kayyara's "Halachot Gedolot". After the death of Hai Gaon, however,
the center of Talmud scholarship shifts to Europe and North Africa. Halakhic
and Aggadic extractions. One area of Talmudic scholarship developed out of the
need to ascertain the Halakha. Early commentators such as Rabbi Isaac Alfasi
(North Africa, 1013‚Äì1103) attempted to extract and determine the binding
legal opinions from the vast corpus of the Talmud. Alfasi's work was highly
influential, attracted several commentaries in its own right and later served
as a basis for the creation of halakhic codes. Another influential medieval
Halakhic work following the order of the Babylonian Talmud, and to some extent
modelled on Alfasi, was "the "Mordechai"", a compilation by Mordechai ben
Hillel (c. 1250‚Äì1298). A third such work was that of Rabbi Asher ben Yechiel
(d. 1327). All these works and their commentaries are printed in the Vilna and
many subsequent editions of the Talmud. A fifteenth century Spanish rabbi,
Jacob ibn Habib (d. 1516), composed the Ein Yaakov. "Ein Yaakov" (or "En
Ya'aqob") extracts nearly all the Aggadic material from the Talmud. It was
intended to familiarize the public with the ethical parts of the Talmud and to
dispute many of the accusations surrounding its contents. Commentaries. The
Talmud is often cryptic and difficult to understand. Its language contains many
Greek and Persian words that became obscure over time. A major area of Talmudic
scholarship developed to explain these passages and words. Some early
commentators such as Rabbenu Gershom of Mainz (10th c.) and Rabbenu ·∏§ananel
(early 11th c.) produced running commentaries to various tractates. These
commentaries could be read with the text of the Talmud and would help explain
the meaning of the text. Another important work is the "Sefer ha-Maftea·∏•"
(Book of the Key) by Nissim Gaon, which contains a preface explaining the
different forms of Talmudic argumentation and then explains abbreviated
passages in the Talmud by cross-referring to parallel passages where the same
thought is expressed in full. Commentaries ("·∏•iddushim") by Joseph ibn Migash
on two tractates, Bava Batra and Shevuot, based on ·∏§ananel and Alfasi, also
survive, as does a compilation by Zechariah Aghmati called "Sefer ha-Ner".
Using a different style, Rabbi Nathan b. Jechiel created a lexicon called the
"Arukh" in the 11th century to help translate difficult words. By far the best
known commentary on the Babylonian Talmud is that of Rashi (Rabbi Solomon ben
Isaac, 1040‚Äì1105). The commentary is comprehensive, covering almost the
entire Talmud. Written as a running commentary, it provides a full explanation
of the words, and explains the logical structure of each Talmudic passage. It
is considered indispensable to students of the Talmud. Medieval Ashkenazic
Jewry produced another major commentary known as Tosafot ("additions" or
"supplements"). The "Tosafot" are collected commentaries by various medieval
Ashkenazic Rabbis on the Talmud (known as "Tosafists"). One of the main goals
of the "Tosafot" is to explain and interpret contradictory statements in the
Talmud. Unlike Rashi, the "Tosafot" is not a running commentary, but rather
comments on selected matters. Often the explanations of "Tosafot" differ from
those of Rashi. Among the founders of the Tosafist school were Rabbi Jacob b.
Meir (known as Rabbeinu Tam), who was a grandson of Rashi, and, Rabbenu Tam's
nephew, Rabbi Isaac ben Samuel. The Tosafot commentaries were collected in
different editions in the various schools. The benchmark collection of Tosafot
for Northern France was that of R. Eliezer of Touques. The standard collection
for Spain was that of Rabbenu Asher ("Tosafot Harosh"). The Tosafot that are
printed in the standard Vilna edition of the Talmud are an edited version
compiled from the various medieval collections, predominantly that of Touques.
Over time, the approach of the Tosafists spread to other Jewish communities,
particularly those in Spain. This led to the composition of many other
commentaries in similar styles. Among these are the commentaries of Nachmanides
(Ramban), Solomon ben Adret (Rashba), Yom Tov of Seville (Ritva) and Nissim of
Gerona (Ran). A comprehensive anthology consisting of extracts from all these
is the "Shittah Mekubbetzet" of Bezalel Ashkenazi. Other commentaries produced
in Spain and Provence were not influenced by the Tosafist style. Two of the
most significant of these are the Yad Ramah by Rabbi Meir Abulafia (uncle of
the mystic Abraham Abulafia) and "Bet Habechirah" by Rabbi Menahem haMeiri,
commonly referred to as "Meiri". While the "Bet Habechirah" is extant for all
of Talmud, we only have the "Yad Ramah" for Tractates Sanhedrin, Baba Batra and
Gittin. Like the commentaries of Ramban and the others, these are generally
printed as independent works, though some Talmud editions include the "Shittah
Mekubbetzet" in an abbreviated form. In later centuries, focus partially
shifted from direct Talmudic interpretation to the analysis of previously
written Talmudic commentaries. These later commentaries include "Maharshal"
(Solomon Luria), "Maharam" (Meir Lublin) and "Maharsha" (Samuel Edels), and are
generally printed at the back of each tractate. Another very useful study aid,
found in almost all editions of the Talmud, consists of the marginal notes
"Torah Or", "Ein Mishpat Ner Mitzvah" and "Masoret ha-Shas" by the Italian
rabbi Joshua Boaz, which give references respectively to the cited Biblical
passages, to the relevant halachic codes and to related Talmudic passages. Most
editions of the Talmud include brief marginal notes by Akiva Eger under the
name "Gilyonot ha-Shas", and textual notes by Joel Sirkes and the Vilna Gaon
(see Textual emendations below), on the page together with the text. Pilpul.
During the 15th and 16th centuries, a new intensive form of Talmud study arose.
Complicated logical arguments were used to explain minor points of
contradiction within the Talmud. The term "pilpul" was applied to this type of
study. Usage of "pilpul" in this sense (that of "sharp analysis") harks back to
the Talmudic era and refers to the intellectual sharpness this method demanded.
Pilpul practitioners posited that the Talmud could contain no redundancy or
contradiction whatsoever. New categories and distinctions ("hillukim") were
therefore created, resolving seeming contradictions within the Talmud by novel
logical means. In the Ashkenazi world the founders of "pilpul" are generally
considered to be Jacob Pollak (1460‚Äì1541) and Shalom Shachna. This kind of
study reached its height in the 16th and 17th centuries when expertise in
pilpulistic analysis was considered an art form and became a goal in and of
itself within the yeshivot of Poland and Lithuania. But the popular new method
of Talmud study was not without critics; already in the 15th century, the
ethical tract "Orhot Zaddikim" ("Paths of the Righteous" in Hebrew) criticized
pilpul for an overemphasis on intellectual acuity. Many 16th- and 17th-century
rabbis were also critical of pilpul. Among them may be noted Judah Loew ben
Bezalel (the "Maharal" of Prague), Isaiah Horowitz, and Yair Bacharach. By the
18th century, pilpul study waned. Other styles of learning such as that of the
school of Elijah b. Solomon, the Vilna Gaon, became popular. The term "pilpul"
was increasingly applied derogatorily to novellae deemed casuistic and
hairsplitting. Authors referred to their own commentaries as "al derekh ha-
peshat" (by the simple method) to contrast them with pilpul. Sephardic
approaches. Among Sephardi and Italian Jews from the fifteenth century on, some
authorities sought to apply the methods of Aristotelian logic, as reformulated
by Averroes. This method was first recorded, though without explicit reference
to Aristotle, by Isaac Campanton (d. Spain, 1463) in his "Darkhei ha-Talmud"
("The Ways of the Talmud"), and is also found in the works of Moses Chaim
Luzzatto. According to the present-day Sephardi scholar Jos√© Faur, traditional
Sephardic Talmud study could take place on any of three levels. The most basic
level consists of literary analysis of the text without the help of
commentaries, designed to bring out the "tzurata di-shema'ta", i.e. the logical
and narrative structure of the passage. The intermediate level, "'iyyun"
(concentration), consists of study with the help of commentaries such as Rashi
and the Tosafot, similar to that practised among the Ashkenazim (historically
Sephardim studied the "Tosefot ha-Rosh" and the commentaries of Nahmanides in
preference to the printed Tosafot). The highest level, "halachah" (law),
consists of collating the opinions set out in the Talmud with those of the
halachic codes such as the Mishneh Torah and the Shulchan Aruch, so as to study
the Talmud as a source of law. (A project called "Halacha Brura", founded by
Abraham Isaac Kook, presents the Talmud and the halachic codes side by side in
book form so as to enable this kind of collation.) A somewhat similar
distinction exists in the Ashkenazi yeshivah curriculum between "beki'ut"
(basic familiarization) and "'iyyun" (in-depth study). Today most Sephardic
yeshivot follow Lithuanian approaches such as the Brisker method: the
traditional Sephardic methods are perpetuated informally by some individuals.
Brisker method. In the late nineteenth century another trend in Talmud study
arose. Rabbi Hayyim Soloveitchik (1853‚Äì1918) of Brisk (Brest-Litovsk)
developed and refined this style of study. Brisker method involves a
reductionistic analysis of rabbinic arguments within the Talmud or among the
Rishonim, explaining the differing opinions by placing them within a
categorical structure. The Brisker method is highly analytical and is often
criticized as being a modern-day version of pilpul. Nevertheless, the influence
of the Brisker method is great. Most modern day Yeshivot study the Talmud using
the Brisker method in some form. One feature of this method is the use of
Maimonides' "Mishneh Torah" as a guide to Talmudic interpretation, as distinct
from its use as a source of practical "halakha". Rival methods were those of
the Mir and Telz yeshivas. Critical method. As a result of Jewish emancipation,
Judaism underwent enormous upheaval and transformation during the nineteenth
century. Modern methods of textual and historical analysis were applied to the
Talmud. Textual emendations. The text of the Talmud has been subject to some
level of critical scrutiny throughout its history. Rabbinic tradition holds
that the people cited in both Talmuds did not have a hand in its writings;
rather, their teachings were edited into a rough form around 450 CE (Talmud
Yerushalmi) and 550 CE (Talmud Bavli.) The text of the Bavli especially was not
firmly fixed at that time. In the early medieval era, Rashi concluded that some
statements in the extant text of the Talmud were insertions from later editors.
On Shevuot 3b Rashi writes "A mistaken student wrote this in the margin of the
Talmud, and copyists {subsequently} put it into the Gemara." The emendations of
Yoel Sirkis and the Vilna Gaon are included in all standard editions of the
Talmud, in the form of marginal glosses entitled "Hagahot ha-Bach" and "Hagahot
ha-Gra" respectively; further emendations by Solomon Luria are set out in
commentary form at the back of each tractate. The Vilna Gaon's emendations were
often based on his quest for internal consistency in the text rather than on
manuscript evidence; nevertheless many of the Gaon's emendations were later
verified by textual critics, such as Solomon Schechter, who had Cairo Genizah
texts with which to compare our standard editions. In the nineteenth century
Raphael Nathan Nota Rabinovicz published a multi-volume work entitled "Dikdukei
Soferim", showing textual variants from the Munich and other early manuscripts
of the Talmud, and further variants are recorded in the Complete Israeli Talmud
and "Gemara Shelemah" editions (see Printing, above). Today many more
manuscripts have become available, in particular from the Cairo Geniza. The
Academy of the Hebrew Language has prepared a text on CD-ROM for
lexicographical purposes, containing the text of each tractate according to the
manuscript it considers most reliable, and the Lieberman Institute, Images of
some of the older manuscripts may be found on the website of the Jewish
National and University Library. Further variant readings can often be gleaned
from citations in secondary literature such as commentaries, in particular
those of Alfasi, Rabbenu ·∏§ananel and Aghmati, and sometimes the later Spanish
commentators such as Nachmanides and Solomon ben Adret. Historical analysis,
and higher textual criticism. Historical study of the Talmud can be used to
investigate a variety of concerns. One can ask questions such as: Do a given
section's sources date from its editor's lifetime? To what extent does a
section have earlier or later sources? Are Talmudic disputes distinguishable
along theological or communal lines? In what ways do different sections derive
from different schools of thought within early Judaism? Can these early sources
be identified, and if so, how? Investigation of questions such as these are
known as "higher textual criticism". (The term "criticism", it should be noted,
is a technical term denoting academic study.) Religious scholars still debate
the precise method by which the text of the Talmuds reached their final form.
Many believe that the text was continuously smoothed over by the "savoraim". In
the 1870s and 1880s Rabbi Raphael Natan Nata Rabbinovitz engaged in historical
study of Talmud Bavli in his "Diqduqei Soferim". Since then many Orthodox
rabbis have approved of his work, including Rabbis Shlomo Kluger, Yoseph Shaul
Ha-Levi Natanzohn, Yaaqov Ettlinger, Isaac Elhanan Spektor and Shimon Sofer.
During the early 19th century, leaders of the newly evolving Reform movement,
such as Abraham Geiger and Samuel Holdheim, subjected the Talmud to severe
scrutiny as part of an effort to break with traditional rabbinic Judaism. They
insisted that the Talmud was entirely a work of evolution and development. This
view was rejected as both academically incorrect, and religiously incorrect, by
those who would become known as the Orthodox movement. Some Orthodox leaders
such as Moses Sofer (the "Chatam Sofer") became exquisitely sensitive to any
change and rejected modern critical methods of Talmud study. Some rabbis
advocated a view of Talmudic study that they held to be in-between the
Reformers and the Orthodox; these were the adherents of positive-historical
Judaism, notably Nachman Krochmal and Zacharias Frankel. They described the
Oral Torah as the result of a historical and exegetical process, emerging over
time, through the application of authorized exegetical techniques, and more
importantly, the subjective dispositions and personalities and current
historical conditions, by learned sages. This was later developed more fully in
the five volume work "Dor Dor ve-Dorshav" by Isaac Hirsch Weiss. (See Jay
Harris "Guiding the Perplexed in the Modern Age" Ch. 5) Eventually their work
came to be one of the formative parts of Conservative Judaism. Another aspect
of this movement is reflected in Graetz's "History of the Jews". Graetz
attempts to deduce the personality of the Pharisees based on the laws or
aggadot that they cite, and show that their personalities influenced the laws
they expounded. The leader of Orthodox Jewry in Germany Samson Raphael Hirsch,
while not rejecting the methods of scholarship in principle, hotly contested
the findings of the Historical-Critical method. In a series of articles in his
magazine "Jeschurun" (reprinted in Collected Writings Vol. 5) Hirsch reiterated
the traditional view, and pointed out what he saw as numerous errors in the
works of Graetz, Frankel and Geiger. On the other hand, many of the nineteenth
century's strongest critics of Reform, including strictly orthodox Rabbis such
as Zvi Hirsch Chajes, utilized this new scientific method. The Orthodox
Rabbinical seminary of Azriel Hildesheimer was founded on the idea of creating
a "harmony between Judaism and science". Another Orthodox pioneer of scientific
Talmud study was David Zvi Hoffman. The Iraqi rabbi Yaakov Chaim Sofer notes
that the text of the Gemara has had changes and additions, and contains
statements not of the same origin as the original. See his "Yehi Yosef"
(Jerusalem, 1991) p.¬ 132 "This passage does not bear the signature of the
editor of the Talmud!" Orthodox scholar Daniel Sperber writes in "Legitimacy,
of Necessity, of Scientific Disciplines" that many Orthodox sources have
engaged in the historical (also called "scientific") study of the Talmud. As
such, the divide today between Orthodoxy and Reform is not about whether the
Talmud may be subjected to historical study, but rather about the theological
and halakhic implications of such study. Contemporary scholarship. Some trends
within contemporary Talmud scholarship are listed below. Role in Judaism. The
Talmud is the written record of an oral tradition. It became the basis for many
rabbinic legal codes and customs, of which the most important are the Mishneh
Torah and the Shulchan Aruch. Orthodox and, to a lesser extent, Conservative
Judaism accept the Talmud as authoritative, while Reconstructionist and Reform
Judaism do not. This section briefly outlines past and current movements and
their view of the Talmud's role. Sadducees. The Sadducees Jewish sect
flourished during the Second Temple period. One of their main arguments with
the Pharisees (later known as Rabbinic Judaism) was over their rejection of an
"Oral Law", and their denying a resurrection after death. Karaism. Another
movement that rejected the oral law was Karaism. It arose within two centuries
of the completion of the Talmud. Karaism developed as a reaction against the
Talmudic Judaism of Babylonia. The central concept of Karaism is the rejection
of the Oral Torah, as embodied in the Talmud, in favor of a strict adherence to
the Written Law only. This opposes the fundamental Rabbinic concept that the
Oral Law was given to Moses on Mount Sinai together with the Written Law. Some
later Karaites took a more moderate stance, allowing that some element of
tradition (called "sevel ha-yerushah", the burden of inheritance) is admissible
in interpreting the Torah and that some authentic traditions are contained in
the Mishnah and the Talmud, though these can never supersede the plain meaning
of the Written Law. Reform Judaism. With the rise of Reform Judaism, during the
nineteenth century, the authority of the Talmud was again questioned. The
Talmud was seen by Reform Jews as a product of late antiquity having relevance
merely as a historical document. In some cases a similar view was taken of the
written law as well, while others appeared to adopt a neo-Karaite "back to the
Bible" approach, though often with greater emphasis on the prophetic than on
the legal books. Present day. Orthodox Judaism continues to stress the
importance of Talmud study and it is a central component of Yeshiva curriculum,
in particular for those training to be Rabbis. This is so even though "Halakha"
is generally studied from the medieval codes and not directly from the Talmud.
Talmudic study amongst the laity is widespread in Orthodox Judaism, with daily
or weekly Talmud study particularly common in Haredi Judaism and with Talmud
study a central part of the curriculum in Orthodox Yeshivas and day schools.
The regular study of Talmud among laymen has been popularized by the "Daf
Yomi", a daily course of Talmud study initiated by Rabbi Meir Shapiro in 1923;
its 13th cycle of study began on August, 2012. Conservative Judaism similarly
emphasizes the study of Talmud within its religious and rabbinic education.
Generally, however, the Talmud is studied as a historical source-text for
Halakha. The Conservative approach to legal decision-making emphasizes placing
classic texts and prior decisions in historical and cultural context, and
examining the historical development of Halakha. This approach has resulted in
greater practical flexibility than that of the Orthodox. Talmud study is part
of the curriculum of Conservative parochial education at many Conservative day
schools and an increase in Conservative day school enrollments has resulted in
an increase in Talmud study as part of Conservative Jewish education among a
minority of Conservative Jews. See also: "The Conservative Jewish view of the
Halakha". Reform Judaism does not emphasize the study of Talmud to the same
degree in their Hebrew schools, but they do teach it in their rabbinical
seminaries; the world view of liberal Judaism rejects the idea of binding
Jewish law, and uses the Talmud as a source of inspiration and moral
instruction. Ownership and reading of the Talmud is not widespread among Reform
and Reconstructionist Jews, who usually place more emphasis on the study of the
Hebrew Bible or Tanakh. Other Contexts. The study of Talmud is not restricted
to those of the Jewish religion and has attracted interest in other cultures.
Christian scholars have long expressed an interest in the study of Talmud which
has helped illuminate their own scriptures. Talmud contains biblical exegesis
and commentary on Tanakh that will often clarify elliptical and esoteric
passages. The Talmud contains possible references to Jesus Christ and his
disciples, while the Christian canon makes mention of Talmudic figures and
contains teachings that can be paralleled within the Talmud and Midrash. The
Talmud provides cultural and historical context to the Gospel and the writings
of the Apostles. In South Korea, the Talmud is commonly read in the belief that
it develops mental acuity and advances academic achievement. The Jewish
traditional values expressed in the Talmud are also esteemed by the South
Koreans. Criticism. Defenders of the Talmud argue that many of these
criticisms, particularly those in antisemitic sources, are based on quotations
that are taken out of context, and thus misrepresent the meaning of the
Talmud's text. Sometimes the misrepresentation is deliberate, and other times
simply due to an inability to grasp the subtle and sometimes confusing
narratives in the Talmud. Some quotations provided by critics deliberately omit
passages in order to generate quotes that appear to be offensive or insulting.
Middle Ages. The history of the Talmud reflects in part the history of Judaism
persisting in a world of hostility and persecution. Almost at the very time
that the Babylonian "savoraim" put the finishing touches to the redaction of
the Talmud, the emperor Justinian issued his edict against "deuterosis"
(doubling, repetition) of the Hebrew Bible. It is disputed whether, in this
context, "deuterosis" means "Mishnah" or "Targum": in patristic literature, the
word is used in both senses. Full scale attacks on the Talmud took place in the
thirteenth century in France, where Talmudic study was then flourishing. The
charge against the Talmud brought by the Christian convert Nicholas Donin led
to the first public disputation between Jews and Christians and to the first
burning of copies of the Talmud in Paris in 1242. The fire of copies of the
Talmud continued. The Talmud was likewise the subject of the Disputation of
Barcelona in 1263 between Nahmanides (Rabbi Moses ben Nahman) and Christian
convert, Pablo Christiani. This same Pablo Christiani made an attack on the
Talmud that resulted in a papal bull against the Talmud and in the first
censorship, which was undertaken at Barcelona by a commission of Dominicans,
who ordered the cancellation of passages deemed objectionable from a Christian
perspective (1264). At the Disputation of Tortosa in 1413, Geronimo de Santa
F√© brought forward a number of accusations, including the fateful assertion
that the condemnations of "pagans," "heathens," and "apostates" found in the
Talmud were in reality veiled references to Christians. These assertion were
denied by the Jewish community and its scholars, who contended that Judaic
thought made a sharp distinction between those classified as heathen or pagan,
being polytheistic, and those who acknowledge one true God (such as the
Christians) even while worshipping the true monotheistic God incorrectly. Thus,
Jews viewed Christians as misguided and in error, but not among the "heathens"
or "pagans" discussed in the Talmud. Both Pablo Christiani and Geronimo de
Santa F√©, in addition to criticizing the Talmud, also regarded it as a source
of authentic traditions, some of which could be used as arguments in favour of
Christianity. Examples of such traditions were statements that the Messiah was
born around the time of the destruction of the Temple, and that the Messiah sat
at the right hand of God. In 1415, Pope Benedict XIII, who had convened the
Tortosa disputation, issued a papal bull (which was destined, however, to
remain inoperative) forbidding the Jews to read the Talmud, and ordering the
destruction of all copies of it. Far more important were the charges made in
the early part of the sixteenth century by the convert Johannes Pfefferkorn,
the agent of the Dominicans. The result of these accusations was a struggle in
which the emperor and the pope acted as judges, the advocate of the Jews being
Johann Reuchlin, who was opposed by the obscurantists; and this controversy,
which was carried on for the most part by means of pamphlets, became in the
eyes of some a precursor of the Reformation. An unexpected result of this
affair was the complete printed edition of the Babylonian Talmud issued in 1520
by Daniel Bomberg at Venice, under the protection of a papal privilege. Three
years later, in 1523, Bomberg published the first edition of the Jerusalem
Talmud. After thirty years the Vatican, which had first permitted the Talmud to
appear in print, undertook a campaign of destruction against it. On the New
Year, Rosh Hashanah (September 9, 1553) the copies of the Talmud confiscated in
compliance with a decree of the Inquisition were burned at Rome, in Campo dei
Fiori (auto de f√©). Other burnings took place in other Italian cities, such as
the one instigated by Joshua dei Cantori at Cremona in 1559. Censorship of the
Talmud and other Hebrew works was introduced by a papal bull issued in 1554;
five years later the Talmud was included in the first Index Expurgatorius; and
Pope Pius IV commanded, in 1565, that the Talmud be deprived of its very name.
The convention of referring to the work as "Shas" ("shishah sidre Mishnah")
instead of "Talmud" dates from this time. The first edition of the expurgated
Talmud, on which most subsequent editions were based, appeared at Basel
(1578‚Äì1581) with the omission of the entire treatise of 'Abodah Zarah and of
passages considered inimical to Christianity, together with modifications of
certain phrases. A fresh attack on the Talmud was decreed by Pope Gregory XIII
(1575‚Äì85), and in 1593 Clement VIII renewed the old interdiction against
reading or owning it. The increasing study of the Talmud in Poland led to the
issue of a complete edition (Krak√≥w, 1602-5), with a restoration of the
original text; an edition containing, so far as known, only two treatises had
previously been published at Lublin (1559‚Äì76). In 1707 some copies of the
Talmud were confiscated in the province of Brandenburg, but were restored to
their owners by command of Frederick, the first king of Prussia. A further
attack on the Talmud took place in Poland (in what is now Ukrainian territory)
in 1757, when Bishop Dembowski, at the instigation of the Frankists, convened a
public disputation at Kamianets-Podilskyi, and ordered all copies of the work
found in his bishopric to be confiscated and burned. The external history of
the Talmud includes also the literary attacks made upon it by some Christian
theologians after the Reformation, since these onslaughts on Judaism were
directed primarily against that work, the leading example being Eisenmenger's
"Entdecktes Judenthum" (Judaism Unmasked) (1700). In contrast, the Talmud was a
subject of rather more sympathetic study by many Christian theologians, jurists
and Orientalists from the Renaissance on, including Johann Reuchlin, John
Selden, Petrus Cunaeus, John Lightfoot and Johannes Buxtorf father and son.
Nineteenth century and after. The Vilna edition of the Talmud was subject to
Russian government censorship, or self-censorship to meet government
expectations, though this was less severe than some previous attempts: the
title "Talmud" was retained and the tractate Avodah Zarah was included. Most
modern editions are either copies of or closely based on the Vilna edition, and
therefore still omit most of the disputed passages. Although they were not
available for many generations, the removed sections of the Talmud, Rashi,
Tosafot and Maharsha were preserved through rare printings of lists of
"errata", known as "Chesronos Hashas" ("Omissions of the Talmud"). Many of
these censored portions were recovered ironically enough from uncensored
manuscripts in the Vatican Library. Some modern editions of the Talmud contain
some or all of this material, either at the back of the book, in the margin, or
in its original location in the text. In 1830, during a debate in the French
Chamber of Peers regarding state recognition of the Jewish faith, Admiral
Verhuell declared himself unable to forgive the Jews whom he had met during his
travels throughout the world either for their refusal to recognize Jesus as the
Messiah or for their possession of the Talmud. In the same year the Abb√©
Chiarini published at Paris a voluminous work entitled "Th√©orie du Juda√Øsme,"
in which he announced a translation of the Talmud, advocating for the first
time a version that would make the work generally accessible, and thus serve
for attacks on Judaism. In a like spirit nineteenth century anti-Semitic
agitators often urged that a translation be made; and this demand was even
brought before legislative bodies, as in Vienna. The Talmud and the "Talmud
Jew" thus became objects of anti-Semitic attacks, for example in August
Rohling's "Der Talmudjude" (1871), although, on the other hand, they were
defended by many Christian students of the Talmud, notably Hermann Strack.
Further attacks from anti-Semitic sources include Justinas Pranaitis' "The
Talmud Unmasked: The Secret Rabbinical Teachings Concerning Christians" (1892)
and Elizabeth Dilling's "The Plot against Christianity" (1964). The criticisms
of the Talmud in many modern pamphlets and websites are often recognisable as
verbatim quotes from one or other of these. Contemporary accusations. Criticism
of the Talmud is widespread, in great part through the Internet. The Anti-
Defamation League's report on this topic states that antisemitic critics of the
Talmud frequently use erroneous translations or selective quotations in order
to distort the meaning of the Talmud's text, and sometimes fabricate passages.
In addition, the attackers rarely provide full context of the quotations, and
fail to provide contextual information about the culture that the Talmud was
composed in, nearly 2,000 years ago. Gil Student, a prolific Internet author,
states that many antisemitic attacks on the Talmud are merely recycling
discredited material that originated in the thirteenth century disputations,
particularly from Raymond Marti and Nicholas Donin, and that the criticisms are
based on quotations taken out of context, and are sometimes entirely
fabricated.
