Tefillin Tefillin (Askhenazic: ; Israeli Hebrew: , ) also called phylacteries
( from Ancient Greek "phylacterion", form of "phyl√°ssein", œÜœÖŒªŒ¨œÉœÉŒµŒπŒΩ
meaning "to guard, protect") are a set of small black leather boxes containing
scrolls of parchment inscribed with verses from the Torah, which are worn by
observant Jews during weekday morning prayers. Although "tefillin" is
technically the plural form (the singular being "tefillah"), it is loosely used
as a singular as well. The hand-tefillin, or "shel yad", is placed on the upper
arm, and the strap wrapped around the arm, hand and fingers; while the head-
tefillin, or "shel rosh", is placed above the forehead. The Torah commands that
they should be worn to serve as a "sign" and "remembrance" that God brought the
children of Israel out of Egypt. The scriptural texts for tefillin are obscure
in literal meaning. For example, the verse in Deut.¬ 11:18 does not designate
what specifically to "bind upon your arm," and the definition of "totafot" is
not obvious. It is the Talmud, the authoritative oral tradition for Rabbinic
Judaism, which explains what are to be bound to the body and the form of
tefillin. Etymology. The ultimate origin of Hebrew "tefillin" is uncertain. The
word "tefillin" is not found in the Bible, which calls them "·π≠o·π≠afot". The
Septuagint renders "·π≠o·π≠afot" "·ºÄœÉŒ±ŒªŒµœÖœÑœåŒΩ", "something immovable."
Some believe it refers to a charm, similar to the Hebrew "ne·π≠ifot", "round
jewel." The Talmud (Sanhedrin 4b) explains that the word "·π≠o·π≠afot" is
combination of two foreign words: "Tot" means "two" in the "Caspi" language and
"Fot" means "two" in the "Afriki" language, hence "tot" and "fot" means "two
and two", corresponding to the four compartments of the head-tefillin. Menahem
ben Saruq explains that the word is derived from the Hebrew "Ve'hateif" and
"Tatifoo", both expressions meaning "speech", "for when one sees the tefillin
it causes him to remember and speak about The Exodus from Egypt." The first
texts to use "tefillin" are the Targumim and Peshitta and it is also used in
subsequent Talmudic literature, although the word "·π≠o·π≠afah" was still
current, being used with the meaning of "frontlet." "Tefillin" may have derived
from the Aramaic "palal", "to plead, pray," a word closely related to the
Hebrew "tefillah", "prayer." Jacob ben Asher (14th¬ century) suggests that
"tefillin" is derived from the Hebrew "pelilah", "justice, evidence," for
tefillin act as a sign and proof of God's presence among the Jewish people. The
only instance of the name "phylacteries" in ancient times occurs once in the
Greek New Testament whence it has passed into the languages of Europe.
"Phylacteries" derives from the Greek "phulaktƒìrion - œÜœÖŒªŒ±Œ∫œÑŒÆœÅŒπŒøŒΩ",
"defences," and in late Greek, "amulets" or "charms." Neither Aquila nor
Symmachus use the word "phylacteries." Purpose. The tefillin are to serve as a
reminder of God's intervention at the time of the Exodus from Egypt. Maimonides
details of the sanctity of tefillin and writes that "as long as the tefillin
are on the head and on the arm of a man, he is modest and God-fearing and will
not be attracted by hilarity or idle talk; he will have no evil thoughts, but
will devote all his thoughts to truth and righteousness." The "Sefer ha-
Chinuch" (14th¬ century) adds that the purpose of tefillin is to help subjugate
a person's worldly desires and encourage spiritual development. Joseph Caro
(16th¬ century) explains that tefillin are placed on the arm adjacent to the
heart and on the head above the brain to demonstrate that these two major
organs are willing to perform the service of God. Manufacture and contents. The
manufacturing process of both the boxes and the parchment scrolls are intricate
and governed by hundreds of detailed rules. In earlier Talmudic times, tefillin
were either cylindrical or cubical, but later the cylindrical form became
obsolete. Nowadays the boxes should be fashioned from a single piece of animal
hide and form a base with an upper compartment to contain the parchment
scrolls. They are made in varying levels of quality. The most basic form are
called "peshutim" ("simple") are made using several pieces of parchment to form
the inner walls of the head tefillin. The higher quality tefillin, namely
"dakkot" ("thin"), made by stretching a thin piece of leather, and the more
durable "gassot" ("thick") are both fashioned from the single piece of hide.
Black leather straps ("retsu'ot") pass through the rear of the base and are
used to secure the tefillin onto the body. On both sides of the head-tefillin,
the Hebrew letter "shin" () is moulded. The knot of the head-tefillin strap
forms the letter "dalet" () while the strap that is passed through the arm-
tefillin is formed into a knot in the shape of the letter "yud" (). These three
letters spell "Shaddai" (), one of the names of God. Parchment scrolls. Four
biblical passages which refer to the tefillin are placed inside the leather
boxes. ("See "Biblical passages contained in Tefillin" template below"). They
are written by a scribe with special ink on parchment scrolls ("klaf"). The
Hebrew Ashuri script must be and there are three main styles of lettering used:
"Beis Yosef" ‚Äì generally used by Ashkenazim; "Arizal" ‚Äì generally used by
Hasidim; "Velish" ‚Äì used by Sefardim. The passages contain 3,188 letters
usually take between 10‚Äì15 hours to complete. The arm-tefillin has one large
compartment, which contains all four biblical passages written upon a single
strip of parchment. The head-tefillin has four separate compartments in each of
which one scroll of parchment is placed. There was considerable discussion
among the commentators of the Talmud as to the order in which the scrolls
should be inserted into the four compartments of the head-tefillin. In the
Middle Ages, a famous debate on the issue was recorded between Rashi and his
grandson Rabbeinu Tam. Rashi held that the passages are placed according to the
chronological order as they appear in the Torah: "Kadesh Li", "Ve-haya Ki
Yeviehcha", "Shema", "Ve-haya Im Shemoa", while according to Rabbeinu Tam, the
last two passages are switched around. Sets of tefillin dating from the 1st-
century CE discovered at Qumran in the Judean Desert revealed that some were
made according to the order understood by Rashi and others in the order of
Rabbeinu Tam. The prevailing custom is to arrange the scrolls according to
Rashi's view, but some pious Jews are also accustomed to briefly lay the
teffilin of Rabbeinu Tam as well, a custom adopted by the Hasidim. The
placement of the protrusion of a tuft of the sinew ("se'ar eigel") identifies
as to which opinion the tefillin were written. The Vilna Gaon, who wore the
tefillin of Rashi, rejected the stringency of also laying Rabbeinu Tam,
pointing out that there were sixty-four permutations for the arrangement of the
tefillin scrolls. Obligation. The duty of laying tefillin rests upon males
after the age of thirteen years. Although women are exempt from the obligation,
some early codifers allowed them to do so. Moses Isserles (16th¬ century),
however, strongly discourages it. Historically, the "mitzvah" of tefillin was
not performed by women, but the ritual was apparently kept by some women in
medieval France and Germany. Traditions exist of some prominent women laying
tefillin and the idea is gaining a following among women affiliated to the
Conservative movement. Others who are not obliged to lay tefllin include a
mourner during the first day of his mourning period, a bridegroom on his
wedding-day. A sufferer from stomach-trouble or one who is otherwise in pain
and can not concentrate his mind is also exempt. One who is engaged in the
study of the Law and scribes of and dealers in tefillin and "mezuzot" while
engaged in their work if it can not be postponed, are also free from this
obligation. The codes view the commandment of tefillin as important and call
those who neglect to observe it "transgressors." Maimonides counts the
commandment of laying the arm-tefillin and head-tefillin as two separate
positive "mitzvot". The Talmud cites Rav Sheshet who said that by neglecting
the precept, one transgresses eight positive commandments. A report of
widespread laxity in its observance is reported by Moses of Coucy in
13th¬ century Spain. It may have arisen from the fear of persecution, similar
to what had occurred to the Jews living in the Land of Israel under Roman rule
in the 2nd-century. Performance. Originally tefillin were worn all day, but not
during the night. Nowadays the prevailing custom is to wear them only during
the weekday morning service, although some individuals wear them at other times
during the day as well. In light of the conflicting opinions, the "Mishna
Berura" (20th-century) recommends Ashkenazim make the following stipulation
before donning tefillin: "If I am obligated to don tefillin I intend to fulfill
my obligation and if I am not obligated to don tefillin, my doing so should not
be considered as fulfilling any obligation" and that the blessing not be
recited. On the fast day of Tisha B'Av, tefillin are not worn in the morning as
tefillin are considered an "adornment", symbols of beauty, which is deemed
inappropriate for a day of mourning. They are worn instead at the afternoon
Mincha service. How to put on tefillin. Ashkenazim put on and remove the
tefillin while standing, while Sephardim do so while sitting. It is forbidden
to speak or be distracted while putting on the tefillin. An Ashkenazi says two
blessings when laying tefillin, the first before he ties the arm-tefillin:
..."lehani'ach tefillin", and the second after placing the head tefillin:
..."al mitzvat tefillin", thereafter he tightens the head straps and says
""Baruch Shem Kovod..."" The Sephardic custom is that no blessing is said for
the head-tefillin, the first blessing sufficing for both. Many members of the
Chabad Orthodox movement only recite the blessing on the Head-Tefillah if they
spoke about something not related to tefillin since reciting the blessing on
the Hand-Tefillah. The arm-tefillin is laid on the inner side of the bare left
arm, two finger breadths above the elbow, so that when the arm is bent the
tefillin faces towards the heart. If one is left-handed, it is placed on the
right arm in the same place. After the blessing is said, the arm-tefillin is
tightened, and the strap wound seven times round the arm. Then the head-
tefillin is placed on the middle of the head just above the forehead, so that
no parts rests below the hairline. The knot of the head-tefillin sits at the
back of the head, upon the part of the occipital bone that protrudes just above
the nape, directly opposite the optic chiasm. The two straps of the head-
tefillin are brought in front of the shoulders, with their blackened side
facing outwards. Now the remainder of the arm-tefillin straps are wound three
times around the middle finger and around the hand to form the shape of the
Hebrew letter of either a "shin" () according to Ashkenazim, or a "dalet" ()
according to Sephardim. There are various customs regarding winding the strap
on the arm and hand. In fact, the arm strap is looped for clockwise wrapping
with Ashkenazi tefillin while it is knotted for counter clockwise wrapping with
Sephardic and Chabad tefillin. On removing the tefillin, the steps are
reversed.
