Temple (Latter Day Saints) In the Latter Day Saint movement, a temple is a
building dedicated to be a house of God and is reserved for special forms of
worship. A temple differs from a church meetinghouse, which is used for weekly
worship services. Temples have been a significant part of the Latter Day Saint
movement since early in its inception. Today, temples are operated by several
Latter Day Saint denominations. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
(LDS Church) has 140 operating temples worldwide to perform Endowment
ceremonies, marriages, and other services for both the living and by proxy in
behalf of dead ancestors with 28 more announced, some in planning stage and
others under construction as of 6 October 2012 . Although the most prolific
builder of temples within the Latter Day Saint movement is The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints, several other denominations have built or
attempted to build temples. Community of Christ operates two temples in the
United States, which are open to the public and are used for worship services,
performances, and religious education. Other denominations with temples are the
Apostolic United Brethren, the Church of Christ, the Fundamentalist Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints and the Righteous Branch of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. __TOC__ History. The Latter Day Saint
movement was conceived as a restoration of practices believed to have been lost
in a Great Apostasy from the true gospel of Jesus Christ. Temple worship played
a prominent role in the Bible's Old Testament, and in the Book of Mormon. This
is believed to emphasize that when the Lord comes again, he will come "to his
temple." As plans were drawn up to construct a temple in Kirtland, the decision
was made to simultaneously begin work on a second temple at the church's colony
in Jackson County, Missouri. Surviving plans indicate that both temples would
have the same dimensions and approximately the same appearance and both were to
be at the "centerplaces" of cities designed according to Smith's plan for the
City of Zion. Conflict in Missouri led to the expulsion of the Mormons from
Jackson County, preventing any possibility of building a temple there, but work
on the temple in Kirtland continued. At great cost and after great sacrifice,
the Latter Day Saints finished the Kirtland Temple in early 1836. On March 27,
they held a lengthy dedication ceremony and numerous spiritual experiences and
visitations were reported. Conflict relating to the failure of the church's
Kirtland Safety Society bank, caused the church presidency to leave Kirtland
and move the church's headquarters to the Mormon settlement of Far West,
Missouri. Far West was also platted along the lines of the City of Zion plan
and in 1838 the church began construction of a new, larger temple in the center
of the town. They may also have dedicated a temple site in the neighboring
Mormon settlement of Adam-ondi-Ahman. The events of the 1838 Mormon War and the
expulsion of the Mormons from Missouri left these attempts at temple-building
no further progressed than excavating foundations. In 1839, the Mormons
regrouped at a new headquarters in Nauvoo, Illinois. They were again commanded
to build a "House of the Lord" â€” this one even larger and greater than those
that went before. Plans for the temple in Nauvoo followed the earlier models in
Kirtland and Independence with lower and upper courts, but the scale was much
increased. New conflicts arose that caused Joseph Smith, the Prophet and
President of the Church, to be murdered, along with his brother Hyrum the
Patriarch, at Carthage Jail on June 27, 1844. The Nauvoo Temple stood only half
finished. Eventually, this temple was finished and dedicated. Some temple
ordinances were performed before most of the saints followed Brigham Young west
across the Mississippi River. Joseph Smith's death resulted in a succession
crisis which divided the movement into different sects. The concept of temple
worship evolved separately in many of these sects and only the LDS Church
continued to build temples until April 1990 when the Community of Christ, then
known as the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS),
began to construct the Independence Temple, which was officially dedicated in
1994. The Community of Christ still owns the Kirtland Temple, which is used for
worship services and special events but also open to visitors, including
various Latter Day Saint denominations interested in the building's historical
significance. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS church) has been the most prolific
builder of temples. In this church, temples are not only a House of the Lord,
but are also where members of the Church make covenants, receive instructions,
and perform sacred ordinances, such as: baptism for the dead, washing and
anointing (or "initiatory" ordinances), the "endowment," and eternal marriage
sealings. Ordinances are a vital part of the theology of the church, which
teaches that they were practiced by the Lord's covenant people in all
dispensations. Additionally, members consider the temple a place to commune
with God, seek Godâ€™s aid, understand the will of God, and receive personal
revelation. Upon completion, temples are usually open to the public for a short
period of time (an "Open House"). During the Open House, the church conducts
tours of the temple with missionaries and members from the local area serving
as tour guides, and all rooms of the temple are open to the public. The temple
is then dedicated as a "House of the Lord," after which only members in good
standing are permitted entrance, thus they are not churches but rather places
of worship. History. In 1832, shortly after the formation of the Church, Joseph
Smith, Jr. said that the Lord desired the saints build a temple; and they
completed the Kirtland Temple in 1836. Differing from other churches in the
Latter Day Saint tradition, members feel that the first endowment ceremonies
were performed in Kirtland, Ohio, although the endowment performed in Kirtland
differed significantly from the endowment performed by Joseph Smith in Nauvoo.
The construction of the Nauvoo Temple and the teaching of the full endowment by
Smith are seen as the final steps in restoring the Church founded by Jesus
Christ following the great apostasy. Because it is an integral part of their
worship, members, upon arriving in Salt Lake City began plans to build temples
there, and built the Endowment House to allow members to receive the endowment
until the temples were completed. Construction. Initially, the Church
constructed temples in areas where there were large concentrations of members:
Utah, Idaho, Arizona, Hawai'i (all in the USA), and Alberta (Canada). In the
mid 20th century, because of the importance of temples in the theology, the
Church tried to balance density with the travel requirements that attending the
temple imposed upon members. Thus, temples were built in Europe (Switzerland-
1955 and England-1958); the Pacific Islands (New Zealand-1958); and Washington,
D.C.Â (1974-first American temple East of Utah since Nauvoo in 1846) when
membership alone might not have justified the effort. Temple growth continued
in the 1980s, Spencer W. Kimball directed the Church to build smaller temples
with similar designs. Before this time, all but the Switzerland temple were at
least , and the average size of the first 20 temples was . The new temples
varied in size but were generally less than allowing temples to be built where
there were fewer members. As a result the first temples in South America
(Brazil-1978); Asia (Japan-1980); and Central America (Mexico City-1983) were
built and the number of temples doubled from 15 to 36. Church president and
prophet Gordon B. Hinckley (1910â€“2008) also accelerated the construction of
temples through the use of an even smaller standardized base design and set a
goal to have 100 operating temples before 2001. Between the brief building
period from 1998 to 2001, 38 of these standardized temples were constructed and
dedicated, meeting Hinckley's goal and, during Hinckley's service as president,
the number of temples more than doubled from 47 to 124. Community of Christ.
Community of Christ (formerly the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter
Day Saints) maintains two temples. Unlike those of The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, however, these temples are open to the public. Many
religious functions take place including Communion and a daily prayer for
peace. The temple built in Kirtland, Ohio is owned and maintained by Community
of Christ. This was the first temple actually built (rather than merely
planned) by the Latter Day Saint movement and the only temple completed in the
lifetime of Joseph Smith, Jr. This temple was the first temple built by Latter
Day Saints. Additionally, during its 1994 World Conference, Community of Christ
dedicated a second temple in Independence, Missouri. Community of Christ
describes this temple as a house of worship and education "dedicated to the
pursuit of peace". The church holds a Daily Prayer for Peace at 1:00 p.m.
Central Time in the 1,600 seat sanctuary. Church of Jesus Christ (Cutlerite).
The Church of Jesus Christ (Cutlerite) performs temple ordinances in its
Independence, Missouri meetinghouse (their only chapel still in active use),
though it also believes in the construction of special temple buildings such as
the ones in Kirtland and Nauvoo. Cutlerites do not designate their meetinghouse
as a temple, "per se", but they believe that it serves precisely the same
purpose, and that the ordinances performed there are just as valid as ones done
in any historic (pre-1844) LDS temple. As within the LDS church, these sacred
services are not open to the public, and participants are forbidden to discuss
them outside the room where they are performed. Cutlerite meetinghouses are
constructed with a main-floor chapel that is always open to the public, unless
baptisms for the dead are being performed; a second-floor room (closed to the
public at all times) is reserved for the ordinances of the Endowment. A
rectangular-shaped baptismal font is accessed through a trap door beneath the
floor of the main-floor chapel, which is used for baptisms of both the living
and the dead. Eternal Marriages are not performed by the Cutlerites, as they
have always rejected that particular doctrine. Unsuccessful attempts at
building temples. During the life of Joseph Smith, Jr., a few years before the
Kirtland temple was built, Smith dedicated a location in Independence, Missouri
for the building of a special temple, which was to be the center of a New
Jerusalem. However, hostile action by non-Mormon citizens resulted in the
expulsion of all Latter Day Saints from the area in 1833, and the planned
temple was never begun. As of 2011, the lot for this temple is owned and
maintained by the Church of Christ (Temple Lot). The Temple Lot church
endeavored to construct a temple beginning in 1929, as a result of a revelation
that Apostle Otto Fetting of that organization claimed to have received from
John the Baptist. A hole for the proposed temple basement was excavated, and
architects' drawings were done, but no further work was completed due to a
chronic lack of funding and the expulsion of Fetting and his followers (about
one-third of the Temple Lot organization at the time) from the mainline Temple
Lot church. Eventually the City of Independence had the hole filled in, in
1946, and the lot today is mostly covered with grass, with the Church of
Christ's meetinghouse and a few trees at the northeast corner. Today, the
Temple Lot church has no plans to build a temple of its own, but rather sees
itself as the steward of the Lot until the various Latter Day Saint factions
unite around the time of Jesus Christ's Second Coming. The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite) endeavored to construct a temple in the
mid-1840s in Voree, Wisconsin, according to a rather elaborate plan devised by
their prophet James J. Strang. Poverty and factional infighting among the
Strangites prevented the temple from progressing beyond the planning stage. The
church has made no attempt to build temples since Strang's death. Performing
ordinances in other buildings. From 1855 to 1889 The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints performed ordinances in the Endowment House to allow members
to receive the endowment during construction of temples in Utah after leaving
Nauvoo. Before the Endowment House was built, the Council House was similarly
used, between 1850 and 1855.
