Sikh gurus The Sikh Gurus established Sikhism from over the centuries,
beginning in the year 1469. Sikhism was founded by the first guru, Guru Nanak,
and subsequently, each guru, in succession, was referred to as "Nanak", and as
"Light", making their teachings, in the holy scriptures, equivalent. There are
a total of 11 gurus, of which the current, and everlasting, Sikh Guru is the
integrated Sikh scriptures known as the Adi Granth or, Siri Guru Granth Sahib.
The Gurus. Sikhism was established by Guru Nanak and ten other Sikh Gurus
starting in 1469. Guru Nanak was the first guru, and Guru Gobind Singh, the
10th Guru, bestowed the Guruship forevermore to the Sikh holy scripture, the
Guru Granth Sahib as the 11th Guru, the living word. Sikhs follow the teachings
of the gurus, which is believed upon remembering, leads to salvation. The name
"Nanak" was used by all the subsequent gurus who wrote any sacred text in the
Sikh holy scripture called the Guru Granth Sahib. The second Sikh Guru, Guru
Angad Dev, is also called the "Second Nanak" or "Nanak II". Sikhs hold that all
subsequent Gurus carried the same message as that of Guru Nanak, and so they
have used the name "Nanak" in their holy text, instead of their own names.
Hence all are referred to as the "Light of Nanak". List of Sikh Gurus.
ImageSize = width:1100 height:200 PlotArea = left:105 bottom:65 top:0 right:55
Alignbars = justify DateFormat = yyyy Period = from:1469 till:1708 TimeAxis =
orientation:horizontal format:yyyy Colors = Legend = orientation:horizontal
position:bottom ScaleMajor = increment:20 start:1469 BarData= PlotData=
