Thealogy Thealogy, is a relatively recent term and describes an emerging field
of academic interdisciplinary study whose origin and initial use is open to
debate. Often attributed to a neologism coined by Isaac Bonewits in 1974,
Patricia 'Iolana traces the early use of the term to 1976 crediting both
Bonewits and Valerie Saiving in its initial use. While the definition and scope
of thealogy is currently being defined by the key scholars in the field,
thealogy is generally understood as a discourse that reflects upon the meaning
of Goddess and Her relationship to life forms. Situated in the field of
theology and religious studies, it is seen as a complementary and relational
field to that of theology. It is a discourse that critically engages the
beliefs, wisdom, practices, questions, and values of the Goddess community,
both past and present. The term suggests a feminist approach to theism and the
context of God and gender within Paganism, Neopaganism, Goddess Spirituality
and various nature-based religions. The term, thealogy, increasingly appeared
in feminist literature associated with the Neopagan Goddess movement during the
1980s to 1990s. Naomi Goldenberg used the term in 1979. Carol P. Christ used
the term in 1987, and further defined thealogy in her 2002 essay, "Feminist
theology as post-traditional thealogy," as "the reflection on the meaning of
the Goddess" (p79). In her 1989 essay "On Mirrors, Mists and Murmurs: Toward an
Asian American Thealogy," Rita Nakashima Brock defined thealogy as "the work of
women reflecting on their experiences of and beliefs about divine reality"
(p236). Contemporary Thealogians include Carol P. Christ, Melissa Raphael,
Asphodel Long, Beverly Clack, Charlotte Caron, Naomi Goldenberg, Paul Reid-
Bowen, Rita Nakashima Brock, and Patricia 'Iolana. Thealogy can be described as
religiously pluralistic, as thealogians come from various religious backgrounds
that are often hybrid in nature. In addition to Pagans, Neopagans, and Goddess-
centred faith traditions, they are also Christian, Jewish, Buddhist, Muslim,
Quakers, etc. or define themselves as Spiritual Feminists. As such, the term
"thealogy" has also been used by feminists within mainstream monotheistic
religions describe in more detail the feminine aspect of a monotheistic deity
or trinity, such as God/dess Herself, or the Heavenly Mother of the Latter Day
Saint movement. Terminology. In "The Druid Chronicles (Evolved)", privately
published in 1976, Isaac Bonewits used "thealogian" to refer to Wiccan author
Aidan Kelly, aka "C. Taliesin Edwards". "The Druid Chronicles (Evolved)"
represented a three-year project starting in 1974 and finished (published) in
1976. The article referred to within "The Druid Chronicles (Evolved)" is dated
to the summer of 1976. Moreover, this is almost certainly not the first usage;
the context of "thealogian" appears in a work by C. Taliesin Edwards, "Essays
towards a Meta"thealogy" of the Goddess" added. There is, however, a
possibility that Bonewits altered the name of the work to fit with his
terminology. Kelley himself had related to Bonewits that he couldn't remember
which of the two of them said "thealogy" to the other first. In the 1979 "The
Changing of the Gods," Naomi Goldenberg introduces the term as a future
possibility with respect to a distinct discourse, highlighting the masculine
nature of theology. Also in 1979, in the first revised edition of "Real Magic",
Bonewits defined "thealogy" in his Glossary as "Intellectual speculations
concerning the nature of the Goddess and Her relations to the world in general
and humans in particular; rational explanations of religious doctrines,
practices and beliefs, which may or may not bear any connection to any religion
as actually conceived and practiced by the majority of its members." Also in
the same glossary, he defined "theology" with nearly identical words, changing
the feminine pronouns with masculine pronouns appropriately. Carol Christ used
the term more substantially in "Laughter of Aphrodite" (1987), acknowledging
that those who create thealogy cannot avoid being influenced by the categories
and questions posed in Christian and Jewish theologies (Christ 1987, p. xii).
In "Rebirth of the Goddess", Christ establishes some guidelines for method,
suggesting that thealogy begins rooted in women's experience (Christ 1997,
pp.Â 31â€“49). Christ's text "Rebirth of the Goddess" sets out to develop the
first systematic thealogy. In 1993, Charlotte Caron's definition of thealogy as
"reflection on the divine in feminine and feminist terms" appeared in "To Make
and Make Again" (Russell & Clarkson 1996). By this time, the concept had gained
considerable status among Goddess adherents. Mainstream religious studies
scholars and theologians have contested the legitimacy of such a discourse. In
2000, Melissa Raphael wrote the text "Introducing Thealogy: Discourse on the
Goddess". Written for an academic audience, it purports to introduce the main
elements of thealogy within the context of Goddess feminism. She situates
thealogy as a discourse that can be engaged with by Goddess feministsâ€”those
who are feminist adherents of the Goddess who may have left their church,
synagogue, or mosque, or those who may still belong to their originally
established religion (Melissa Raphael 2000, p.Â 16) In 2007, Paul Reid-Bowen
wrote the text "Goddess as Nature: Towards a Philosophical Thealogy", which can
be regarded as another systematic approach to thealogy, but which integrates
philosophical discourse. In 2010, Angela Hope co-founded the "Institute for
Thealogy & Deasophy" with Patricia 'Iolana. In the past decade, other
thealogians like Patricia 'Iolana and D'vorah Grenn have generated discourses
that bridge thealogy with other academic disciplines. 'Iolana's Jungian
thealogy bridges analytical psychology with thealogy, and Grenn's metaformic
thealogy is a bridge between matriarchal studies and thealogy. Interpretations.
Thealogy is referred to as its own unique discourse separate from theology,
rather than a sub-field within theology. In line with Christ and Reid-Bowen,
thealogy can be conceived of in a systematic fashion with specific methods,
while deasophy (a concept coined by Max Dashu) which addresses the wisdom of
the Goddess tradition, may not necessarily be systematically ordered.
