Theism Theism, in the broadest sense, is the belief that at least one deity
exists. In a more specific sense, "theism" is a doctrine concerning the nature
of a monotheistic God and God's relationship to the universe. "Theism", in this
specific sense, conceives of God as personal, present and active in the
governance and organization of the world and the universe. As such "theism"
describes the classical conception of God that is found in Christianity,
Judaism, Islam and some forms of Hinduism. The use of the word "theism" to
indicate this classical form of monotheism began during the scientific
revolution of the seventeenth century in order to distinguish it from the then-
emerging deism which contended that God, though transcendent and supreme, did
not intervene in the natural world and could be known rationally but not via
revelation. The term "theism" derives from the Greek "theos" meaning "god". The
term "theism" was first used by Ralph Cudworth (1617â€“88). In Cudworth's
definition, they are "strictly and properly called Theists, who affirm, that a
perfectly conscious understanding being, or mind, existing of itself from
eternity, was the cause of all other things". Atheism is rejection of theism in
the broadest sense of theism; i.e. the rejection of belief that there is even
one deity. Rejection of the narrower sense of theism can take forms such as
deism, pantheism, and polytheism. The claim that the existence of any deity is
unknown or unknowable is agnosticism. The positive assertion of knowledge,
either of the existence of gods or the absence of gods, can also be attributed
to some theists and some atheists. Put simply theism and atheism deal with
belief, and agnosticism deals with (absence of) rational claims to asserting
knowledge. Types. Monotheism. Monotheism (from Greek ) is the belief in
theology that only one deity exists. Some modern day monotheistic religions
include Christianity, Islam, Judaism, and some forms of Hinduism. Polytheism.
Polytheism is the belief that there is more than one deity. In practice,
polytheism is not just the belief that there are multiple gods; it usually
includes belief in the existence of a specific pantheon of distinct deities.
Pantheism and panentheism. Some people find the distinction between these two
beliefs as ambiguous and unhelpful, while others see it as a significant point
of division. Deism. Deism typically rejects supernatural events (such as
prophecies, miracles, and divine revelations) prominent in organized religion.
Instead, Deism holds that religious beliefs must be founded on human reason and
observed features of the natural world, and that these sources reveal the
existence of a supreme being as creator. Autotheism. Autotheism is the
viewpoint that, whether divinity is also external or not, it is inherently
within 'oneself' and that one has a duty to become perfect (or divine). This
can either be in a selfish, wilful, egotistical way or a selfless way following
the implications of statements attributed to ethical, philosophical, and
religious leaders (such as Jesus, Buddha, Mahavira and Socrates). Autotheism
can also refer to the belief that one's self is a deity (often the only one),
within the context of subjectivism. This is a fairly extreme version of
subjectivism, however.
