Thomas Cajetan Thomas Cajetan (pronounced "Ca-'je-tan"), also known as
Gaetanus, commonly Tommaso de Vio (20 February 1469 - 9 August 1534), was an
Italian cardinal from 1517 until his death and the Master of the Order of
Preachers 1508-18. He is perhaps best known among Protestants for his
opposition to the teachings of Martin Luther and the Protestant Reformation
while he was the Pope's Legate in Wittenberg, and perhaps best known among
Catholics for his extensive commentary on the "Summa Theologica" of Thomas
Aquinas. He is not to be confused with his contemporary, Saint Cajetan, the
founder of the Theatines. Life. De Vio was born in Gaeta, then part of the
Kingdom of Naples, as Jacopo Vio. The name Tommaso was taken as a monastic
name, while the surname Cajetan derives from his native city. At the age of
fifteen he entered the Dominican order, and, devoting himself to studies in
philosophy of St. Thomas Aquinas (he is the founder of Neothomism), became,
before the age of thirty, a doctor of theology at Padua, where he was
subsequently professor of metaphysics. A public disputation at Ferrara (1494)
with Pico della Mirandola gave him a great reputation as a theologian. He was
made general procurator in 1507 and general of his order a year later in 1508.
For his zeal in defending the papal rights against the 1511 Council of Pisa, in
a series of works which were condemned by the Sorbonne and publicly burnt by
order of King LouisÂ XII, he obtained the bishopric of Gaeta, and in 1517 Pope
LeoÂ X made him a cardinal and archbishop of Palermo. He appears in 1511 as a
supporter of the pope against the claims of the Council of Pisa called by
dissident cardinals to punish Pope Julius II, composing in defense of his
position the "Tractatus de Comparatione auctoritatis PapÃ¦ et conciliorum ad
invicem". Jacques Almain answered this work, and Cajetan replied in his
"Apologia". At the Fifth Lateran Council (1512-17) which Pope Julius II set up
in opposition to that of Pisa, De Vio played the leading role. During the
second session of the council, he brought about a decree recognizing the
superiority of papal authority to that of councils. For his services Leo X made
him in 1517 cardinal presbyter of San Sisto in Rome, and made him in the
following year bishop of Palermo. He resigned as bishop of Palermo in 1519 to
become bishop of Gaeta, as granted him by the Emperor Charles V, for whose
election De Vio had labored zealously. In 1518 he was sent as legate to the
Diet of Augsburg and to him, at the wish of the Saxon elector, was entrusted
the task of examining and testing the teachings of Luther. According to Hilaire
Belloc, " had not been treated roughly by his opponents, the roughness had been
on his side. But things had gone against him, and he had been made to look
foolish; he had been cross-examined into denying, for instance, the authority
of a General Council--which authority was the trump card to play against the
Papacy." In 1519, De Vio helped in drawing up the bill of excommunication
against Luther. De Vio was employed in several other negotiations and
transactions, being as able in business as in letters. In conjunction with
Cardinal Giulio de'Â Medici in the conclave of 1521â€‘1522, he secured the
election of Adrian Boeyens, bishop of Tortosa, as AdrianÂ VI. He retained
influence under Clement VII, suffered a short term of imprisonment after the
storming of Rome by the Constable of Bourbon and by Frundsberg (1527), retired
to his bishopric for a few years, and, returning to Rome in 1530, assumed his
old position of influence about the person of Clement, in whose behalf he wrote
the decision rejecting the appeal for divorce from Catharine of Aragon made by
Henry VIII of England. Nominated by Clement VII a member of the committee of
cardinals appointed to report on the "Nuremberg Recess", he recommended, in
opposition to the majority, certain concessions to the Lutherans, notably the
marriage of the clergy as in the Greek Church, and communion in both kinds
according to the decision of the council of Basel. Cardinal De Vio died in Rome
in 1534. Views. Though as a theologian De Vio was a scholastic of the older
Thomist type, his general position was that of the moderate reformers of the
school to which Reginald Pole, later archbishop of Canterbury, also belonged;
i.e.,Â he desired to retain the best elements of the humanist revival in
harmony with Catholic orthodoxy illumined by a revived appreciation of the
Augustinian doctrine of justification. In the field of Thomistic philosophy he
showed striking independence of judgment, expressing liberal views on marriage
and divorce, denying the existence of a material Hell and advocating the
celebration of public prayers in the vernacular. Some Dominicans regarded his
views as too independent of those of Saint Thomas. The Sorbonne in Paris found
some of these views heterodox, and in the 1570 edition of his celebrated
commentary on Aquinas' "Summa", the objectionable passages were expunged. In
this spirit he wrote commentaries upon portions of Aristotle, and upon the
"Summa" of Aquinas, and towards the end of his life, made a careful translation
of the Old and New Testaments, excepting Solomon's Song, the Prophets and the
Revelation of St John. Of the Reformation he remained a steadfast opponent,
composing several works directed against Martin Luther, and taking an important
share in shaping the policy of the papal delegates in Germany. Learned though
he was in the scholastics, he recognized that to fight the Reformers with some
chance of success a deeper knowledge of the Scriptures than he possessed was
necessary. To this study he devoted himself with characteristic zeal, wrote
commentaries on the greater part of the Old and the New Testament, and, in the
exposition of his text, which he treated critically, allowed himself
considerable latitude in departing from the literal and traditional
interpretation. De Vio is reported as declaring a statement that has seemed
controversial to some. In contrast to the majority of Italian cardinals of his
day, De Vio was a man of austere piety and fervent zeal. From the standpoint of
the Dominican idea of the supreme necessity of maintaining ecclesiastical
discipline, he defended the rights of the papacy and proclaimed that the pope
should be "the mirror of God on earth."
