Total depravity Total depravity (also called absolute inability, radical
corruption, total corruption, or Augustinianism) is a theological doctrine
derived from the Augustinian concept of original sin. It is the teaching that,
as a consequence of the Fall of Man, every person born into the world is
enslaved to the service of sin and, apart from the efficacious or prevenient
grace of God, is utterly unable to choose to follow God, refrain from evil, or
accept the gift of salvation as it is offered. It is advocated to various
degrees by many Protestant confessions of faith and catechisms, including those
of Lutheranism, Arminianism, and Calvinism. Summary. Total depravity is the
fallen state of human beings as a result of original sin. The doctrine of total
depravity asserts that people are by nature not inclined or even able to love
God wholly with heart, mind, and strength, but rather all are inclined by
nature to serve their own will and desires and to reject the rule of God. Even
religion and philanthropy are wicked to God to the extent that these originate
from a human imagination, passion, and will, and are not done to the glory of
God. Therefore, in Reformed theology, if God is to save anyone God must
predestine, call, or elect individuals to salvation since fallen man does not
want to, and is indeed incapable of choosing God. Total depravity does not
mean, however, that people are as evil as possible. Rather, it means that even
the good which a person may intend is faulty in its premise, false in its
motive, and weak in its implementation; and there is no mere refinement of
natural capacities that can correct this condition. Thus, even acts of
generosity and altruism are in fact egoist acts in disguise. All good,
consequently, is derived from God alone, and in no way through humanity. This
idea can be illustrated by a glass of wine with a few drops of deadly poison in
it: Although not all the liquid is poison, all the liquid is "poisoned". In the
same way, while not all of human nature is depraved, all human nature is
totally affected by depravity. Nonetheless, the doctrine teaches optimism
concerning God's love for what he has made and God's ability to accomplish the
ultimate good that God intends for creation. In particular, in the process of
salvation, God overcomes a person's inability with divine grace, though the
precise means of this overcoming varies between the theological systems. The
differences between the solutions to the problem of total depravity revolve
around the relation between divine grace and human free will â€“ namely,
whether it is efficacious grace that human free will cannot resist, as in
Calvinism, or prevenient grace enabling the human will to choose to follow God,
as in Arminianism and Molinism. Definition by the Catholic Church. Many of the
early Church Fathers affirmed the freedom of the will in human beings, laying
the responsibility for whether any particular person followed virtue or vice on
the individual, while also maintaining the need for grace from God in
salvation. Writing against the monk Pelagius, whom Augustine understood as
teaching that human nature was unaffected by the Fall, or at least was only
weakened in the Fall, and that one was free to follow after God apart from
divine intervention, Augustine expounded the doctrine of original sin and,
Calvinists contend, the doctrine of total inability. Augustine's views
prevailed in the controversy, and Pelagius' teaching was condemned as heretical
at the Council of Ephesus (431) and again condemned in the moderated form known
as semi-Pelagianism at the second Council of Orange (529). Augustine's idea of
"original" (or inherited) guilt was not shared by all of his contemporaries in
the Greek-speaking part of the church and is still not shared in Eastern
Orthodoxy, in Oriental Orthodoxy, or in the Church of the East. Objections. The
Catholic Church maintains that man cannot "be justified before God by his own
works... without the grace of God through Jesus Christ," thereby rejecting
Pelagianism in accordance with the writings of Augustine and the Second Council
of Orange (529). However, the Catholic Church disagrees with the Protestant
doctrine of total depravity, because the Catholic Church maintains humans
retained a free but wounded will after the Fall. Referring to Scripture and the
Church Fathers, Catholicism views human free will as deriving from being made
in God's image. Accordingly, the Catholic Church condemned as heresy any
doctrine asserting "since Adam's sin, the free will of man is lost and
extinguished". The doctrine of total depravity was affirmed by the Five
articles of Remonstrance and by Jacobus Arminius himself, and John Wesley, who
strongly identified with Arminius through publication of his periodical "The
Arminian", also advocated a strong doctrine of inability. Some Reformed
theologians have mistakenly used the term "Arminianism" to include some who
hold the Semipelagian doctrine of limited depravity, which allows for an
"island of righteousness" in human hearts that is uncorrupted by sin and able
to accept God's offer of salvation without a special dispensation of grace.
Although Arminius and Wesley both vehemently rejected this view, it has
sometimes inaccurately been lumped together with theirs (particularly by
Calvinists) because of other similarities in their respective systems such as
conditional election, unlimited atonement, and prevenient grace. In particular,
prevenient grace is seen in many of these systems as giving humans back the
freedom to follow God in one way or another. One refutation of the doctrine is
that it implicitly rejects either God's love or omnipotence. That is, it is
argued that if God is both loving and omnipotent, then God would not have
allowed humankind to become totally corrupt. Thus, total depravity would imply
God is either not all-loving or not omnipotent. This refutation relies,
however, on an insistence that a human being can know God's thoughts and plans,
and therefore judge God's actions. Advocates of total depravity offer a variety
of responses to this line of argumentation. Wesleyans suggest that God endowed
human beings with the free will that allowed humanity to become depraved and
God also provided a means of escape from the depravity. Calvinists note that
the argument assumes that either God's love is necessarily incompatible with
corruption or that God is constrained to follow the path that some men see as
best, whereas they believe God's plans are not fully known to humans and God's
reasons are God's own and not for human beings to question (compare Rom. 9:18-
24; Job 38:1-42:6). Some particularly dislike the Calvinist response because it
leaves the matter of God's motives and means largely unresolved, but the
Calvinist sees it merely as following Calvin's famous dictum that "whenever the
Lord shuts his sacred mouth, student of the Bible also desists from inquiry."
