Transitional deacon In the Roman Catholic Church, a transitional deacon is a
celibate man who has been ordained a deacon and who intends to become a priest.
Transitional deacons are usually ordained to the diaconate after they complete
their third year at the theological seminary. For several centuries, all Roman
Catholic deacons were in this transitional stage between layman and priest. The
role of permanent deacon, usually a married man who is unable to remarry after
ordination if his wife predeceases him, was revived after the Second Vatican
Council in the 1960s. In the Old Catholic churches, whose formal existence
stems from the First Vatican Council in 1870, a transitional deacon may
generally be celibate, engaged in a relationship or married. In many groups
within the Old Catholic church, men and women alike can be ordained into the
diaconate, as well as both homosexual and heterosexual seminarians.
Liturgically, the role of deacon is the same as the Roman Church, with some
differences possibly being found in each group. In the Anglican tradition (such
as the Episcopal Church in the United States of America), a transitional deacon
is similar except that, in keeping with the differences in the requirements for
priesthood from the Roman Catholic church, they may be a man or woman and may
be married. Another historical difference is that an Anglican transitional
deacon had to first be a graduate of an approved seminary, theological college
or distance education program. Today, however, many dioceses of the Episcopal
Church in the United States of America are changing that and allowing
ordination of transitional deacons during the final year of seminary. The
Episcopal Church also ordains individuals as vocational deacons (see Anglican
ministry).
