Vatican Hill Vatican Hill (in Latin, "Mons Vaticanus ") is the name given, long
before the founding of Christianity, to one of the hills on the side of the
Tiber opposite the traditional seven hills of Rome. It may have been the site
of an Etruscan town called "Vaticum". The name "Vatican" has often been thought
to derive from the Latin "vates", meaning "seer, soothsayer", though this is
uncertain and it is also possible that "Vaticanus" comes from an unrelated
Etruscan loan-word. Indeed, the Vatican Hill was the home of the Vates long
before pre-Christian Rome. Vaticanus, also known as Vagitanus, was an Etruscan
god of prophecy, and his temple was built on the ancient site of Vaticanum
(Vatican Hill). [http://www.ireport.com/docs/DOC-2472 In the 1st century AD,
the Vatican Hill was outside the city limits and so could feature a circus (the
circus of Nero) and a cemetery. St. Peter's Basilica is built over this
cemetery, the traditional site of St. Peter the Apostle's grave. There was
another cemetery nearby, which was opened to the public on 10 October 2006 to
commemorate the 500th anniversary of the Vatican Museums. The Vatican Hill is
not one of the famous seven hills of Rome although it was included within the
city limits of Rome during the reign of Pope Leo IV, who, between 848 and 852,
expanded the city walls to protect St. Peter's Basilica and the Vatican. Thus,
Vatican Hill has been within the walls and city limits of Rome for over 1100
years. Until the Lateran Treaties in 1929 it was part of the Rione of Borgo.
Before the Avignon Papacy (1305â€“1378), the headquarters of the Holy See were
located at the Lateran Palace. After the Avignon Papacy the church
administration moved to Vatican Hill and the papal palace was (until 1871) the
Quirinal Palace, upon the Quirinal Hill. Since 1929, part of the Vatican Hill
is the site of the State of the Vatican City. However, the cathedral of the
Bishop of Rome, the Pope, is not St. Peter's in the Vatican, but Basilica di
San Giovanni in Laterano, which is extra-territorially linked, as indicated in
the Lateran Pacts signed with the Italian state in 1929, with the Holy See.
