Veneration Veneration (Latin "veneratio", Greek , "douleia"), or veneration of
saints, is a special act of honoring a saint, a person who has been identified
as having a high degree of sanctity or holiness. Angels are shown similar
veneration in many religions. Philologically, to venerate derives from the
Latin verb, "venerare", meaning to regard with reverence and respect.
Veneration of saints is practiced, formally or informally, by adherents of some
branches of all major religions, including Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism,
Islam, and Buddhism. Within Christianity, veneration is practiced by groups
such as the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Roman Catholic, and Eastern Catholic
Churches, all of which have varying degrees of canonization or glorification
procedures. In some Christian denominations, veneration is shown outwardly by
respectfully bowing or making the sign of the cross before a saint's icon,
relics, or statue, or by going on pilgrimage to sites associated with saints.
The practice of veneration is deemed heretical by iconoclastic denominations.
In Judaism, there is no classical or formal recognition of saints, but there is
a long history of reverence shown toward biblical heroes and martyrs. In some
regions, for example within Judaism in Morocco, there is a long and widespread
tradition of saint veneration. Hinduism has a long tradition of veneration of
saints, expressed toward various gurus and teachers of sanctity, both living
and dead. Branches of Buddhism include formal liturgical worship of saints,
with Mahayana Buddhism classifying degrees of sainthood. In Islam, veneration
of saints is practiced by sects such as the Shi'a and Sufi, and in many parts
of Southeast Asia, along with "folk Islam", which often incorporates local
beliefs and practices. Other sects, such as Sunnis and Wahhabists, abhor the
practice Christianity. Veneration towards those who were considered holy began
in early Christianity, with the martyrs first being given special honor.
Official church commemoration of saints in Rome beginning as early as the third
century. Over time, the honor also began to be given to those Christians who
lived lives of holiness and sanctity. Various denominations venerate and
determine saints in different ways, with some having a formal canonization or
glorification process. Roman Catholic, Orthodox.  Church theologians have long
adopted the terms "latria" for the type of worship due to God alone, and
"dulia" for the veneration given to saints and icons. Catholic theology also
includes the term "hyperdulia" for the type of veneration specifically paid to
Mary, mother of Jesus, in Catholic tradition. This distinction is spelled out
in the dogmatic conclusions of the Seventh Ecumenical Council (787), which also
decreed that iconoclasm (forbidding icons and their veneration) is a heresy
that amounts to a denial of the incarnation of Jesus. Now, the Roman Catholic
tradition has a well established philosophy for the veneration of the Virgin
Mary via the field of Mariology with Pontifical schools such as the Marianum
specifically devoted to this task. Protestant view of veneration as idolatry.
In Protestant churches, veneration is sometimes considered to amount to the
heresy of idolatry, and the related practice of canonization amounts to the
heresy of apotheosis. Protestant theology usually denies that any real
distinction between veneration and worship can be made, and claims that the
practice of veneration distracts the Christian soul from its true object, the
worship of God. In his "Institutes of the Christian Religion", John Calvin
writes that "(t)he distinction of what is called "dulia" and "latria" was
invented for the very purpose of permitting divine honours to be paid to angels
and dead men with apparent impunity." Judaism. While orthodox and organized
Judaism doesn't countenance the veneration of saints, veneration and pilgrimage
to holy sites associated with saints were an ancient part of the tradition.
That tradition is still strong in the few Jewish communities that were not
uprooted over the years, the declining communities in Iran, Morocco and
Tunisia. The tradition is particularly strong among Morocco Jews, who have a
comprehensive list of 656 saints, including 25 women. As with some other
religions, the practice of veneration of saints and the making of saints,
mostly expressed in Morocco Judaism but not only there, is by popular sentiment
rather than formal canonization. Hinduism. Hinduism has a longstanding and
living tradition of reverence toward saints, with the line often blurring
between humanity and divinity with some Hindu deities. The bhakti movements
helped to popularize the veneration of saints and gurus as models showing the
way to liberation. Buddhism. Both main branches of Buddhism, Theravada and
Mahayana, recognize those who have achieved a high degree of enlightenment as
an Arhat. Mahayana Buddhism particularly gives emphasis to the power of saints
to aid ordinary people on the path to enlightenment. Those who have reached
enlightenment, and have delayed their own complete enlightenment in order to
help others, are called Bodhisattvas. Mahayana Buddhism has formal liturgical
practices for venerating saints, along with very specific levels of sainthood.
Tibetan Buddhist venerate especially holy lamas, such as the Dalai Lama, as
saints. Islam. Veneration of saints in Islam is especially common in the Sufi
branch, though there are many local customs in different parts of the world,
especially in southeast Asia, where saints are honored and venerated. Islam has
no formal process of canonizationâ€”it is typically done through popular
acclaim and local custom. Muslim saints who are venerated include the women
Sufi mystic Rabia Basri, and Sufi saints Habib al-Ajami, and Saint Nuri. Many
Islamic sects condemn veneration of icons associated with saints. Destruction
of historical Islamic sites, which are holy to Shi'ite Muslims, in Saudi Arabia
were instigated by Wahhabis and the Saudi royal family, most notably the
shrines and tombs in the Al-Baqi' cemetery in 1925. In 2001, the 6th century
monumental statues called the Buddhas of Bamiyan in Afghanistan were destroyed
by the Taliban. In 2006, a bombing by al-Qaeda resulted in the destruction of
the Al-Askari Mosque in Iraq. In July 2012 Ansar Dine, a strict Islamic sect,
demolished mausoleums of the saints in Timbuktu, the "City of 333 (Sufi)
Saints" and desecrated the Sidi Yahya Mosque. In August 2012, Salafi zealots
bulldozed several Sufi sites in and near Tripoli Other religious traditions. In
Green Christianity (or Creation-centered theology) animals, plants, and other
parts of nature may be said to be "venerated" simply by taking good care of
them, thereby showing honor and respect for God who made them. Creation, being
regarded as an icon of the Creator, is a valid object of veneration.
