Association of Vineyard Churches The Association of Vineyard Churches, also
known as the Vineyard Movement, is a neocharismatic evangelical Christian
denomination with over 1,500 affiliated churches worldwide. The Vineyard
Movement is rooted in the charismatic renewal and historic evangelicalism.
Instead of the mainstream charismatic label, however, the movement has
preferred the term "Empowered Evangelicals" (a term coined by Rich Nathan and
Ken Wilson in their book of the same name) to reflect their roots in
traditional evangelicalism as opposed to classical Pentecostalism. Members also
sometimes describe themselves as the "radical middle" between evangelicals and
Pentecostals, which is a reference to the book "The Quest for the Radical
Middle," a historical survey of the Vineyard by Bill Jackson. It has been
associated with the "Signs and Wonders" movement, the Toronto blessing, the
Kansas City Prophets and a particular style of Christian worship music. The
Vineyard operates a publishing house, Vineyard International Publishing.
History. The first Vineyard Church started when Kenn Gulliksen brought together
two Bible studies, both meeting at the houses of singer/songwriters: Larry
Norman and Chuck Girard. In early 1975, thirteen groups met at the Beverley
Hills Women's club. These Bible studies, and others like them, were attended by
many popular actors/actresses and musicians including Bob Dylan. Gulliksen's
Vineyard had spun off sister churches. In 1977, John Wimber, an evangelical
pastor and teacher on church growth, founded a Calvary Chapel in Yorba Linda,
California. Wimber's teaching on healing and the ministry of the Holy Spirit
led to conflict with Calvary Chapel. In a meeting with Calvary Chapel leaders,
it was suggested that Wimber's church stop using the Calvary name and affiliate
with Gulliksen's Vineyard movement. In 1982, Wimber's church changed its name
to the Anaheim Vineyard Christian Fellowship. Gulliksen turned over the
churches in under his oversight to Wimber, beginning his leadership of the
Vineyard movement. Beginning in 1988, Wimber established relationships with
prophetic figures such as Paul Cain, Bob Jones, and Mike Bickle who pastored
Kansas City Fellowship, an independent church which would come under the
Vineyard banner as Metro Vineyard (see Kansas City Prophets). For a time, these
men had considerable influence on Wimber and the Vineyard—according to
Jackson, Wimber's son was delivered from drug addiction through a prophetic
word from Jones. However, there were those in the Vineyard who were skeptical,
and Wimber himself became disillusioned over the restorationist teaching and
failed prophecies of these men. Around 1991, Wimber began to distance himself
from the prophetic movement, leading the Vineyard back to a church-planting
direction, while Bickle's church withdrew and dropped the Vineyard label. The
Vineyard Movement suffered a visible leadership vacuum after Wimber's death on
November 16, 1997. However, Todd Hunter, who served as National Coordinator
since February 1994 and as acting Director of the Vineyard at the time of
Wimber's death, became the National Director in January 1998 and served in that
capacity until he resigned in May 2000. After Hunter's resignation, the
National Board of Directors named Bert Waggoner of Sugar Land, Texas, as the
new National Director. As of 2007, the Association of Vineyard Churches
includes over 1,500 churches around the world, and this number continues to
grow due to a strong priority placed on church-planting within the Vineyard
mission. In October, 2011, Phil Strout was selected by the National Board of
Directors to succeed Waggoner as National Director in January 2013. Beliefs and
practices. Doctrinal statements. According to text in the official Vineyard
Statement of Faith released in 1994, an effort to create a common Statement of
Faith had been underway since 1983, but took 10+ years to complete because: "On
one hand, we felt obliged to set forth our biblical and historically orthodox
beliefs, on the other hand, we wanted to describe the values and priorities
that make the Vineyard unique within the context of Evangelicalism." The
Vineyard Statement of Faith is generally considered to be a biblically-based
Evangelical Christian profession of faith, with no mention of any issues that
are considered to be controversial or divisive. In addition to the Statement of
Faith (released in 1994), the church released a statement of "Theological and
Philosophical Statements" penned by Bert Waggoner in 2004 to clarify the
church's position on some issues that had been unclear from the Statements of
Faith, including the church's priorities as it relates to worship and Bible
study. The church also has published a 10-point "Vineyard Genetic Code," taught
to a session of senior leadership by John Wimber in 1992, that outlines the 10
areas of ministry considered essential to any Vineyard church. Rich Nathan has
described the Vineyard movement as part of a "Third Wave of the Holy Spirit" in
America.Vineyard philosophy has also played a key role in the development of
the transformationalism school of Christian thought. Worship. One of the most
important aspects of the Vineyard church model is the strong emphasis on
connecting with God through worship. Generally in regular gatherings, whether
they are main Sunday services or small “homegroups” based in private homes,
equal time is given to both worship and Bible study, and a significant amount
of time is also devoted to prayer and one-on-one ministry. This focus on
worship and connection with the Holy Spirit is one of the primary reasons
(along with the active nature of spiritual gifts discussed previously) that
John Wimber gave for breaking with the Calvary Chapel movement. Worship in the
Vineyard almost always is performed in a contemporary worship format, with a
multi-piece band leading worship, but is not restricted to this style. The
unique nature of this contemporary worship music (especially unique in the 70s
and 80s, when most mainstream denominations limited their worship to more
traditional hymns) gained a lot of interest, and led to the formation of a
special music ministry, later formed into a church-supported music recording
and distribution company, Vineyard Music. Ministry and the local church.
Vineyard Church pastors and ministers are officially ordained after years of
church service in the role of a lay leader, rather than after seminary
education as in mainline Protestant denominations. Clergy in the Vineyard, like
the membership and the church as a whole, are known for their “relaxed”
style. More likely than not, clergy will be seen preaching on Sunday morning in
casual clothing, and they never wear ceremonial vestments. Many Vineyard
Churches have no official membership procedures or membership records, and such
a policy is not dictated by the national Vineyard Church. Instead, a community
of believers is formed by those who attend Sunday or weekend services, weekday
homegroups, and participate in various church ministries. Branches. The
Vineyard has a highly decentralized organizational structure, reflecting the
church's belief that local and regionally-based management, ministries and
outreach are more effective. Besides the nations listed below, the Vineyard
also exists in many countries across Latin America, Africa, Europe, Asia and
the Far East. Most national Vineyard churches are charged with their own
governance, although some smaller groups exist with the support and oversight
of another nation's leadership. United States. The national headquarters of
Vineyard USA is currently located in Sugar Land, Texas. Vineyard USA is divided
into eight regions, and each region has clusters of churches grouped together
by relationship and location, facilitated by an Area Pastoral Care Leader
(APCL). The APCL's work together with the Regional Overseer (RO) to provide
leadership and encouragement to the region. The central governing body of the
Vineyard in the U.S. is a 12-member National Board, made up of the eight
regional overseers plus four additional leadership members, including the
National Director. Currently, the President and National Director is Bert
Waggoner. All major strategic decisions, including theological and doctrinal
statements, are made by the National Board. In 2004, Vineyard USA had 140,000
members in 600 churches. Canada. Canada was the first country outside the
United States to be accorded its own independent National Association. The
first Canadian Vineyard was established in Vancouver in January 1985. Within a
year, a second Vineyard was established in the Vancouver area. More churches
followed, and by the time of the release of the Association of Vineyard
Churches Canada in the summer of 1995 and the appointment of Gary and Joy Best
as National Directors of Canada, there had been fifty Vineyards established
across the country. United Kingdom and Ireland. The Association of Vineyard
Churches UK (AVC) was released in the spring of 1996 by the international
association as its own national organisation. It is governed by a Council
through a number of task forces, including a Board of Trustees, which oversees
the pastors of existing churches and facilitates church planting. There are
more than 100 Vineyard Churches in Ireland and the United Kingdom. Australia.
In 1995, the first Vineyard churches were commenced in Sydney, Perth, Adelaide
and Brisbane, Australia. On 13 March 2003, the Association of Vineyard
Churches, Australia was formed, with Peter and Kathy Downes commissioned as
National Directors. As of June 2009, there were 33 Vineyard Churches in
Australia. In February 2009, the Association launched a School of Ministry, in
conjunction with Perth Bible College. Germany, Austria and Switzerland. The
first Vineyard church in Germany started in the mid-nineties near Munich. In
1999, the national association - Vineyard DACH (Deutschland, Austria, CH-
Switzerland) - was released under the leadership of Martin and Georgia
Bühlmann as National Directors. As of summer 2011, there are more than 70
Vineyard Churches in Vineyard DACH, with some of them within the Evangelical
Church in Germany (EKD) or Roman Catholic Church. Vineyard DACH is governed by
a leadership council, supported by task forces (church planting, worship,
theology, training) and active in missions in countries such as Congo, Congo-
Brazzaville, Cameroon, Angola, Ghana, Ivory Coast,Togo, Serbia, Bosnia,
Romania, Moldovia, France, Spain etc. Vineyard DACH has started an African
Migration Vineyard Movement in Europe with 12 Vineyards and is also very active
in reaching Roma Gypsies in different European countries. Vineyard Music.
Vineyard Music is a record label created and used by the Association of
Vineyard Churches. The organisation uses it to release worship albums. A UK
branch of the record label exists, called Vineyard Records. Its musicians
include Kathryn Scott, Nigel Briggs, Samuel Lane, Marc James, Nigel Hemming,
Casey Corum, Carl Tuttle, Brenton Brown, Brian Doerksen, David Ruis, Andy Park,
Jeremy Riddle, Scott Underwood, Johanna Blanding-Koskinen, Jeff Searles, Rita
Springer, Kevin Prosch and Steve Southworth. History. Vineyard Music was
developed by the Vineyard church in 1986. The church began to write its own
worship songs, so John Wimber founded Mercy Records. This later became Vineyard
Music. Vineyard Music has won some industry awards, such as an award from
ASCAP. "Breathe" was recognized in 2002 as ASCAPs most recorded song of the
year. Education and training. The Vineyard operates its own 2-year leadership
training program called Vineyard Leadership Institute, or VLI. VLI is housed on
the campus of Vineyard Church of Columbus in Westerville, Ohio, and is directed
by Steve Robbins. VLI is also offered in many Vineyard and some non-Vineyard
churches through video and correspondence course curriculum. Vineyard clergy
are not required to have been trained through VLI. The Vineyard Bible
Institute, a distance-learning Bible studies program, is based out of a
Vineyard church in Cape Town, South Africa. Criticism and the Toronto Blessing.
During the 1990s, the Vineyard was widely criticized by cessationist christians
due to events during a series of revival meetings at the then Toronto Vineyard.
These meetings, dubbed the Toronto Blessing, gained notoriety due to the large
crowds, lengthy meetings, and reports of unorderly manifestations of the Holy
Spirit, including people laughing, crying, and shaking. Critics, such as Hank
Hanegraaff in his book, "Counterfeit Revival", charged the Toronto Blessing
(under Wimber's authority at the time) with promoting heresy for three main
reasons: first, claiming unusual experiences of the Holy Spirit including
physical responses, speaking in tongues, and prophesying; second, claiming that
these experiences of spiritual revelation were equal in importance to the
Bible; and third, claiming that these experiences were a sign that God was
doing "something new." Hanegraaf held that the Toronto Blessing (and thus the
Vineyard movement) was denying "sola scriptura" or the “sufficiency of
Scripture”, a doctrinal tenet that Protestant churches have held to be
incontrovertibly true, by suggesting that all believers should come to see what
"new thing" God was doing in Toronto. To cessationist and conservative
thinking, this "new thing" felt dangerous and potentially cultist, putting the
inerrant word of God on equal footing with the expression of a spiritual gift
or, in the Hanagraaf's position, undermining the Bible with false teachings.
Ultimately, the Toronto church was released from the Vineyard movement due to
the controversy of how the meetings were being handled. For a detailed
treatment of this topic, refer to "The Quest For the Radical Middle" by Bill
Jackson (see related books below). Wimber consistently emphasized that clear,
accurate teaching and knowledge of the scripture is critical for every Vineyard
church, without expressly stating the scriptures to be the final and supreme
authority in all matters of faith. These items are included in the "Vineyard
Genetic Code" paper he released in 1992. Throughout the early years of the
Vineyard (1970s to 1992), Wimber avoided publicly responding to his critics.
Instead, he invited his critics to meet with him personally to talk through
their charges in accordance with his understanding of Scripture (Mat 18:
15–17, Gal 6:1, 1 Tim 5:1). However, as the influence of the Vineyard
broadened and certain misunderstandings were repeated from different sources,
both outside the church and within, Wimber made the decision to respond
publicly. The decision is detailed in Vineyard Position Paper #1 entitled "Why
I respond to criticism" authored by John Wimber. This was followed by a number
of other position papers from various sources within the national Vineyard
leadership which sought to address the most serious and widespread of the
criticisms leveled against the movement.
