Viruses of the Mind "Viruses of the Mind" (1993) is an article by Richard
Dawkins using memetics and analogies with biological and computer viruses, and
with disease and epidemiology, to analyse the propagation of ideas and
behaviours. Its particular focus is on religious beliefs and activities. The
article is included in the books "Dennett and His Critics: Demystifying Mind"
(ISBN 0-631-19678-1) and "A Devil's Chaplain". In this article, Dawkins coined
the term "faith-sufferer". The second episode of Dawkins' two-part television
programme "The Root of All Evil?" explored similar ideas and took a similar
name, "The Virus of Faith". Content. Dawkins defines the "symptoms" of being
infected by the "virus of religion", providing examples for most of them, and
tries to define a connection between the elements of religion and its survival
value (invoking Zahavi's handicap principle of sexual selection, applied to
believers of a religion). Dawkins also describes religious beliefs as "mind-
parasites", and as "gangs will come to constitute a package, which may be
sufficiently stable to deserve a collective name such as Roman Catholicism ...
or ... component parts to a single virus". Dawkins stresses his claim that
religious beliefs do not spread as a result of evidence in their support, but
typically by cultural transmission, in most cases from parents or from
charismatic individuals. He refers to this as involving "epidemiology, not
evidence". Further Dawkins distinguishes this process from the spread of
scientific ideas, which, he suggests, is constrained by the requirement to
conform with certain virtues of standard methodology: "testability, evidential
support, precision, quantifiability, consistency, intersubjectivity,
repeatability, universality, progressiveness, independence of cultural milieu,
and so on". He points out that faith "spreads despite a total lack of every
single one of these virtues". Reactions. The idea that "God" and "Faith" are
viruses of the mind has provoked some hostile criticism, including John
Bowker's 1992â€“1993 Gresham College lectures, in which he suggests that
Dawkins' "account of religious motivation ... is ... far removed from evidence
and data" and that, even if the God-meme approach were valid, "it does not give
rise to one set of consequences ... Out of the many behaviours it produces, why
are we required to isolate only those that might be regarded as diseased?"
Alister McGrath, a Christian theologian, has also commented critically on
Dawkins' analysis, suggesting that "memes have no place in serious scientific
reflection", that there is strong evidence that such ideas are not spread by
random processes, but by deliberate intentional actions, that "evolution" of
ideas is more Lamarckian than Darwinian, and that there is no evidence (and
certainly none in the article) that epidemiological models usefully explain the
spread of religious ideas. McGrath also cites a metareview of 100 studies and
argues that "If religion is reported as having a positive effect on human well-
being by 79% of recent studies in the field, how can it conceivably be regarded
as analogous to a virus?"
