Week A week is a time unit equal to seven days. The English word week continues
an Old English "wice", ultimately from a Common Germanic ', from a root '
"turn, move, change". The Germanic word probably had a wider meaning prior to
the adoption of the Roman calendar, perhaps "succession series", as suggested
by Gothic "wik≈ç" translating "taxis" "order" in Luke 1:8. The term "week" is
sometimes expanded to refer to other time units comprising a few days. Such
"weeks" of between four and ten days have been used historically in various
places. Intervals longer than 10 days are not usually termed "weeks" as they
are closer in length to the fortnight or the month than to the seven-day week.
Seven-day week. Evidence of continuous use of a seven-day week appears with the
Jews during the Babylonian Captivity of the 6th century BC. Both Judaism (based
on the Creation narrative in the Bible) and ancient Babylonian religions used a
seven-day week. Other cultures adopted the seven-day week at different times.
Between the 1st and 3rd centuries the Roman Empire gradually replaced the
eight-day Roman nundinal cycle with the seven-day week. Hindus may have adopted
a seven-day week earlier than 11th century BC. See Rig Veda. There is evidence
of some Chinese groups using a seven-day week as early as 4th century. Systems
derived from the seven-day week. Soviet Union. Between 1929 and 1931 the USSR
changed from the seven-day week to a five-day week. There were 72 weeks and an
additional five national holidays inserted within three of them totaling a year
of 365 days. In 1931, after its brief experiment with a five-day week, the
Soviet Union changed to a six-day week. Every sixth day (6th, 12th, 18th, 24th
and 30th) of the Gregorian Calendar was a state rest day. The five additional
national holidays in the earlier five-day week remained and did not fall on the
state rest day. But as January, March, May, July, August, October and December
have 31 days, the week after the state rest day of the 30th was seven days long
(31st‚Äì7th). This extra day was a working day for most or an extra holiday for
others. Also as February is only 28 or 29 days depending on whether it is a
leap year or not, the first of March was also made a state rest day, although
not every enterprise conformed to this. To clarify, the week after the state
rest day, 24/25 February to 1 March, was only five or six days long, depending
on whether it was a leap year or not. The week after that, 2 to 6 March, was
only five days long. The calendar was abandoned 26 June 1940 and the seven-day
week reintroduced the next day. Decimal calendar. A 10-day week, called
"d√©cade", was used in France for nine and a half years from October 1793 to
April 1802; furthermore, the Paris Commune adopted the Revolutionary Calendar
for 18 days in 1871. Christian "eighth day". For early Christians, Sunday, as
well as being the first day of the week, was also the spiritual eighth day, as
it symbolised the new world created after Christ's resurrection. The concept of
the eighth day was symbolic only and had no effect on the use of the seven-day
week for calendar purposes. Justin Martyr wrote: "the first day after the
Sabbath, remaining the first of all the days, is called, however, the eighth,
according to the number of all the days of the cycle, and remains the first".
This does not set up an eight-day week, since the eighth day is also considered
to be the first day of the next cycle (i.e., not the following day). A period
of eight days, starting and ending on a Sunday or starting on a major feast day
and finishing on the same day of the week a (seven-day) week later, is called
an octave. For centuries these were a major feature of the liturgical calendar,
particularly of the Catholic Church, and some are still observed, though the
number of such octaves has now been radically reduced. Some modern Church uses
also preserve the idea of an eight-day period, starting and finishing on the
same day of the week, and retain the name "octave" for them; for example, many
churches observe an annual "Octave of Prayer for Christian Unity" on 18‚Äì25
January or in the week that begins with Pentecost Sunday. Organizations such as
8th Day Center for Justice, based out of Chicago, Illinois, use the concept in
terms of social justice as well. Hermetic lunar week. The Hermetic Lunar Week
Calendar is one of many proposed reforms to the Gregorian Calendar. The
lunation is divided into the four moon phases and has six, seven, eight, or
nine days depending on the actual time difference between the full moon, first
quarter, new moon and last quarter. "Weeks" in other calendars. Periods termed
"weeks" in calendars unrelated to the Judeo-Christian tradition. Three-day. The
names of the days of the week ("aste") in Guipuscoan Basque point to an earlier
three-day week. Four-day. The Igbo of Nigeria have a traditional calendar with
a four-day week. This "market week" features prominently in the fiction of
Chinua Achebe. Five-day. The Javanese people of Indonesia have a five-day week
known as the Pasaran cycle. This is still in use today and superimposed with
seven-day week of the Gregorian calendar and Islamic calendar to become what is
known as the 35-day Wetonan Cycle. Six-day. The Akan people of West Africa have
a 42-day cycle known as "Adaduanan". The "Adaduanan" cycle appears to be based
on an older six-day week, still extant in some northern Guan communities such
as the Nchumuru, on which is superimposed a seven-day week which may have been
brought south with itinerant traders from the Savannah. The six-day week is
referred to as "Nanson" (literally seven-days), reflecting an inclusive
numbering system. Eight-day. Nundinal cycle. The ancient Etruscans developed an
eight-day market week known as the nundinal cycle around the 8th or 7th century
BC. This was passed on to the Romans no later than the 6th century BC. As Rome
expanded, it encountered the seven-day week and for a time attempted to include
both. The popularity of the seven-day rhythm won and the eight-day week
disappeared forever. The cycle of seven days, named after the sun, the moon,
and the five planets visible to the naked eye, was already customary in the
time of Justin Martyr, who wrote of the Christians meeting on the Day of the
Sun (Sunday). Emperor Constantine eventually established the seven-day week in
the Roman calendar in AD 321. Celts. With regards to measuring time, the Celts
regarded darkness as taking precedence over light, so used periods of darkness
such as night and winter to begin their calculations of time. This meant that
the first period of time in a "week" was a night, followed by a day. Further,
they also counted the ending night period, giving rise to periods of time with
more nights than days. In Irish, the term "n√≥mad" is used to signify a small
number of days and is exactly the length of the nine night week as in "co cend
nomaide" - a period of time with nine nights bracketing eight days. The nine
nights divided nicely into a sidereal month of 27 nights. In Welsh a similar
word "wythnos" meaning "a week" literally means "an eight-night" since it
started and ended with a period of night bracketing seven days. Similarly a
fortnight "pythewnos" means "a fifteen night". Nine-day. Baltic calendars. In
the 14th century, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania used a solar-lunar calendar. The
structure of this calendar was understood with the help of the so-called
Gediminas Sceptre discovered in 1680. Similarly in Latvia petroglyphs were
found in 1987, which are considered to show nine day calendar with three weeks
in a month. Archaeological evidence suggests that the week of the ancient Balts
was nine days long. Thus, the sidereal month must have been divided into three
parts. Ten-day. China, Japan. The Chinese ten-day week went as far back as the
Xia Dynasty (2070-1600 BC). The law in the Han Dynasty (206 BC ‚Äì AD 220)
required officials of the empire to rest every five days, called "mu" (Ê≤ê),
while it was changed into 10 days in the Tang Dynasty (AD 618 ‚Äì 907), called
"huan" or "x√∫n" (Êó¨). Months were almost three weeks long (alternating 29 and
30 days to keep in line with the lunation). The weeks were labelled "sh√ ng
x√∫n" (‰∏äÊó¨), "zh≈çng x√∫n" (‰∏≠Êó¨), and "xi√  x√∫n" (‰∏ãÊó¨) which mean
roughly "upper", "middle" and "lower" week. Markets in Japan followed the
Chinese "jun" (Êó¨) system; see Japanese calendar. Egypt. Ancient Egypt had a
ten-day week, three weeks per month with five extra days at the end of the
year. Revolutionary France. In the French Republican Calendar, each month
consisted of three ten-day weeks, called "d√©cades". Other calendar intervals.
Aztecs. The Aztecs divided a ritual cycle of 260 days, known as Tonalpohualli,
into 20 weeks of 13 days known as Trecena. The Aztecs divided a solar year of
365 days, Xiuhpohualli, into 18 periods of 20 days and five nameless days known
as "Nemontemi". Although some call this 20-day division or grouping a month, it
has no relation to a lunation and therefore the word "week" is more
appropriate. Maya. The Maya divided a 260-day ritual cycle known Tzolk'in into
20 weeks of 13 days known as Trecena. The Maya also divided the year, Haab',
into 18 periods of 20 days, "Uinal", and five nameless days known as "Wayeb"'.
Bali, Indonesia. The Pawukon is a 210-day calendar consisting of 10 different
concurrent weeks of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 days.
