Westminster Shorter Catechism The Westminster Shorter Catechism (also known
simply as the Shorter Catechism, hereinafter referred to as the WSC) is a
catechism that was written in the 1640s by English and Scottish divines. The
assembly also produced the Westminster Confession of Faith and the Westminster
Larger Catechism. The three documents are considered by many Protestants to be
the grandest doctrinal statements to come out of the English Reformation.
Completed in 1647, it was presented to the Long Parliament on 14 April 1648.
The purpose of the WSC is to educate lay persons in matters of doctrine and
belief. The WSC is in a simple question and answer format to facilitate
memorization. Typically, parents and the church would use the shorter catechism
to train their children in the ways of the Lord. New converts are also given
the WSC as well as the Confession of Faith and Holy Scripture to study. Various
denominations have used the Westminster Confession and Catechism to instruct
their members. Although the church in Scotland (the Kirk) had produced "The New
Catechisme according to the Forme of the Kirk of Scotland" in 1644, it was
aimed particularly at children and youth, and was not adopted by the
Westminster Assembly of Divines. It was, however, later acknowledged that the
Shorter Catechism was not suitable for young children or those of a weak
capacity. Various other catechisms were created for this purpose, including the
Mother's Catechism. The "First Book of Discipline" (1560) required that a
Sabbath afternoon session be set aside for examination of young children in
catechism, and this practice was adopted in the Kirk on John Knox's return to
Scotland. Catechizing became a part of life in the Scottish Churches with
itinerant catechists being employed to instruct the people â€” a practice that
continued into the 19th century. The Church of Scotland approved the
Westminster Shorter Catechism in 1648, and thereafter it was the manual for
instruction. However, because a significant portion of the Scottish Highland
population spoke only Gaelic, the Synod of Argyll in 1649 instructed seven of
its ministers to translate the Westminster Shorter Catechism into that
language. The result was published that same year, and the Gaelic Shorter
Catechism continued to play a part in church life for decades after it had
ceased to be used in the English speaking churches. The Free Church of Scotland
still presents a Bible to a child who can answer all 107 questions accurately
at one sitting. The catechism is composed of 107 questions and answers. The
first 12 questions concern God as Creator. Questions 13-20 deal with original
sin and the fallen state of man's nature. Questions 21-38 concern Christ the
Redeemer and the benefits that flow from redemption. The next set of questions,
39-84, discuss the ten commandments. Questions 85-97 teach concerning the
Sacraments of Baptism and Holy Communion. The final set of questions, 98-107,
teach and explain the Lord's prayer. This organization mimics the earlier
Heidelberg Catechism of the continental Reformed churches. The most famous of
the questions (known to a great many Presbyterian children) is the first: "Q.
What is the chief end of man?" See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:
Footnotes for an explanation of how to generate footnotes using the tags, and
the template below.
