Yoruba religion The Yor√πb√° religion comprises the indigenous religion of the
Yoruba people. Its homeland is in Southwestern Nigeria and the adjoining parts
of Benin and Togo, a region that has come to be known as Yorubaland. Yor√πb√°
religion is formed of diverse traditions and has no single founder. It has
influenced or given birth to thriving ways of life such as Lucum√≠, Umbanda and
Candombl√©. Yoruba religious beliefs are part of itan, the total complex of
songs, histories, stories and other cultural concepts which make up the
Yor√πb√° society. Beliefs. According to Kola Abimbola, the Yor√πb√° have
evolved a robust philosophy. In brief, it holds that all human beings possess
what is known as "√Äy√ nm√¥" (destiny, fate) and are expected to eventually
become one in spirit with Ol√≥d√πmar√® (Ol√≤r√∫n, the divine creator and source
of all energy). Furthermore, the thoughts and actions of each person in Ay√©
(the physical realm) interact with all other living things, including the Earth
itself. Each person attempts to achieve transcendence and find their destiny in
√ír√∫n-R√©r√© (the spiritual realm of those who do good and beneficial things).
One's Or√≠-Inu (spiritual consciousness in the physical realm) must grow in
order to consummate union with one's "Ip√¥nri" (Or√≠ √ír√∫n, spiritual self).
Those who stop growing spiritually, in any of their given lives, are destined
for "√ír√∫n-Apadi" (Lit. the invisible realm of potsherds). Life and death are
said to be cycles of existence in a series of physical bodies while one's
spirit evolves toward transcendence. This evolution is said to be most evident
amongst the Orishas, the divine viziers of the Almighty God. Iwap·∫πl·∫π (or
well-balanced) meditation and sincere veneration is sufficient to strengthen
the Or√≠-Inu of most people. Well-balanced people, it is believed, are able to
make positive use of the simplest form of connection between their Oris and the
omnipotent Olu-√ír√∫n: an ad√∫ra (petition or prayer) for divine support.
Prayer to one's Or√≠ √ír√∫n has been known to produce an immediate sensation of
joy. ·∫∏l√©gbara (E·π£u, the divine messenger) initiates contact with √ír√∫n on
behalf of the petitioner, and transmits the prayer to Ay√©; the deliverer of
√ ·π£·∫π or "the spark of life". He transmits this prayer without distorting it
in any way. Thereafter, the petitioner may be satisfied with a personal answer.
In the event that he or she is not, the Ifa oracle of the Orisha Orunmila may
also be consulted. All communication with √ír√∫n, whether simplistic in the
form of a personal prayer or complicated in the form of that done by an
initiated priest of divination, however, is energized by invoking √ ·π£·∫π. In
the Yor√πb√° belief system, Ol√≥d√πmar√® has √ ·π£·∫π over all that is. It is
for this reason that He is considered supreme. According to one of the Yor√πb√°
accounts of creation, during a certain stage in this process, the "truth" was
sent to confirm the habitability of the newly formed planets. The earth being
one of these was visited but deemed too wet for conventional life. After a
successful period of time, a number of divinities were commanded to accomplish
the task of helping earth develop its crust. On one of their visits to the
realm, the arch-divinity Obatala took to the stage equipped with a mollusk that
held in its shell some form of soil; two winged beasts and some cloth like
material. He emptied the soil onto what soon became a large mound on the
surface of the water and soon after, the winged-beasts began to scatter this
around until the point where it gradually made into a large patch of dry land;
the various indentations they created eventually becoming hills and valleys.
Obatala leaped on to a high-ground and named the place Ife. The land became
fertile and plant life began to flourish. From handfuls of earth he began to
mould figurines. Meanwhile, as this was happening on earth, Ol√≥d√πmar√®
gathered the gasses from the far reaches of space and sparked an explosion that
shaped into a fireball. He subsequently sent it to Ife, where it dried much of
the land and simultaneously began to bake the motionless figurines. It was at
this point that Ol√≥d√πmar√® released the "breath of life" to blow across the
land, and the figurines slowly came into "being" as the first people of Ife.
For this reason, Ile-Ife is locally referred to as the "cradle of existence".
Ol√≥d√πmar√®. Ol√≥d√πmar√® is the most important "state of existence". Regarded
as being all-encompassing, no gender can therefore be assigned. Hence, it is
common to hear references to "it" or "they" (although this is meant to address
a somewhat singularity) in usual speech. "They" are the owner of all heads, for
during human creation, Ol√≥d√πmar√® gave "√™m√≠" (the breath of life) to
humankind. In this, Ol√≥d√πmar√® is Supreme Perhaps one of the most important
human endeavors extolled within the tribe's literary corpus is the quest to
better one's "Iwa" (character, behaviour). In this way the teachings transcends
religious doctrine, advising as it does that a person must also better his
civic, social and intellectual spheres of being; every stanza of the sacred Ifa
oracular poetry has a portion covering the importance of "Iwa". Central to this
is the theme of righteousness, both individual and collective. An Alternative
Version Of The Creation. The Yor√πb√° regard Ol√≥d√πmar√® as the principal
agent of creation. In another telling of the creation myth, Ol√≥d√πmar√® (also
called Olorun) is the creator. In the beginning there is only water.
Ol√≥d√πmar√® sends Obatala to bring forth land. Obatala descended from above on
a long chain, bringing with him a rooster, some earth, and some iron. He
stacked the iron in the water, the earth on the iron, and the chicken atop the
earth. The chicken kicked and scattered the earth, creating land. Some of the
other divinities descended upon it to live with Obatala. One of them,
Chameleon, came first to judge if the earth was dry. When he said that it was,
Ol√≥d√πmar√® called the land "Ife" for "wide". Obatala then created humans out
of earth and called Ol√≥d√πmar√® to blow life into them. Some say Obatala was
jealous and wished to be the only giver of life, but Ol√≥d√πmar√® put him to
sleep as he worked. Conversely, it is also said by others that it is Obatala
who shapes life while it is still in the womb. Divinities. An Orisha (Orisa or
Orixa) is an entity that possesses the capability of reflecting some of the
manifestations of Ol√≥d√πmar√®. Y√≤r√πb√° "Orishas" (translated "owners of
heads") are often described as intermediaries between man and the supernatural.
The term is often translated as "deities" or "divinities". Orisha(s) are more
like "anamistic entities" and have control over specific elements in nature,
thus being better referred to as the divinities. Even so, there are those of
their number that are more akin to ancient heroes and/or sages These are best
addressed as dema deities. Even though in the basics of things, the term Orisha
is often used to acknowledge a many divine entities, is mainly reserved for the
former. Ir√∫nm√¥l√®. Ir√∫nm√¥l√® are entities sent by the Supreme
(Ol√≥d√πmar√®) to complete given tasks, often acting as liaisons between Orun
(the invisible realm) and Aiye (the physical realm). Ir√∫nm√¥l√®(s) can best be
described as ranking divinities; whereby such divinities are regarded as the
principal Orishas. Reincarnation. The Yoruba believe in reincarnation within
the family. The names Babatunde (father returns), Yetunde (Mother returns),
Babatunji (Father wakes once again) and Sotunde (The wise man returns) all
offer vivid evidence of the Ifa concept of familial or lineal rebirth. There is
no simple guarantee that your grandfather or great uncle will "come back" in
the birth of your child, however. Whenever the time arrives for a spirit to
return to Earth (otherwise known as The Marketplace) through the conception of
a new life in the direct bloodline of the family, one of the component entities
of a person's being returns, while the other remains in Heaven (Ikole Orun).
The spirit that returns does so in the form of a Guardian Ori. One's Guardian
Ori, which is represented and contained in the crown of the head, represents
not only the spirit and energy of one's previous blood relative, but the
accumulated wisdom he or she has acquired through a myriad of lifetimes. This
is not to be confused with one‚Äôs spiritual Ori, which contains personal
destiny, but instead refers to the coming back to "The Marketplace" of one's
personal blood Ori through one's new life and experiences. The Primary Ancestor
(which should be identified in your Itefa) becomes - if you are aware and work
with that specific energy - a ‚Äúguide‚Äù for the individual throughout their
lifetime. At the end of that life they return to their identical spirit self
and merge into one, taking the additional knowledge gained from their
experience with the individual as a form of "payment". Yoruba religion around
the world. Relationship with Vodou. The popularly known Vodou faith, said to
have originated amongst a different ethnic group (the Gba speaking peoples of
modern Benin, Togo and Ghana), shares some similarities with the religion, and
may even be taken to be theologically related on a superficial level.
