Zen Zen is a school of Mahayana Buddhism and originated in China during the 6th
century as Ch√°n. From China, Zen spread south to Vietnam, to Korea and east to
Japan. The word "Zen" is derived from the Japanese pronunciation of the Middle
Chinese word Á¶™ "Dzyen" (Modern Mandarin: "Ch√°n"), which in turn is derived
from the Sanskrit word "dhyƒÅna", which can be approximately translated as
"absorption" or "meditative state". Zen emphasizes the attainment of
enlightenment and the personal expression of direct insight in the Buddhist
teachings. As such, it de-emphasizes mere knowledge of sutras and doctrine and
favors direct understanding through zazen and interaction with an accomplished
teacher. The teachings of Zen include various sources of MahƒÅyƒÅna thought,
especially YogƒÅcƒÅra, the TathƒÅgatagarbha Sutras and Huayan . The
Praj√±ƒÅpƒÅramitƒÅ literature and, to a lesser extent, Madhyamaka have also
been influential. Chinese Ch√°n. Periodisation. The history of Ch√°n in China
can be divided in several periods. Zen as we know it today is the result of a
long history, with many changes and contingent factors. Each period had
different types of Zen, some of which kept influential, while others vanished.
Both Ferguson and McRae don't give a periodisation for Chinese Ch√°n after the
Song-dynasty, though McRae menions "at least a postclassical phase or perhaps
multiple phases". Origins and Taoist influences. When Buddhism came to China
from India, it was initially adapted to the Chinese culture and understanding.
Buddhism was exposed to Confucianist and Taoist influences. Goddard quotes D.T.
Suzuki, calling Ch√°n a "natural evolution of Buddhism under Taoist
conditions." Buddhism was first identified to be "a barbarian variant of
Taoism": Taoist terminology was used to express Buddhist doctrines in the
oldest translations of Buddhist texts, a practice termed "ko-i", "matching the
concepts", while the emerging Chinese Buddhism had to compete with Taoism and
Confucianism. The first Buddhist recruits in China were Taoists. Against this
background, especially the Taoist concept of naturalness seemed to have been
inherited by the early Ch√°n disciples: they equated‚Äîto some extent‚Äîthe
ineffable Tao and Buddha-nature, and thus, rather than feeling bound to the
abstract "wisdom of the s≈´tras", emphasized Buddha-nature to be found in
"everyday" human life, just as the Tao. In addition to Taoist ideas, also Neo-
Taoist concepts were taken over in Chinese Buddhism. Concepts such as "T‚Äôi -
yung" (Essence and Function) and "Li-shih" (Noumenon and Phenomenon) were first
taken over by Hua-yen Buddhism, which consequently influenced Ch√°n deeply. On
the other hand, Taoists at first misunderstood sunyata to be akin to the Taoist
non-being. Legendary or Proto-Ch√°n - Six Patriarchs. Traditionally the origin
of Ch√°n in China is credited to the Indian monk Bodhidharma. The story of his
life, and of the Six Patriarchs, was constructed during the Tang Dynasty to
lend credibility to the growing Ch√°n-school. Bodhidharma is recorded as having
come into China from India during the time of Southern and Northern Dynasties
to teach a "special transmission outside scriptures" which "did not stand upon
words". Only scarce historical information is available about him, but his
hagiography developed when the Chan tradition grew stronger and gained
prominence in the early 8th century. By this time a lineage of the six
ancestral founders of Ch√°n in China was developed. The short text "Two
Entrances and Four Acts", written by T'an-l√≠n (ÊõáÊûó; 506‚Äì574), contains
teachings which are attributed to Bodhidharma. The text is known from the
Dunhuang-manuscripts. The actual origins of Ch√°n may lie in ascetic
practitioners of Buddhism, who found refuge in forests and mountains. Huike, "a
dhuta (extreme ascetic) who schooled others", figures in the stories about
Bodhidharma. Huike is regarded as the second Ch√°n patriarch, appointed by
Bodhidharma to succeed him. One of Huike's students, Sengcan, to whom is
ascribed the Xinxin Ming, is regarded as the third patriarch. Early Ch√°n and
Classical Ch√°n - Tang dynasty (618‚Äì907). Early Ch√°n. The link between Huike
and Sengcan, and the fourth patriarch Daoxin ( 580‚Äì651), "is far from clear
and remains tenuous". With Daoxin and his successor, the fifth patriarch
Hongren ( 601‚Äì674), there emerged a new style of teaching. A large group of
students gathered at a permanent residence, and extreme ascetism became
outdated. The period of Daoxin and Hongren came to be called the East Mountain
Teaching, due to the location of the residence of Hongren at Huamgmei. Hui-
neng, a minor student of Hongren, came to be regarded as the Sixth Patriarch,
due to the influence of his student Shenhui. The term "East Mountain Teaching"
was used by Shenxiu (Á•ûÁßÄ 606?-706), the most important successor to Hongren.
In 701 he was invited to the Imperial Court by Empress Wu, who paid him
imperial reverence. This gave his school the support and the legitimation of
the imperial court. But the Ch√°n-tradition depicts another student of Hongren,
Huineng (ÊÉ ËÉΩ; 638‚Äì713), as the sixth and last patriarch, due to the
influence of Shenhui, a successor to Huineng. The dramatic story of Huineng's
life, as narrated in the Platform Sutra, tells that there was a contest for the
transmission of the title of patriarch. After being chosen by Hongren, the
fifth patriarch, Huineng had to flee by night to Nanhua Temple in the south to
avoid the wrath of Hongren's jealous senior disciples. Historic research
reveals that this story was created around the middle of the 8th century,
beginning in 731 by Shenhui, a successor to Huineng, to win influence at the
Imperial Court. He claimed Huineng to be the successor of Hongren's, instead of
the then publicly recognized successor Shenxiu. Shenxiu's Northern School was
denigrated as "gradual", in opposition to the self-acclaimed "sudden" approach
of Shenhui's Southern School. Shenhui's story was so influential that all
surviving schools regard Huineng as their ancestor. Classical Ch√°n. The An
Lushan Rebellion (755-763) led to a loss of control by the Tang-dynasty, and
changed the Chan scene again. Metropolitan Chan began to lose its status, while
"other schools were arising in out-lying areas controlled by warlords. These
are the forerunners of the Chan we know today." The most important of these
schools is the Hongzhou school (Ê¥™Â∑ûÂÆó) of Mazu, to which also belong
Shitou, Baizhang, Huangbo and Linji. This school became the archetypal
expression of Zen, with its emphasis on the personal expression of insight, and
its rejection of positive statements of this insight. Shitou is regarded as the
Patriarch of Caodong (Jp. S≈çt≈ç), while Linji is regarded as the founder of
Rinzai-Zen. During 845-846 Emperor Wuzong persecuted the Buddhist schools in
China. This persecution was devastating for metropolitan Chan, but the Chan
school of Ma-tsu and his likes survived, and took a leading role in the Chan of
the later Tang. This surviving rural Chan developed into the Five Houses of
Ch√°n (Ch. ‰∫îÂÆ∂) of Zen, or five "schools". These were not originally
regarded as "schools" or "sects", but historically they have come to be
understood that way. Most Zen lineages throughout Asia and the rest of the
world originally grew from or were heavily influenced by the original five
houses of Zen. Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period (907‚Äì960/979). After
the fall of the Tang Dynasty, China was without effective central control
during the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period. China was divided into
several autonomous regions. Support for Buddhism was limited to a few areas.
The Hua-yen and T'ient-tai schools suffered from the changing circumstances,
since they had depended on imperial support. The collapse of T'ang society also
deprived the aristocratic classes of wealth and influence, which meant a
further drawback for Buddhism. Shenxiu's Northern School and Henshui's Southern
School didn't survive the changing circumstances. Nevertheless, ch√°n emerged
as the dominant stream within Chinese Buddhism, but with various schools
developing various emphases in their teachings, due to the regional orientation
of the period. The Fayan school, named after Fa-yen Wen-i (885-958) became the
dominant school in the southern kingdoms of Nan-T'ang (Jiangxi, Chiang-hsi) and
Wuyue (Che-chiang). Literary Ch√°n - Song dynasty (960‚Äì1297). The Five
Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period was followed by the Song Dynasty, which
established a strong central government. During the Song Dynasty, Ch√°n (Á¶™)
was used by the government to strengthen its control over the country, and
Ch√°n grew to become the largest sect in Chinese Buddhism. An ideal picture of
the Ch√°n of the Tang period was produced, which served the legacy of this
newly acquired status. With the establishment of the Wu-shan (Gozan) system
during the Southern Sung, the Chinese bureaucratic system entered into Zen
temples throughout the country, and a highly organized system of temple rank
and administration developed. The Linji school became the dominant school
within Ch√°n, due to support from literati and the court. Before the Song
Dynasty, the Linji-school is rather obscure, and very little is known about its
early history. The first mention of Linji is in the "Zutang ji", compiled in
952, 86 years after Linji's death. But the "Zutang ji" pictures the Xuefeng
Yicun lineage as heir to the legacy of Mazu and the Hongzhou-school. According
to Welter, the real founder of the Linji-school was Shoushan (or Baoying)
Shengnian (È¶ñÂ±±ÁúÅÂøµ)(926-993), a fourth generation dharma-heir of Linji.
The "Tiansheng Guangdeng lu" (Â§©ËÅñÂª£ÁáàÈåÑ), "Tiansheng Era Expanded Lamp
Record", compiled by the official Li Zunxu (ÊùéÈÅµÂãó)(988-1038) confirms the
status of Shoushan Shengnian, but also pictures Linji as a major Chan patriarch
and heir to the Mazu, displacing the prominence of the Fayan-lineage. It also
established the slogan of "a special transmission outside the teaching",
supporting the Linji-school claim of "Chan as separate from and superior to all
other Buddhist teachings". During the 12th century, a clear difference between
the Linji and the Caodong schools emerged. The two schools were competing for
support of the literati, who became more powerful when the Song-government
started to limit her influence on society. Hongzhi Zhengjue (1091-1157) of the
Caodong-school emphasized silent illumination or shikantaza as a means for
solitary practice, which could be undertaken by lay-followers. Dahui Zonggao (
(1089‚Äì1163) introduced k'an-hua practice, "observing the word-head", as a
means of solitary practice. During the Song, both schools were exported to
Japan, were they eventually became two clearly distinguished schools or
"sects". Post-Classical Ch√°n. This was different from China, were the Buddhist
schools tended to coalesce into a syncretic Chinese Buddhist school. Yuan
Dynasty (1279-1368). The "Yuan Dynasty" was the empire established by Kublai
Khan, the leader of Mongolian Borjigin clan, after Mongol conquered the Jin and
the Southern Song Dynasty in China. Ch√°n-teachings started to be mixed with
Pure Land teachings, as in the teachings of Zhongfeng Mingben (1263-1323). Ming
dynasty (1368-1644). Ch√°n Buddhism enjoyed something of a revival in the Ming
Dynasty with teachers such as Hanshan Deqing (ÊÜ®Â±±Âæ∑Ê∏Ö), who wrote and
taught extensively on both Ch√°n and Pure Land Buddhism; Miyun Yuanwu
(ÂØÜÈõ≤ÂúìÊÇü), who came to be seen posthumously as the first patriarch of the
≈åbaku Zen school; as well as Yunqi Zhuhong (Èõ≤Ê£≤Á•©ÂÆè) and Ouyi Zhixu
(ËïÖÁõäÊô∫Êó≠). Ch√°n was taught alongside Pure Land Buddhism in many Chinese
Buddhist monasteries. In time much of the distinction between them was lost,
and many masters taught both Ch√°n and Pure Land. With the downfall of the Ming
Dynasty several Chinese Ch√°n-masters fled to Japan, founding the ≈åbaku
school. Qing Dynasty (1644-1912). The Qing Dynasty, also "Empire of the Great
Qing" or "Great Qing", was the last imperial dynasty of China. In the beginning
of the Qing Dunasty Ch√°n was "reinvented", by the "revival of beating and
shouting practices" by Miyun Yuanwu (1566‚Äì1642), and the publication of the
"Wudeng yantong" ("The strict transmission of the five Chan schools") by Feiyin
Tongrong‚Äôs (1593‚Äì1662), a dharma heir of Miyun Yuanwu. The book placed
self-proclaimed Chan monks without proper Dharma transmission in the category
of "lineage unknown" ("sifa weixiang"), thereby excluding several prominent
Caodong-monks. Modern times. After further centuries of decline during the Qing
Dynasty (1644‚Äì1912), Ch√°n was revived again in the early 20th century by Hsu
Yun (ËôõÈõ≤) (1840-1959), a well-known figure of 20th century Chinese Buddhism.
Many Ch√°n teachers today trace their lineage back to Hsu Yun, including Sheng-
yen (ËÅñÂö¥) and Hsuan Hua (ÂÆ£Âåñ), who have propagated Ch√°n in the West
where it has grown steadily through the 20th and 21st century. Ch√°n was
repressed in China during the 1960s in the Cultural Revolution, but
subsequently had been re-asserting itself on the mainland, and has a
significant following in Taiwan and Hong Kong as well as among Overseas
Chinese. Spread of Ch√°n Buddhism in Asia. Thi·ªÅn in Vietnam. Thi·ªÅn Buddhism
(Á¶™ÂÆó Thi·ªÅn T√¥ng) is the Vietnamese name for the school of Zen Buddhism.
Thi·ªÅn is ultimately derived from the Chinese "Ch√°n Z≈çng" (Á¶™ÂÆó).
According to traditional accounts of Vietnam, in 580, an Indian monk named
Vinitaruci () traveled to Vietnam after completing his studies with Sengcan,
the third patriarch of Chinese Ch√°n. This, then, would be the first appearance
of Vietnamese Thi·ªÅn Buddhism. The sect that Vinitaruci and his lone
Vietnamese disciple founded would become known as the oldest branch of Thi·ªÅn.
After a period of obscurity, the Vinitaruci School became one of the most
influential Buddhist groups in Vietnam by the 10th century, particularly so
under the patriarch V·∫°n-H·∫°nh (died 1018). Other early Vietnamese Zen
schools included the V√¥ Ng√¥n Th√¥ng, which was associated with the teaching
of Mazu, and the Th·∫£o ƒê∆∞·ªùng, which incorporated "nianfo" chanting
techniques; both were founded by Chinese monks. A new school was founded by one
of Vietnam's religious kings; this was the Tr√∫c L√¢m school, which evinced a
deep influence from Confucian and Taoist philosophy. Nevertheless, Tr√∫c L√¢m's
prestige waned over the following centuries as Confucianism became dominant in
the royal court. In the 17th century, a group of Chinese monks led by Nguy√™n
Thi·ªÅu established a vigorous new school, the L√¢m T·∫ø, which is the
Vietnamese pronunciation of "Linji". A more domesticated offshoot of L√¢m T·∫ø,
the Li·ªÖu Qu√°n school, was founded in the 18th century and has since been the
predominant branch of Vietnamese Thi·ªÅn. Zen master Th√≠ch Thanh T·ª´ is
credit for renovating Thien Tr√∫c L√¢m in Vi·ªát Nam. He is one of the most
prominent and influential figures of Viet Nam zen masters currently alive. He
was a disciple of Master Th√≠ch Thi·ªán Hoa. The most famous practitioner of
syncretized Thi·ªÅn Buddhism in the West is Th√≠ch Nh·∫•t H·∫°nh who has
authored dozens of books and founded Dharma center Plum Village in France
together with his colleague Chan Khong, Bhikkhuni and Zen Master. Seon in
Korea. Seon was gradually transmitted into Korea during the late Silla period
(7th through 9th centuries) as Korean monks of predominantly Hwaeom (ËèØÂö¥)
and Consciousness-only (ÂîØË≠ò) background began to travel to China to learn
the newly developing tradition. During his lifetime, Mazu had begun to attract
students from Korea; by tradition, the first Korean to study Seon was named
Peomnang (Ê≥ïÊúó). Mazu's successors had numerous Korean students, some of whom
returned to Korea and established the nine mountain (‰πùÂ±±) schools. This was
the beginning of Ch√°n in Korea which is called Seon. Seon received its most
significant impetus and consolidation from the Goryeo monk Jinul (Áü•Ë®•)
(1158‚Äì1210), who established a reform movement and introduced k≈çan practice
to Korea. Jinul established the Songgwangsa (ÊùæÂª£ÂØ∫) as a new center of pure
practice. It was during the time of Jinul the Jogye Order, a primarily Seon
sect, became the predominant form of Korean Buddhism, a status it still holds.
which survives down to the present in basically the same status. Toward the end
of the Goryeo and during the Joseon period the Jogye Order would first be
combined with the scholarly Êïô schools, and then be relegated to lesser
influence in ruling class circles by Confucian influenced polity, even as it
retained strength outside the cities, among the rural populations and ascetic
monks in mountain refuges. Nevertheless, there would be a series of important
Seon teachers during the next several centuries, such as Hyegeun (ÊÖßÂã§),
Taego (Â§™Âè§), Gihwa (Â∑±Âíå) and Hyujeong (‰ºëÈùú), who continued to develop
the basic mold of Korean meditational Buddhism established by Jinul. Seon
continues to be practiced in Korea today at a number of major monastic centers,
as well as being taught at Dongguk University, which has a major of studies in
this religion. Taego Bou (1301‚Äì1382) studied in China with Linji teacher and
returned to unite the Nine Mountain Schools. In modern Korea, by far the
largest Buddhist denomination is the Jogye Order, which is essentially a Zen
sect; the name Jogye is the Korean equivalent of Caoxi (ÊõπÊ∫™), another name
for Huineng. Seon is known for its stress on meditation, monasticism, and
asceticism. Many Korean monks have few personal possessions and sometimes cut
off all relations with the outside world. Several are near mendicants traveling
from temple to temple practicing meditation. The hermit-recluse life is
prevalent among monks to whom meditation practice is considered of paramount
importance. Currently, Korean Buddhism is in a state of slow transition. While
the reigning theory behind Korean Buddhism was based on Jinul's "sudden
enlightenment, gradual cultivation", the modern Korean Seon master,
Seongcheol's revival of Hui Neng's "sudden enlightenment, sudden cultivation"
has had a strong impact on Korean Buddhism. Although there is resistance to
change within the ranks of the Jogye order, with the last three Supreme
Patriarchs' stance that is in accordance with Seongcheol, there has been a
gradual change in the atmosphere of Korean Buddhism. Zen in Japan. Kamakura
(1185-1333). Keizan's Soji-ji temple was a rival to Dogen's Eihei-ji. Others
say that D≈çgen gave "high religious ideals" while Keizan ensured S≈çt≈ç's
survival. Muromachi (or Ashikaga) (1336-1573). During the Muromachi period the
Rinzai school was the most successful of the schools, since it was favoured by
the Shogun. Rinzai was organized in the Gozan system. This system was extended
throughout Japan, effectively giving control to the central government, which
administered this system. The Rinka monasteries, primarily found outside the
cities in rural areas, had a greater degree of independence. The O-to-kan
lineage, that centered on Daitoku-ji, also had a greater degree of freedom. A
well-known teacher from Daytoku-ji was Ikky≈´. Another Rinka lineage was the
Hotto lineage, of which Bassui Tokush≈ç is the best-known teacher. Soto too
spread out over Japan. Gasan adopted the Five Ranks of Tung-shan as a fit
vehicle to explain the Mahayana teachings. Azuchi-Momoyama (1573-1600) and Edo
(or Tokugawa) (1600-1868). After a period of war Japan was re-united in the
Azuchi‚ÄìMomoyama period. This decreased the power of Buddhism, which had
become a strong political and military force in Japan and was seen as a threat
by the ruling clan. Neo-Confucianism gained influence at the expense of
Buddhism, which came under strict state control. Japan closed the gates to the
rest of the world. New doctrines and methods were not to be introduced, nor
were new temples and schools. The only exception was the ≈åbaku lineage, which
was introduced in the 17th century during the Edo period by Ingen, a Chinese
monk. Well-known Zen masters from this period are Bankei Y≈çtaku
(Áõ§Áè™Ê∞∏Áê¢?, 1622‚Äì1693), Matsuo Bash≈ç (ÊùæÂ∞æ Ëä≠Ëïâ?, 1644 ‚Äì November
28, 1694) and Hakuin Ekaku (ÁôΩÈö  ÊÖßÈ∂¥?, 1686‚Äì1768), who revived the
Rinzai school. Meiji Restoration (1868-1912) and Imperial expansionism. During
the Meiji period (1868‚Äì1912) Japan abandoned its feudal system and opened up
to Western modernism. Shinto became the state religion, and Buddhism was
coerced to adapt to the new regime. Rinzai and Soto Zen chose to adapt, with
embarrassing consequences when Japanese nationalism was endorsed by the Zen
institutions. War endeavours against Russia, China and finally during the
Pacific War were supported by the Zen establishment. Within the Buddhist
establishment the Western world was seen as a threat, but also as a challenge
to stand up to. Parties within the Zen establishment sought to modernize Zen in
accord with Western insights, while simultaneously maintaining a Japanese
identity. Present time (after 1945). Interest in Zen grew in the West after
World War II. Westerners such as Philip Kapleau and the Dutchman Janwillem van
de Wetering went to Japan to study Zen. Japanese teachers came to the West to
share Zen practice and philosophy. Contemporary Zen organisations. There are
three traditional schools of Zen in contemporary Japan are the , , and . Of
these, S≈çt≈ç is the largest, Rinzai is middle, and ≈åbaku the smallest. These
are further divided into subschools by head temple, with 2 head temples for
S≈çt≈ç (S≈çji-ji and Eihei-ji, with S≈çji-ji having a much larger network), 14
head temples for Rinzai, and 1 head temple (Manpuku-ji) for ≈åbaku, for a total
of 17 head temples. The Rinzai head temples, which are most numerous, have
substantial overlap with the traditional Five Mountain System, and include
Myoshin-ji, Nanzen-ji, Tenry≈´-ji, Daitoku-ji, and Tofuku-ji, among others.
Besides these traditional organizations, there are modern Zen organisations
which have especially attracted Western lay followers, namely the Sanbo Kyodan
and the FAS Society. Zen in the Western world. Although it is difficult to
trace when the West first became aware of Zen as a distinct form of Buddhism,
the visit of Soyen Shaku, a Japanese Zen monk, to Chicago during the World
Parliament of Religions in 1893 is often pointed to as an event that enhanced
its profile in the Western world. It was during the late 1950s and the early
1960s that the number of Westerners, other than the descendants of Asian
immigrants, pursuing a serious interest in Zen began to reach a significant
level. Especially Japanese Zen has gained popularity in the West. The various
books on Zen by Reginald Horace Blyth, and Alan Watts published between 1950
and 1975, contributed to this growing interest in Zen in the West, as did the
interest from beat poets such as Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg and Gary Snyder.
Western Zen lineages. Over the last fifty years mainstream forms of Zen, led by
teachers who trained in East Asia and their successors, have begun to take root
in the West. Derived from Japan. In North America, the Zen lineages derived
from the Sanbo Kyodan school are the most numerous. The Sanbo Kyodan is a
Japan-based reformist Zen group, founded in 1954 by Yasutani Hakuun, which has
had a significant influence on Zen in the West. The most widespread are the
lineages founded by Hakuyu Taizan Maezumi and the White Plum Asanga. Maezumi's
successors include Susan Myoyu Andersen, John Daido Loori, Tetsugen Bernard
Glassman, Nicolee Jikyo McMahon, Joan Hogetsu Hoeberichts, and Charlotte Joko
Beck. The San Francisco Zen Center, for S≈çt≈ç practice, was established by
Shunryu Suzuki. In 1967 it established the first Zen Monastery in America,
called Tassajara, in the mountains near Big Sur. This S≈çt≈ç-center was
followed by other official centers, such as the Sanshin Zen Community
(Sanshinji) located in Bloomington, Indiana, established by Shohaku Okumura,
and several Minneapolis‚ÄìSaint Paul, Minnesota centers in the lineage of
Dainin Katagiri. There are also a number of Rinzai Zen centers in the West. In
North America, some of the more prominent include Rinzai-ji founded by Kyozan
Joshu Sasaki Roshi in California, Dai Bosatsu Zendo Kongo-ji established by
Eido Shimano Roshi and Soen Nakagawa Roshi in New York, Chozen-ji founded by
Omori Sogen Roshi in Hawaii, Daiyuzenji founded by Dogen Hosokawa Roshi (a
student of Omori Sogen Roshi) in Chicago, Illinois, and Chobo-Ji founded by
Genki Takabayshi Roshi in Seattle, Washington. In Europe there is Egely
Monastery established by a Dharma Heir of Eido Shimano, Denko Mortensen.
Derived from China. Hsuan Hua was the first Chinese master to teach Westerners
in North America. He taught Ch√°n and other traditions of Chinese Buddhism in
San Francisco during the early 1960s. He went on to found the City Of Ten
Thousand Buddhas, a monastery and retreat center located on a 237 acre (959,000
m¬≤) property near Ukiah, California. Another Chinese Ch√°n teacher with a
Western following is Sheng-yen, a master trained in both the Caodong and Linji
schools. He first visited the United States in 1978 under the sponsorship of
the Buddhist Association of the United States, and subsequently founded the CMC
Ch√°n Meditation Center in Queens, New York and the Dharma Drum Retreat Center
in Pine Bush, New York. The Fo Guang Shan organization, which has branches
worldwide, also belongs to the Ch√°n school; its founder, the Venerable Master
Hsing Yun is a lineage holder in the Linji (Rinzai) tradition. Derived from
Korea. The Kwan Um School of Zen, one of the largest Zen schools in the West,
teaches a form of Seon Buddhism. Soeng Hyang Soen Sa Nim (b. 1948), birth name
Barbara Trexler (later Barbara Rhodes), is Guiding Dharma Teacher of the
international Kwan Um School of Zen and a successor of the late Seung Sahn Soen
Sa Nim. Derived from Vietnam. Two notable Vietnamese Zen teachers have been
influential in Western countries: Thich Thien-An and Thich Nhat Hanh. Thich
Thien-An came to America in 1966 as a visiting professor at UCLA and taught
traditional Thien meditation. Thich Nhat Hanh was a monk in Vietnam during the
Vietnam War, during which he was a peace activist. In response to these
activities, he was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1967 by Martin Luther
King, Jr. In 1966, he left Vietnam in exile and now resides at Plum Village, a
monastery in France. He has written more than one hundred books about Buddhism,
which have made him one of the very few most prominent Buddhist authors among
the general readership in the West. In his books and talks, Thich Nhat Hanh
emphasizes mindfulness ("sati") as the most important practice in daily life.
Pan-lineage organizations. In the United States, two pan-lineage organizations
have formed in the last few years. The oldest is the American Zen Teachers
Association which sponsors an annual conference. North American Soto teachers
in North America, led by several of the heirs of Taizan Maezumi and Shunryu
Suzuki, have also formed the Soto Zen Buddhist Association. Doctrinal
background. Though Zen-narrative states that it is a "special transmission
outside scriptures" which "did not stand upon words", Zen does have a rich
doctrinal background. Most essential are "the most fundamental teaching [...]
that we are already originally enlightened", and the Bodhisattva ideal, which
supplements insight with Karu·πáƒÅ, compassion with all sentient beings.
Polarities. The teaching of "Original enlightenment" in classical Chinese Ch√°n
is expressed by a set of polarities: Buddha-nature - sunyata, absolute-
relative, sudden and gradual enlightenment. Buddha-nature and sunyata. When
Buddhism was introduced in China it was understood in terms of its own culture.
Various sects struggled to attain an understanding of the Indian texts. The
TathƒÅgatagarbha Sutras and the idea of the Buddha-nature were endorsed,
because of the perceived similarities with the Tao. Sunyata was understood as
pointing to an underlying essence, just as the Buddha-nature. It took Chinese
Buddhism several centuries to understand that sunyata does not refer to a
substance or essence underneath or behind the world of appearances. This
realisation was discernable in the course that Ch√°n took. Absolute-relative.
The Prajnaparamita Sutras and Madhyamaka emphasized the non-duality of form and
emptiness: form is emptiness, emptiness is form, as the Heart Sutra says. The
idea that the ultimate reality is present in the daily world of relative
reality fitted into the Chinese culture which emphasized the mundane world and
society. But this does not tell how the absolute is present in the relative
world. This question is answered in such schemata as the Five Ranks of Tozan
and the Oxherding Pictures. Sudden and gradual enlightenment. In Zen Buddhism
two main views on the way to enlightenment are discernible, namely sudden and
gradual enlightenment. Early Ch√°n recognized the ""transcendence of the body
and mind"", followed by ""non-defilement knowledge and perception"", meaning
sudden insight into the true nature followed by gradual purification of
intentions. In the 8th-century the Ch'an-history was effectively re-fashioned
by Shenhui, who created a dichotomy between the so-called "Northern School",
led by Yuquan Shenxiu, propagating "gradual teachings", and his own line of
teaching, which he called the "Southern school", propagating "sudden
awakening". According to the "sudden enlightenment" propagated by Shenhui
insight into true nature is sudden; there-after there can be no
misunderstanding anymore about this true nature. Once the dichotomy between
sudden and gradual was in place, it defined its own logic and rhetorics, which
are also recognizable in the distinction between Caodong (Soto) and Lin-ji
(Rinzai) ch√°n. But it also lead to a "sometimes bitter and always prolix
sectarian controversy between later Ch√°n and Hua-yen exegetes". In the
Platform Sutra the dichotomy between sudden and gradual is reconciled. Guifeng
Zongmi, fifth-generation successor to Shenhui, also softened the edge between
sudden and gradual. In his analysis, sudden awakening points to seeing into
one's true nature, but is to be followed by a gradual cultivation to attain
Buddhahood. The need of cultivation after attaining insight is still recognized
by the contemporary Rinzai-school and the Sanbo Kyodan. The Bodhisattva ideal.
An important, though easily overlooked aspect of Zen is the bodhisattva ideal.
It supplements kensho and insight into the absolute with Karu·πáƒÅ, compassion
with all sentient beings. This ideal is reflected in the Bodhisattva vow and
the Bodhisattva Precepts or jukai. Part of this Bodhisattva-ideal are the
pƒÅramitƒÅs, which are also being mentioned in the Diamond Sutra: The
Bodhisattva-ideal is a central theme in the prajnaparamita-sutras. Dogen
mentions the Bodhisattva-ideal throughout his works. Hakuin saw "deep
compassion and commitment to help all sentient beings everywhere" as an
indispensable part of the Buddhist path to awakening. Hakuin emphasized the
need op "post-satori training", purifying the mind of karmic tendencies and
Buddhas and bodhisattvas such as AmitƒÅbha, Avalokite≈õvara, Ma√±ju≈õrƒ´,
Samantabhadra, and K·π£itigarbha are venerated alongside Gautama Buddha. Zen
scripture. The role of scripture in Zen. Contrary to the popular image,
literature does play a role in the Zen-training. "Unsui", Zen-monks, "are
expected to become familiar with the classics of the Zen canon". A review of
the early historical documents and literature of early Zen masters clearly
reveals that they were well versed in numerous MahƒÅyƒÅna Buddhist s≈´tras.
Nevertheless Zen is often pictured as anti-intellectual. This picture of Zen
emerged during the Song Dynasty (960‚Äì1297), when Ch√°n became the dominant
form of Buddhism in China, and gained great popularity among the educated and
literary classes of Chinese society. The use of koans, which are highly
stylized literary texts, reflects this popularity among the higher classes. In
the tenth century, during the turmoil of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms
period, regionally oriented schools with differing views on the Ch√°n-identity
developed. One view was that of chiao-wai pieh-ch'uan, "a special transmission
outside the teaching". The opposing view was chiao-ch'an i-chih, "the harmony
between Ch√°n and the teaching". The view of the harmony between Ch√°n and the
teachings was dominant in the lineage of Fa-ten Wen-i (885-958), and prevailed
in the Southern Kingdoms in the tenth century, and was at first also favored at
he Song court. There-after the Linji school and the notion of a "special
transmission outside the teachings" became dominant. The famous saying "do not
establish awords and letters", attributed in this period to Bodhidharma, The
Ch√°n of the Tang Dynasty, especially that of Mazu and Linji with its emphasis
on "shock techniques", in retrospect was seen as a golden age of Ch√°n. This
picture has gained great popularity in the west in the 20th century, especially
due to the influence of D.T. Suzuki, and further popularized by Hakuun Yasutani
and the Sanbo Kyodan. This picture has been challenged, and comlemented, since
the 1970s by modern scientific research on Zen. But direct insight has to be
supported by study and understanding ("hori" of the Buddhist teachings and
texts.. Intellectual understanding without practice is called "yako-zen", "wild
fox Zen", but "one who has only experience without intellectual understanding
is a "zen temma, "Zen devil"". Grounding Ch√°n in scripture. The early Buddhist
schools in China were each based on a specific sutra. At the beginning of the
Tang Dynasty, by the time of the Fifth Patriarch Hongren (601‚Äì674), the Zen
school became established as a separate school of Buddhism. It had to develop a
doctrinal tradition of its own to ascertain its position, and to ground its
teachings in a specific sutra. Various sutra's were used for this, even before
the time of Hongren: the ≈örƒ´mƒÅlƒÅdevƒ´ S≈´tra (Huike), Awakening of Faith
(Daoxin), the Lankavatara Sutra (East Mountain School), the Diamond Sutra
(Shenhui), the Platform Sutra. Subsequently, the Zen tradition produced a rich
corpus of written literature which has become a part of its practice and
teaching. Other influential sutras are the Vimalakirti Sutra, Avatamsaka Sutra,
the Shurangama Sutra, and the Mahaparinirvana Sutra. The growing Ch√°n
tradition also faced the challenge to put its teachings into words, to bolster
its identity and to applicate it in formal teaching settings, without losing
the central insight into the "suchness" of reality. One solution to this was
the shift of emphasis from the recorded sayings of the historical Buddha, to
the sayings of living Buddhas, namely the Ch√°n masters. In time, these
sayings, from the so-called "encounter-dialogues" between masters and students,
but also from sermons, became codified and formed the basis of typical Zen-
genres, namely the "y√º-l√º" (recorded sayings) and the classic koan-
collections. These too became formalised, and as such became a subject of
disputes on the right way to teach Zen and the avoidance of dependence on
words. Zen literature. The Zen-tradition developed a rich textual tradition,
based on the interpretation of the Buddhist teachings and the recorded sayings
of Zen-masters. Chinese texts. Hui-neng's Platform Sutra. Among the earliest of
the specifically Zen texts, dating back to at least the 8th century, is the
"Platform S≈´tra of the Sixth Patriarch", attributed to Huineng. It was
constructed over a longer period of time, and contains different layers of
writing. It is... It contains the well-known story of the contest for the
succession of Hongren. According to the text, Huineng won this contest, but had
to flee the monastery to avoid the rage of the supporters of Henxui. The story
is not a factual account, but an 8th-century construction, probably by the so-
called Oxhead School. The Platform S≈´tra cites and explains a wide range of
Buddhist scriptures: the "Diamond S≈´tra", the "Lotus S≈´tra" ("Saddharma
Pu·πá·∏çarƒ´ka S≈´tra"), the "Vimalakƒ´rti Nirde≈õa S≈´tra", the "≈ö≈´ra·πÖgama
S≈´tra", the "La·πÖkƒÅvatƒÅra S≈´tra", the Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana-
sutra, and the Mahaparinirvana Sutra. Transmission of the Lamp. Another
literary device for establishing those traditions was given by the "Kao-seng-
chuan" (Biographies of Eminent Monks), compiles around 530. The Ch√°n-tradition
developed its own corpus in this genre, with works as "Anthology of the
Patriarchal Hall" (952) and the "Jingde Records of the Transmission of the
Lamp" (published 1004). McRae considers Dumoulin's "A History of Zen" to be a
modern example of this genre, disguished as scientific history. Ch√°n
transmission records, teng-lu, were essential in shaping the identity of Ch√°n.
The Records of the Transmission of the Lamp (Ching-te ch'uan-teng lu), compiled
by Tao-y√ºn and published in 1004, introduced several of the key elements of
the Ch√°n-tradition. Another key text is the "Record of the Extensive
Transmission the Lamp compiled during the T'ien-sheng era" ("T'ien-sheng kuang-
teng lu"), compiled by Li Tsun-hs√º and published in 1036, which clearly
introduced the idea of "a special transmission outside the teaching". Until the
T'ien-sheng kuang-teng lu, Ch√°n was viewed as a teaching in harmony with the
Buddhist scriptural tradition. In the tenth century, during the turmoil of the
Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, regionally oriented schools with
differing views on the Ch√°n-identity developed. One view was that of "chiao-
wai pieh-ch'uan", "a special transmission outside the teaching". The opposing
view was "chiao-ch'an i-chih", "the harmony between Ch√°n and the teaching".
The view of the harmony between Ch√°n and the teachings was dominant in the
lineage of Fa-ten Wen-i (885-958), and prevailed in the Southern Kingdoms in
the tenth century. The first statement can be seen as a support of the harmony
between the teachings and Ch√°n. The second statement can be seen as a support
of a "special transmission outside the teachings". Recorded Sayings and
Encounter Dialogue. From the "question-and-answer format that had been
developed as a means of conveying Buddhist teachins" developed the "y√º-l√º"
genre, the recorded sayings of the masters, and the encounter dialogues. The
best-known example is the "Lin-ji y√º-l√º". These recorded sayings are not
verbatim recordings of the sayings of the masters, but well-edited texts,
written down up to 160 years after the supposed sayings and meetings. Linji
yulu. The "Linji yulu" ("Zhenzhou Linji Huizhao Chansi yulu") is the seminal
text of the Linji and Rinzai school. It contains the recorded sayings
attributed to Linji Yixuan (d. 866). It was published in 1120, but developed in
a period stretching from 952 to 1120. The first mention of Linji is in the the
"Zutang ji" (Á•ñÂ ÇÈõÜ "Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall), compiled in 952, 86
years after Linji's death. The "Jingde Chuangdeng lu" (ÊôØÂæ∑ÂÇ≥ÁáàÈåÑ "Jingde
Records of the Transmission of the Lamp"), compiled in 1004 by Daoyuan, gives
brief biographical information on Lijni, followed by Linji's interactions with
Hunagbo, to strenghten the claim of Linji's descendancy form Hunagbo and the
Mazu-lineage. The "Tiansheng Guangdeng lu" (Â§©ËÅñÂª£ÁáàÈåÑ), "Tiansheng Era
Expanded Lamp Record", compiled by the official Li Zunxu (ÊùéÈÅµÂãó)(988-1038)
confirms the status of Shoushan Shengnian, but also pictures Linji as a major
Chan patriarch and heir to the Hongzhou school of Mazu Daoyi, displacing the
prominence of the Fayan-lineage. It also established the slogan of "a special
transmission outside the teaching", supporting the Linji-school claim of "Chan
as separate from and superior to all other Buddhist teachings". The "Sijia
yulu", ("Discourse Records of the Four Masters"), compiled 1066-1069 by
Huanglong Huinan (1002-1069), contains the discourse records of Mazu Daoyi
(709‚Äì788), Baizhang Huaihai (720‚Äì814), Huangbo Xiyun (d.850) and Linji, the
major patriarchs of the Tang Dynasty according to the Linji faction. In this
text, Linji is explicitly placed in line with these teachers of the Hongzhou
school school. The "Zhenzhou Linji Huizhao Chansi yulu" ("The record of
Linji"), compiled by Yuanjue Zongan in 1120, is the classic version of the
record of Linji. Yuanjue Zongan belonged to the Yunmen-faction, and also re-
issued the "Yunmen yulu", the "Discourse Records of Yunmen". The separate
publication of Linji's records signals the newly acquired status of Linji as
one of Ch√°n's major patriarchs. Koan-collections. The "encounter dialogue"-
genre developed into various collections of "k≈çans", which form itself another
extensive literary corpus. Koan practice developed from a literary practice,
styling snippets of encounter-dialogue into well-edited stories. It arose in
interaction with "educated literati". There were dangers involved in such a
literary approach, such as fixing specific meanings to the cases. Dahui Zonggao
is even said to have burned the woodblocks of the Blue Cliff Record, for the
hindrance it had become to study of Ch√°n by his students. The two best known
koan-collections (in the west) are the "Gateless Gate" and the "Blue Cliff
Record". "The Gateless Gate" (Chinese: ÁÑ°ÈñÄÈóú Wumenguan; Japanese: Mumonkan)
is a collection of 48 k≈çans and commentaries published in 1228 by Chinese monk
Wumen (ÁÑ°ÈñÄ) (1183‚Äì1260). The title may be more accurately rendered as
"Gateless Barrier" or "Gateless Checkpoint"). The "Blue Cliff Record" (Chinese:
Á¢ßÂ∑ñÈåÑ B√¨y√°n L√π; Japanese: Hekiganroku) is a collection of 100 k≈çans
compiled in 1125 by Yuanwu Keqin (ÂúúÊÇüÂÖãÂã§ 1063‚Äì1135). Japanese texts.
The Japanese Zen-tradition also developed a corpus of its own. During the
Tokugawa-period D≈çgen's "Sh≈çb≈çgenz≈ç" became the authoritative text of the
Soto-school. In the Rinzai-school, the koan-curricula were systematized by
dharma-heirs of Hakuin, who himself produced an extended corpus of written
texts. Dogen's Sh≈çb≈çgenz≈ç. During the Tokugawa-period the Soto-school
started to place a growing emphasis on textual authority. In 1615 the bakufu
declared that "Eheiji's standards ("kakun") must be the rule for all Soto
monks". In time this came to mean all the writings of Dogen, which thereby
became the normative source for the doctrines and organisation of the Soto-
school. A key factor in this growing emphasis on Dogen was Manzan's appeal to
change the rules for dharma transmission, based on arguments derived from the
Sh≈çb≈çgenz≈ç. Another reformation was implemented by Gento Sokuchu
(1729‚Äì1807), who tried to purify the Soto-school of the use of koans. Gento
Sokuchu implanted new regulations, based on Dogen's regulations. During the
Meiji Restoration, the memory of D≈çgen was used to ensure Eihei-ji's central
place in the Soto-organisation, and "to cement closer ties with lay people". In
1899 the first lay ordination ceremony was organized in Eihei-ji. Eihei-ji also
promoted the study of D≈çgen's works, especuially the Sh≈çb≈çgenz≈ç, which
changed the view of D≈çgen in Soto's history. Zensh≈´ Shiburoku. The Zensh≈´
Shiburoku, "The Four Texts of the Zen Sect", is a collection of four essential
Zen texts which are being used in Japan as introductory texts in the education
of novice Zen monks. The collection consists of the "J≈´gy≈´zu" (Ten Oxherding
Pictures), the "Shinjinmei" (Faith in mind), attributed to the third Chinese
Ch√°n-patriarch Sengcan, the "Sh≈çd≈çka" (Song of Enlightenment), attributed to
Yongjia Xuanjue, and the "Zazengi" (The Principles of Zazen), written by Dogen.
Zen teachings. To point out 'essential Zen-teachings' is almost impossible,
given the variety of schools, the extended history of 1500 years, and the
emphasis on suchness, reality just-as-it-is, which has to be expressed in daily
life, not in words. But common to most schools and teachings is this emphasis
on suchness, the Bodhisattva-ideal, and the priority of zazen. Varieties in
Zen-teaching. Rinzai. Other Zen-teachers have also expressed sudden insight
followed by gradual cultivation. Chinul, a 12th-century Koran Seon master,
followed Zongmi, and also emphasized that insight into our true nature is
sudden, but is to be followed by practice to ripen the insight and attain full
Buddhahood. This is also the standpoint of the contemporary Sanbo Kyodan,
according to whom kensho is at the start of the path to full enlightenment. To
attain this primary insight and to deepen it, zazen and k≈çan-study is deemed
essential. This trajectory of initial insight followed by a gradual deepening
and ripening is expressed by linji in his Three mysterious Gates, and the Four
Ways of Knowing of Hakuin. Another example of depiction of stages on the path
are the Ten Ox-Herding Pictures which detail the steps on the Path. Soto. This
gradual cultivation is also recognized by the Caodong-teacher Tozan, who
described the Five ranks of enlightenment. The S≈çt≈ç-school has de-emphasized
k≈çans since Gent≈ç Sokuch≈´ (circa 1800), and instead emphasized shikantaza.
Western understanding. In the west, Zen-teachings have tended to become part of
a modern version of the Perennial philosophy, "the idea of a common set of
truths held by all peoples in all times and places". The writings of D.T.
Suzuki have been instrumental in this understanding, but Suzuki in his turn was
influenced by western esoteric traditions. This interpretation emphasizes
"spiritual progress", experience and the direct cognition of a "divine,
ineffable reality, transcendent yet pervading everything and to which the
individual mind is directly connected or even identical". This understanding
differs from Japanese Zen, which is basically a monastic training in which
communal aspects and daily life are emphasized. Zen practice. Zen meditation.
Central to Zen-practice is dhyana or meditation. The Zen tradition holds that
in meditation practice, notions of doctrine and teachings necessitate the
creation of various notions and appearances (Skt. "sa·πÉj√±ƒÅ"; Ch. Áõ∏,
"xiƒÅng") that obscure the transcendent wisdom of each being's Buddha-nature.
This process of rediscovery goes under various terms such as "introspection",
"a backward step", "turning-about" or "turning the eye inward". Zazen. Sitting
meditation is called "zazen" (Jp.: ÂùêÁ¶Ö, lit. "seated meditation"), and in
Chinese it is called "zu√≤ch√°n" (ÂùêÁ¶Ö), both simply meaning "sitting
dhyƒÅna". During this sitting meditation, practitioners usually assume a
position such as the lotus position, half-lotus, Burmese, or seiza postures,
using the dhyƒÅna mudrƒÅ. To regulate the mind, awareness is directed towards
counting or watching the breath or put in the energy center below the navel
(see also anapanasati). Often, a square or round cushion placed on a padded mat
is used to sit on; in some other cases, a chair may be used. Shikantaza. In the
Soto school of Zen, meditation with no objects, anchors, or content, is the
primary form of practice. The meditator strives to be aware of the stream of
thoughts, allowing them to arise and pass away without interference.
Considerable textual, philosophical, and phenomenological justification of this
practice can be found throughout D≈çgen's "Sh≈çb≈çgenz≈ç", as for example in
the "Principles of Zazen" and the "Universally Recommended Instructions for
Zazen". Sesshin. Zen traditions include periods of intensive group meditation
in a monastery. While the daily routine in the monastery may require monks to
meditate for several hours each day, during this intensive period they devote
themselves almost exclusively to the practice of sitting meditation. The
numerous 30‚Äì50 minute long meditation periods are interleaved with short rest
breaks, meals, and sometimes, short periods of work should be performed with
the same mindfulness; nightly sleep is kept to a minimum: 7 hours or less. In
modern Buddhist practice in Japan, Taiwan, and the West, lay students often
attend these intensive practice sessions, which are typically 1, 3, 5, or 7
days in length. These are held at many Zen centers, especially in commemoration
of the Buddha's attainment of "AnuttarƒÅ Samyaksa·πÉbodhi". One distinctive
aspect of Zen meditation in groups is the use of a flat wooden slat used to
keep meditators focused and awake. K≈çan practice. At the beginning of the Song
Dynasty, practice with the k≈çan method became popular, whereas others
practiced "silent illumination." This became the source of some differences in
practice between the Linji and Caodong traditions. A k≈çan, literally "public
case", is a story or dialogue, describing an interaction between a Zen master
and a student. These anecdotes give a demonstration of the master's insight.
Koans emphasize the non-conceptional insight that the Buddhist teachings are
pointing to. Koans can be used to provoke the "great doubt", and test a
student's progress in Zen practice. Today, the Zen student's mastery of a given
k≈çan is presented to the teacher in a private interview (referred to in
Japanese as dokusan (Áã¨ÂèÇ), daisan (‰ª£ÂèÇ), or sanzen (ÂèÇÁ¶Ö)). Zen
teachers advise that the problem posed by a k≈çan is to be taken quite
seriously, and to be approached as literally a matter of life and death. While
there is no unique answer to a k≈çan, practitioners are expected to demonstrate
their understanding of the k≈çan and of Zen through their responses. The
teacher may approve or disapprove of the answer and guide the student in the
right direction. There are also various commentaries on k≈çans, written by
experienced teachers, that can serve as a guide. These commentaries are also of
great value to modern scholarship on the subject. K≈çan-inquiry may be
practiced during sitting meditation ("zazen"), walking meditation ("kinhin"),
and throughout all the activities of daily life. K≈çan practice is particularly
emphasized by the Japanese Rinzai school, but it also occurs in other schools
or branches of Zen depending on the teaching line. Interaction with a teacher.
Yet, it is this same accent on interaction which makes Zen-practice, at least
in the west, also vulnerable to misunderstanding and exploitation. Zen chanting
and liturgy. A practice in many Zen monasteries and centers is a daily liturgy
service. Practitioners chant major sutras such as the Heart Sutra, chapter 25
of the Lotus Sutra (often called the "Avalokiteshvara Sutra"), the Song of the
Jewel Mirror Awareness, the Great Compassionate Heart Dharani (Daihishin
Dharani), and other minor mantras. The Butsudan is the altar in a monastery
where offerings are made to the images of the Buddha or Bodhisattvas. The same
term is also used in Japanese homes for the altar where one prays to and
communicates with deceased family members. As such, reciting liturgy in Zen can
be seen as a means to connect with the Bodhisattvas of the past. Liturgy is
often used during funerals, memorials, and other special events as means to
invoke the aid of supernatural powers. Chanting usually centers on major
Bodhisattvas like Avalokiteshvara (see also Guan Yin) and Manjusri. According
to Mahayana Buddhism, Bodhisattvas are beings who have taken vows to remain in
Samsara to help all beings achieve liberation from the cycle of birth, death
and rebirth. Since the Zen practitioner's aim is to walk the Bodhisattva path,
chanting can be used as a means to connect with these beings and realize this
ideal within oneself. By repeatedly chanting the (chapter 25 of the Lotus
Sutra), for example, one instills the Bodhisattva's ideals into ones mind. The
ultimate goal is given in the end of the sutra, which states, "In the morning,
be one with Avalokiteshvara; in the evening, be one with Avalokiteshvara".
Through the realization of emptiness and the Mahayana notion that all things
have Buddha-nature, one understands that there is no difference between the
cosmic bodhisattva and oneself. The wisdom and compassion of the Bodhisattva
one is chanting to is seen to equal the inner wisdom and compassion of the
practitioner. Thus, the duality between subject and object, practitioner and
Bodhisattva, chanter and sutra is ended. Lay services. Though in western Zen
the emphasis is on zen-meditation, and the application of Zen-teachings in
daily life, Japanese Zen also serves a function in public religion. Funerals
play an important role as a point of contact between the monks and the laity.
Statistics published by the S≈çt≈ç school state that 80 percent of S≈çt≈ç
laymen visit their temple only for reasons having to do with funerals and
death, while only 17 percent visit for spiritual reasons and a mere 3 percent
visit a Zen priest at a time of personal trouble or crisis. Zen organisation
and institutions. Religion is not only an individual matter, but "also a
collective endeavour". Though individual experience and the iconoclastic
picture of Zen are emphasised in the western world, the Zen-tradition is
maintained and transferred by a high degree of institutionalisation. In Japan,
modernity has led to criticism of the formal system and the commensement of
lay-oriented Zen-schools such as the Sanbo Kyodan and the Ningen Zen Kyodan.
How to organize the continuity of the Zen-tradition in the west, constraining
charismatic authority and the derailment it may bring on the one hand, and
maintaining the legitimacy and authority by limiting the number of authorized
teachers on the other hand, is a challenge for the developing Zen-communities
in the west. Temple-training. Since the East Mountain Teaching, Zen has
centered on monastic life. In modern Soto and Rinzai, monasteries serve as
training facilities to educate Zen priests, most of whom move on to run their
own temple. Japanese laity has been allowed to participate in Zen training only
since the Meiji Restoration. Japanese Soto and Rinzai are organized in a system
of head-temples and sub-temples. Soto. The two head temples or of the S≈çt≈ç
sect are Eihei-ji and S≈çji-ji. While Eihei-ji owes its existence to D≈çgen,
throughout history this head temple has had significantly fewer sub-temple
affiliates than the S≈çji-ji. During the Tokugawa period, Eiheiji had
approximately 1,300 affiliate temples compared to S≈çji-ji's 16,200.
Furthermore, out of the more than 14,000 temples of the S≈çt≈ç sect today,
13,850 of those identify themselves as affiliates of S≈çji-ji. Additionally,
most of the some 148 temples that are affiliates of Eiheiji today are only
minor temples located in Hokkaido‚Äî founded during a period of colonization
during the Meiji period. Therefore, it is often said that Eiheiji is a head
temple only in the sense that it is "head of all S≈çt≈ç dharma lineages. Dharma
transmission. In the western understanding, dharma transmission is primarily
the affirmation of awakening by a teacher. But is also part of the continuation
and maintanance of Zen-institutions. Function of Dharma Transmission. Esoteric
and exoteric transmission. According to Borup the emphasis on 'mind to mind
transmission' is a form of esoteric transmission, in which "the tradition and
the enlightened mind is transmitted face to face". Metaphorically this can be
described as the transmission from a flame from one candle to another candle,
or the transmission from one vein to another. Exoteric transmission requires
"direct access to the teaching through a personal discovery of one's self. This
type of transmission and identification is symbolized by the discovery of a
shining lantern, or a mirror." This polarity is recognizable in the emphasis
that the Zen-tradition puts on maintaining the correct Dharma transmission,
while simultaneously stressing seeing into one's nature. Seeing one's nature
gives an autonomous confirmation of Zen's ultimate truth, which may conflict
with the need to maintain institutions and traditions. Family structure. The
family-model is easier recognized when East Asian languages are being used,
because the same terminology is used to describe both earthly and spiritual
family relations. Contemporary use of Dharma transmission. In Soto, dharma
transmission establishes a lifelong relation between teacher and student. To
qualify as a Zen priest, further training is required. In Rinzai, the most
common form of transmission is the acknowledgement that one has stayed in the
monastery for a certain amount of time, and may later become a temple priest.
The common transmission does not include "inka sh≈çmei", which is being used
for the transmission of the "true lineage" of the masters ("shike") of the
training halls. Training halls are temples which are authorised for further
training after being qualified as a temple priest. There are only about fifty
to a hundred of such "inka sh≈çmei"-bearers in Japan. Although the formal
transmission of the dharma-lineage, from Shakyamuni Buddha to the present day,
is preserved in this way, it is also seen as problematical in contemporary Zen.
Self-awakening. The Zen tradition has always stressed the importance of formal
Dharma transmission, but there are indeed well known examples of Mushi dokugo,
self-awakening, such as N≈çnin, Jinul and Suzuki Sh≈çsan who attained awakening
on their own, though all of them were familiair with the Zen-teachings. Zen
Universities. Both Soto and Rinzai have educational institutions, such as
Komazawa University and Hanazono University, which stand in strong competition.
Several Zen-teachers known in the west have studied there, such as Shohaku
Okumura and Keido Fukushima. The Kyoto University was the centre of activities
for the Kyoto School, to which belong Keiji Nishitani and Masao Abe.
Organization of Western Zen. Western Zen is mainly a lay-movement, though
grounded in formal lineages. Its Japanese background is in mainly lay-oriented
new religious movements, especially the Sanbo Kyodan. Though a number of zen-
buddhist monasteries exist in the western world, most practice takes place in
Zen centers throughout the western world. Kon√© sees three issues in the
emerging western Zen tradition: sustainability, legitimicay, and authority. A
recurrent issue has been the reliance on charismatic authority and the
resulting teacher scandals. Sandra Bell has analysed the scandals at Vajradhatu
and the San Francisco Zen Center and concluded that these kinds of scandals are
Robert Sharf also mentions charisma from which institutional power is derived,
and the need to balance charismatic authority with institutional authority.
Elaborate analyses of these scandals are made by Stuart Lachs, who mentions the
uncritical acceptance of religious narratives, such as lineages and dharma
transmission, which aid in giving uncritical charismatic powers to teachers and
leaders. The scandals eventually lead to rules of conduct by the American Zen
Teachers Association, and the reorganising of Zen Centers, to spread the
management of those centers over a wider group of people and diminish the role
of charismatic authority. Another affect was the split in various Zen
organisations, such as Robert Aitken leaving the Sanbo Kyodan, and Joko Beck
leaving the White Plum Sangha. Zen Narratives. Modern scientific research on
the history of Zen discerns three main narratives concerning Zen, its history
and its teachings: Traditional Zen Narrative (TZN), Buddhist Modernism (BM),
Historical and Cultural Criticism (HCC). Traditional Zen Narrative (TZN). The
Traditional Zen Narrative developed in phases in China during the Tang Dynasty
and the beginning of the Song Dynasty, from the 7th to 11th century. It became
dominant during the Song Dynasty, when Ch√°n was the dominant form of Buddhism
in China, due to support from the Emperial Court. Its main phases were the
development of the traditional Chan lineage, culminating in the "Transmission
of the Lamp"-genre, the encounter dialogue culminating in the k≈çan
collections, and the "climax-paradigm of the Song period, when Chan became the
dominant Buddhist school in China. Buddhist Modernism (BM). In the 20th century
the Traditional Zen Narrative was transformed into a modern narrative, due to
the power of the Western colonial forces and the modernisation of Japan, and
the popularization in the Western world. Historical and Cultural Criticism
(HCC). Contemporary research on Buddhism has shed new light on the history of
Chan and Zen. Since the 1960s the scientific research on Zen has created
another narrative of Zen. The "grand saga" of Zen appears not to be an accurate
historical documentation, but a skillfully created narrative, meant to lend
authority to the Zen school. The consequences of this critical narrative seem
hardly to be recognized in the Western world. Charismatic authority. The
introduction of Zen in the West has been accompanied by problems which seem to
be connected to this "grand saga". The teacher scandals which have occurred in
Western Zen have been explained as being caused by an overreliance on
charismatic authority, and a misinterpretation of the meaning of dharma
transmission and the position of a roshi. In Western Zen dharma transmission is
highly esteemed. In the Japanese monastery system dharma transmission is a
formal notification that someone is fully qualified to take a leading role in
this system In the USA and Europe dharma transmission is linked to the
unofficial title roshi, older teacher. In the Western world roshis have been
given an archetypal status as "wise old man", someone who has realized an
infallible insight into the true self, and a perfect personality. In daily life
this appears to be an idealized view, give the repeated cases of abuse of
power, and financial and sexual misbehaviour. The dependence on charismatic
authority and lack of central authority may also lead to fragmentarisation and
"new sects spinning off in several directions". Zen and World War II. Japanese
Zen organisations supported Japanese nationalism and its endeavours during the
Pacific War. This support has been made widely known in the Western world by
Brian Victoria in his groundbreaking study Zen at War, though in Japan this was
already more common knowledge. D.T. Suzuki too supported these endeavours. This
Japanese nationalism, and the "Japanese uniqueness" was also a reaction to
perceived western imperialism during the 19th century. Further reading. Modern
classics "Overview" "Formation of Ch√°n in Tang & Song China" "Japan" "Modern
times" Contemporary practice
