Zionism Zionism (, "Tsiyonut") is a form of nationalism of Jews and Jewish
culture that supports a Jewish nation state in territory defined as the Land of
Israel. Zionism supports Jews upholding their Jewish identity and opposes the
assimilation of Jews into other societies and has advocated the return of Jews
to Israel as a means for Jews to be liberated from anti-Semitic discrimination,
exclusion, and persecution that has occurred in other societies. Since the
establishment of the State of Israel, the Zionist movement continues primarily
to advocate on behalf of the Jewish state and address threats to its continued
existence and security. In a less common usage, the term may also refer to non-
political, cultural Zionism, founded and represented most prominently by Ahad
Ha'am; and political support for the State of Israel by non-Jews, as in
Christian Zionism. Critics of Zionism consider it a colonialist or racist
movement. Some scholars consider certain forms of opposition to Zionism to
constitute Antisemitism. Overview. The common denominator among all Zionists is
the claim to Eretz Israel as the national homeland of the Jews and as the
legitimate focus for the Jewish national self-determination (as shown, among
others, by Gideon Shimoni). It is based on historical ties and religious
traditions linking the Jewish people to the Land of Israel. Zionism does not
have a uniform ideology, but has evolved in a dialogue among a plethora of
ideologies: General Zionism, Religious Zionism, Labor Zionism, Revisionist
Zionism, Green Zionism, etc. After almost two millennia of existence of the
Jewish diaspora without a national state, the Zionist movement was founded in
the late 19th century by secular Jews, largely as a response by Ashkenazi Jews
to rising antisemitism in Europe, exemplified by the Dreyfus affair in France
and the Anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian Empire. The political movement was
formally established by the Austro-Hungarian journalist Theodor Herzl in 1897
following the publication of his book "Der Judenstaat". At that time, the
movement sought to encourage Jewish migration to the Ottoman Palestine.
Although initially one of several Jewish political movements offering
alternative responses to assimilation and antisemitism, Zionism grew rapidly
and became the dominant force in Jewish politics with the destruction of Jewish
life in Central and Eastern Europe where these alternative movements were
rooted. The movement was eventually successful in establishing Israel on May
14, 1948 (5 Iyyar 5708 in the Hebrew calendar), as the homeland for the Jewish
people. The proportion of the world's Jews living in Israel has also steadily
grown since the movement came into existence and over 40% of the world's Jews
now live in Israel, more than in any other country. These two outcomes
represent the historical success of Zionism, unmatched by any other Jewish
political movement in the past 2,000 years. In some academic studies, Zionism
has been analyzed both within the larger context of diaspora politics and as an
example of modern national liberation movements. Zionism was also directed at
assimilation into the modern world. As a result of the Diaspora, many of the
Jewish people were outcasts and had no knowledge of the modern era. There were
Jews who desired complete assimilation and were willing to neglect their faith
in an attempt at modernization. The assimilationists, who are depicted as truly
messianic, were a radical group in Jewish history. They desired a pure
revolution: a complete integration of Jews into European society. This would
dispel any dissimilarity between Jews and non-Jews. They are described as
messianic in their anticipation and desire of a new era. Assimilationists were
not concerned with keeping their own identity but wanted homogeneity. They
would disband their traditional views and opinions as long as it insured
complete assimilation into the modern world. Another less radical form of
assimilation was called cultural synthesis. Those in favor of cultural
synthesis emphasized an obligation to maintain traditional Jewish values but
also a need to conform to a modernist society. They are described as defensive
and sought to reject the pure revolution that the assimilationists promoted.
They aimed to eradicate any disparity between Jewish and modern life. However
(in contrast with assimilationists), they also wanted to preserve their own
faith and many of their traditional values. They were concerned that if Jews
lost their identification, the result would be detrimental. Those in favor of
cultural synthesis desired a balance between change and continuity as opposed
to the assimilationists who only wanted change. In 1975, the United Nations
General Assembly passed a resolution that designated Zionism as "a form of
racism and racial discrimination". The resolution was repealed in 1991. Within
the context of the Arabâ€“Israeli conflict, Zionism is viewed by critics as a
system that fosters apartheid and racism. Terminology. The term "Zionism"
itself is derived from the word Zion (), referring to Jerusalem. Throughout
eastern Europe at the time, there were numerous grassroots groups promoting the
national resettlement of the Jews in what was termed their "ancestral
homeland", as well as the revitalization and cultivation of Hebrew. These
groups were collectively called the "Lovers of Zion." The first use of the term
is attributed to the Austrian Nathan Birnbaum, founder of a nationalist Jewish
students' movement "Kadimah", who used the term in his journal
"Selbstemanzipation" ("Self Emancipation") . Readings of the founders of
Zionism shows that they lived in the same Europe which spawned fascism and
Naziism, and they adopted the anti-Jewish view that Jews did not belong in
Europe as the core of their ideology. Organization. The multi-national,
worldwide Zionist movement is structured on representative democratic
principles. Congresses are held every four years (they were held every two
years before the Second World War) and delegates to the congress are elected by
the membership. Members are required to pay dues known as a "shekel". At the
congress, delegates elect a 30-man executive council, which in turn elects the
movement's leader. The movement was democratic from its inception and women had
the right to vote. Until 1917, the World Zionist Organization pursued a
strategy of building a Jewish National Home through persistent small-scale
immigration and the founding of such bodies as the Jewish National Fund
(1901Â â€” a charity that bought land for Jewish settlement) and the Anglo-
Palestine Bank (1903Â â€” provided loans for Jewish businesses and farmers). In
1942, at the Biltmore Conference, the movement included for the first time an
express objective of the establishment of a Jewish state in the Land of Israel.
Since the creation of modern Israel, the role of the movement has declined and
it is now a peripheral factor in Israeli politics, though different perceptions
of Zionism continue to play a role in Israeli and Jewish political discussion.
Labor Zionism. Labor Zionism originated in Eastern Europe. Socialist Zionists
believed that centuries of oppression in antisemitic societies had reduced Jews
to a meek, vulnerable, despairing existence that invited further antisemitism,
a view originally stipulated by Theodor Herzl. They argued that a revolution of
the Jewish soul and society was necessary and achievable in part by Jews moving
to Israel and becoming farmers, workers, and soldiers in a country of their
own. Most socialist Zionists rejected the observance of traditional religious
Judaism as perpetuating a "Diaspora mentality" among the Jewish people, and
established rural communes in Israel called "kibbutzim". The kibbutz began as a
variation on a "national farm" scheme, a form of cooperative agriculture where
the Jewish National Fund hired Jewish workers under trained supervision. The
kibbutzim were a symbol of the Second Aliya in that they put great emphasis on
communalism and egalitarianism, representing to a certain extent Utopian
socialism. Furthermore, they stressed self-sufficiency, which became an
important aspect of Labor Zionism. Though socialist Zionism draws its
inspiration and is philosophically founded on the fundamental values and
spirituality of Judaism, its progressive expression of that Judaism has often
fostered an antagonistic relationship with Orthodox Judaism. Labor Zionism
became the dominant force in the political and economic life of the Yishuv
during the British Mandate of Palestine and was the dominant ideology of the
political establishment in Israel until the 1977 election when the Israeli
Labor Party was defeated. The Israeli Labor Party continues the tradition,
although the most popular party in the kibbutzim is Meretz. Labor Zionism's
main institution is the Histadrut, which began by providing strikebreakers
against a Palestinian worker's strike in 1920 and is now the largest employer
in Israel after the Israeli government. Liberal Zionism. General Zionism (or
Liberal Zionism) was initially the dominant trend within the Zionist movement
from the First Zionist Congress in 1897 until after the First World War.
General Zionists identified with the liberal European middle class to which
many Zionist leaders such as Herzl and Chaim Weizmann aspired. Liberal Zionism,
although not associated with any single party in modern Israel, remains a
strong trend in Israeli politics advocating free market principles, democracy
and adherence to human rights. Kadima, however, does identify with many of the
fundamental policies of Liberal Zionist ideology, advocating among other things
the need for Palestinian statehood in order to form a more democratic society
in Israel, affirming the free market, and calling for equal rights for Arab
citizens of Israel. Nationalist Zionism. Nationalist Zionism originated from
the Revisionist Zionists led by Jabotinsky. The Revisionists left the World
Zionist Organization in 1935 because it refused to state that the creation of a
Jewish state was an objective of Zionism. The revisionists advocated the
formation of a Jewish Army in Palestine to force the Arab population to accept
mass Jewish migration. Revisionist Zionism evolved into the Likud Party in
Israel, which has dominated most governments since 1977. It advocates that
Israel maintain control of the West Bank and East Jerusalem, and takes a hard-
line approach in the Israeli-Arab conflict. In 2005 the Likud split over the
issue of creation of a Palestinian state on the occupied territories, and party
members advocating peace talks helped form the Kadima party. Religious Zionism.
In the 1920s and 1930s Rabbi Abraham Isaac Kook (the first Chief Rabbi of
Palestine) and his son Rabbi Zevi Judah Kook saw great religious and
traditional value in many of Zionism's ideals, while rejecting its anti-
religious undertones. They taught that Orthodox (Torah) Judaism embraces and
mandates Zionism's positive ideals, such as the ingathering of exiles, and
political activity to create and maintain a Jewish political entity in the Land
of Israel. In this way, Zionism serves as a bridge between Orthodox and secular
Jews. While other Zionist groups tended to moderate their nationalism over
time, the gains from the Six-Day War have led religious Zionism to play a
significant role in Israeli political life. Now associated with the National
Religious Party and Gush Emunim, religious Zionists have been at the forefront
of Jewish settlement in the West Bank and efforts to assert Jewish control over
the Old City of Jerusalem. Green Zionism. Green Zionism is a branch of Zionism
primarily concerned with the environment of Israel. The only environmental
Zionist party is the Green Zionist Alliance. Neo-Zionism and Post-Zionism. Neo-
Zionism and post-Zionism share traits with "classical" Zionism but differ by
accentuating antagonist and diametrically opposed poles already present in
Zionism. "Neo Zionism accentuates the messianic and particularistic dimensions
of Zionist nationalism, while post-Zionism accentuates its normalising and
universalistic dimensions". Post-Zionism asserts that Israel should abandon the
concept of a "state of the Jewish people" and strive to be a state of all its
citizens, or a binational state where Arabs and Jews live together while
enjoying some type of autonomy. Zionism and Haredi Judaism. Most Haredi
Orthodox organizations do not belong to the Zionist movement; they view Zionism
as secular, reject nationalism as a doctrine and consider Judaism to be first
and foremost a religion. However, some Haredi movements such as Shas do openly
affiliate with the Zionist movement. Haredi rabbis do not consider Israel to be
a halachic Jewish state because it is secular. However, they generally consider
themselves responsible for ensuring that Jews maintain religious ideals and
since most Israeli citizens are Jews they pursue this agenda within Israel.
Others reject any possibility of a Jewish state, since according to them a
Jewish state is completely forbidden by Jewish law, and a Jewish state is
considered an oxymoron. Two Haredi parties run in Israeli elections. They are
sometimes associated with views that could be regarded as nationalist or
Zionist, and have shown a preference for coalitions with more nationalist
Zionist parties, probably because these are more interested in enhancing the
Jewish nature of the Israeli state. The Sephardi-Orthodox party Shas rejected
association with the Zionist movement, however in 2010 it joined the World
Zionist Organization, its voters also generally regard themselves as Zionist
and Knesset members frequently pursue what others might consider a Zionist
agenda. Shas has supported territorial compromise with the Arabs and
Palestinians but generally opposes compromise over Jewish holy sites. The non-
Hasidic or 'Lithuanian' Haredi Ashkenazi world is represented by the Ashkenazi
Agudat Israel/UTJ party has always avoided association with the Zionist
movement and usually avoids voting on or discussing issues related to peace
because its members do not serve in the army. The party does work towards
ensuring that Israel and Israeli law are in tune with the halacha, on issues
such as Shabbat rest. The rabbinical leaders of the so-called Litvishe world in
current and past generations, such as Rabbi Elazar Menachem Shach and Rabbi
Avigdor Miller, are strongly opposed to all forms of Zionism, religious and
secular, but allow for slight cooperation in the form of participating in
Israeli political life, including both passive and active participation in
elections. Many other Hasidic groups, most famously the Satmar Hasidim as well
as the larger movement they are part of in Jerusalem, the Edah HaChareidis, are
strongly anti-Zionist. One of the best known Hasidic opponent of all forms of
modern political Zionism was Hungarian rebbe and Talmudic scholar Joel
Teitelbaum. In his view, the current State of Israel, which was founded by
people that included some anti-religious personalities in seeming violation of
the traditional notion that Jews should wait for the Jewish Messiah, is seen as
contrary to Judaism. The core citations from classical Judaic sources cited by
Teitelbaum in his arguments against modern Zionism are based on a passage in
the Talmud, Rabbi Yosi b'Rebbi Hanina explains (Kesubos 111a) that the Lord
imposed "Three Oaths" on the nation of Israel: a) Israel should not return to
the Land together, by force; b) Israel should not rebel against the other
nations; and c) The nations should not subjugate Israel too harshly. According
to Teitelbaum, the second oath is relevant concerning the subsequent wars
fought between Israel and Arab nations. Other opponent groups included in the
Edah HaChareidis include Dushinsky, Toldos Aharon, Toldos Avrohom Yitzchok,
Spinka, and others, numbering tens of thousands in Jerusalem, and hundreds of
thousands worldwide. The Neturei Karta, an orthodox Haredi religious movement,
strongly oppose Zionism and Israel; it considers the latter a racist regime.
The movement equates Zionism to Nazism, stating "Apart from the Zionists, the
only ones who consistently considered the Jews a race were the Nazis." Naturei
Carta believes that Zionist ideology is totally contrary to traditional Jewish
law and beliefs and the teachings of the Holy Torah and that Zionism promotes
antisemitism. The Chabad-Lubavitch Hasidic movement has traditionally not
identified itself as Zionist, although in recent years it has adopted a
nationalist agenda and opposed any territorial compromise. Particularities of
Zionist beliefs. Zionism was established with the goal of creating a Jewish
state. Though later Zionist leaders hoped to create a Jewish state in Eretz
Yisrael, Theodor Herzl "approached Great Britain about possible Jewish
settlement in that country's East African colonies." Aliyah (migration,
literally "ascent") to the Land of Israel is a recurring theme in Jewish
prayers. Some Zionists consider Jews outside of Israel as living in exile.
Rejection of life in the Diaspora is a central assumption in Zionism.
Underlying this attitude is the feeling that the Diaspora restricts the full
growth of Jewish individual and national life. Zionists generally preferred to
speak Hebrew, a Semitic language that developed under conditions of freedom in
ancient Judah, modernizing and adapting it for everyday use. Zionists sometimes
refused to speak Yiddish, a language they considered affected by Christian
persecution. Once they moved to Israel, many Zionists refused to speak their
(diasporic) mother tongues and gave themselves new, Hebrew names. Hebrew was
preferred not only for ideological reasons, but also because it allowed members
of the new Yishuv who came from different parts of the world to have a common
language, thus furthering the political and cultural bonds between Zionists.
Zionism is dedicated to fighting antisemitism. Some Zionists believe
antisemitism will never disappear (and that Jews must conduct themselves with
this in mind), while others perceive Zionism as a vehicle with which to end
antisemitism. History. Since the first centuries CE most Jews have lived
outside Land of Israel (Eretz Israel, better known as Palestine by non-Jews),
although there has been a constant presence of Jews. According to Judaism,
Eretz Israel is a land promised to the Jews by God according to the Bible. The
Diaspora began in 586 BCE during the Babylonian occupation of Israel. The
Babylonians destroyed the First Temple, which was central to Jewish culture at
the time. After the 1st century Great Revolt and the 2nd century Bar Kokhba
revolt, the Romans expelled the Jews from Judea, changing the name to "Syria
Palaestina." The Bar Kokhba revolt caused a spike in anti-Semitism and Jewish
persecution. The ensuing exile from Judea greatly increased the percent of Jews
who were dispersed throughout the Diaspora instead of living in their original
home. Zion is a hill near Jerusalem (now in the city), widely symbolizing the
Land of Israel. In the middle of the sixteenth century Joseph Nasi, with the
support of the Ottoman Empire, tried to gather the Portuguese Jews, first to
Cyprus, then owned by the Republic of Venice and later to Tiberias. This was
the only practical attempt to establish some sort of Jewish political center in
Palestine between the fourth and 19th centuries. In the seventeenth century
Sabbatai Zebi (1626â€“1676) announced himself as the Messias and gained over
many Jews to his side, forming a base in Salonica. He first tried to establish
a settlement in Gaza, but moved later to Smyrna. After deposing the old rabbi
Aaron Lapapa even the Jewish community of Avignon prepared to emigrate to the
new kingdom in the spring of 1666. The readiness of the Jews of the time to
believe the messianic claims of Sabbatai Zevi may be largely explained by the
desperate state of European Jewry in the mid-17th century. The bloody pogroms
of Bohdan Khmelnytsky had wiped out one third of the Jewish population and
destroyed many centers of Jewish learning and communal life. Finally, he was
forced by the Ottoman Sultan Mehmed IV to visit him and, to the surprise of his
followers, in the presence of the Sultan he converted to Islam. In the 19th
century, a current in Judaism supporting a return to Zion grew in popularity,
particularly in Europe, where antisemitism and hostility towards Jews were also
growing, although this idea was rejected by the conferences of rabbis held in
that epoch. Nonetheless, individual efforts supported the emigration of groups
of Jews to Palestine, pre-Zionist Aliyah, even before 1897, the year considered
as the start of practical Zionism. The Reformed Jews rejected this idea of a
return to Zion. The conference of rabbis, at Frankfurt am Main, July 15â€“28,
1845, deleted from the ritual all prayers for a return to Zion and a
restoration of a Jewish state. The Philadelphia conference, 1869, followed the
lead of the German rabbis and decreed that the Messianic hope of Israel is "the
union of all the children of God in the confession of the unity of God". The
Pittsburg conference, 1885, reiterated this Messianic idea of reformed Judaism,
expressing in a resolution that "we consider ourselves no longer a nation, but
a religious community; and we therefore expect neither a return to Palestine,
nor a sacrificial worship under the sons of Aaron, nor the restoration of any
of the laws concerning a Jewish state". Jewish settlements were established in
the upper Mississippi region by W.D. Robinson in 1819 and near Jerusalem, by
the American Consul Warder Cresson, a convert to Judaism, in 1850. Before he
succeeded, he was tried and condemned for lunacy in a suit brought forward by
his own wife and son; after winning a second trial he established a colony in
the Valley of Rephaim, where he hoped to "prevent any attempts being made to
take advantage of the necessities of our poor brethrenÂ ... (that would)Â ...
FORCE them into a pretended conversion." Similar efforts were made in Prague,
by Abraham Benisch and Moritz Steinschneider in 1835. Sir Moses Montefiore,
famous for his intervention in favor of Jews around the world, including the
attempt to rescue Edgardo Mortara, established a colony for Jews in Palestine.
In 1854, his friend Judah Touro bequeathed money to fund Jewish residential
settlement in Palestine. Montefiore was appointed executor of his will, and
used the funds for a variety of projects, including building in 1860 the first
Jewish residential settlement and almshouse outside of the old walled city of
JerusalemÂ â€” today known as Mishkenot Sha'ananim. Laurence Oliphant failed in
a like attempt to bring to Palestine the Jewish proletariat of Poland,
Lithuania, Romania, and the Turkish Empire (1879 and 1882). The official
beginning of the construction of the New Yishuv in Palestine is usually dated
back to the arrival of the Bilu group in 1882, which commenced the First
Aliyah. In the following years, Jewish immigration to Palestine started in
earnest. Most immigrants came from Russia, escaping the frequent pogroms and
state-led persecution. They founded a number of agricultural settlements with
financial support from Jewish philanthropists in Western Europe. Further
Aliyahs followed the Russian Revolution and Nazi persecution. However, at the
end of the XIX century, Jews still were a minority in Palestina. In the 1890s,
Theodor Herzl infused Zionism with a new ideology and practical urgency,
leading to the First Zionist Congress at Basel in 1897, which created the World
Zionist Organization (WZO). Herzl's aim was to initiate necessary preparatory
steps for the attainment of a Jewish state. Herzl's attempts to reach a
political agreement with the Ottoman rulers of Palestine were unsuccessful and
other governmental support was sought. The WZO supported small-scale settlement
in Palestine and focused on strengthening Jewish feeling and consciousness and
on building a worldwide federation. The Russian Empire, with its long record of
state organized genocide and ethnic cleansing ("pogroms") was widely regarded
as the historic enemy of the Jewish people. As much of its leadership were
German speakers, the Zionist movement's headquarters were located in Berlin. At
the start of World War I, most Jews (and Zionists) supported Germany in its war
with Russia. Lobbying by a Russian Jewish immigrant, Chaim Weizmann and fear
that American Jews would encourage the USA to support Germany culminated in the
Balfour Declaration of 1917 by the British government (the Zionist congress had
decided already by 1903 to decline an offer by the British to establish a
homeland in Uganda). This endorsed the creation of a Jewish Homeland in
Palestine. In addition, a Zionist military corps led by Jabotinsky were
recruited to fight on behalf of Britain in Palestine. Weizmann's role in
obtaining the Balfour Declaration led to his election as the movement's leader.
He remained in that role until 1948 and then became the first President of
Israel. Jewish migration to Palestine and widespread Jewish land purchases from
feudal landlords led to landlessness and fueled unrestÂ â€” often led by the
same landlords who sold the land. There were riots in 1920, 1921 and 1929,
sometimes accompanied by massacres of Jews The victims were usually from the
non-Zionist Haredi Jewish communities in the Four Holy Cities. Britain
supported Jewish immigration in principle, but in reaction to Arab violence
imposed restrictions. In 1933, Hitler came to power in Germany, and in 1935 the
Nuremberg Laws made German Jews (and later Austrian and Czech Jews) stateless
refugees. Similar rules were applied by the many Nazi allies in Europe. The
subsequent growth in Jewish migration and impact of Nazi propaganda aimed at
the Arab world led to the 1936â€“1939 Arab revolt in Palestine. Britain
established the Peel Commission to investigate the situation. The commission
did not consider the situation of Jews in Europe, but called for a two-state
solution and compulsory transfer of populations. Britain rejected this solution
and instead implemented White Paper of 1939. This planned to end Jewish
immigration by 1944 and to allow no more than 75,000 further Jewish migrants.
This was disastrous to European Jews already being gravely discriminated
against and in need of a place to seek refuge. The British maintained this
policy until the end of the Mandate. Growth of the Jewish community in
Palestine and devastation of European Jewish life sidelined the World Zionist
Organization. The Jewish Agency for Palestine under the leadership of David
Ben-Gurion increasingly dictated policy with support from American Zionists who
provided funding and influence in Washington, D.C., including via the highly
effective American Palestine Committee. After World War II and the Holocaust, a
massive wave of stateless Jews, mainly Holocaust survivors, began migrating to
Palestine in small boats in defiance of British rules. The Holocaust united
much of the rest of world Jewry behind the Zionist project. The British either
imprisoned these Jews in Cyprus (including many orphaned children) or sent them
to the British-controlled Allied Occupation Zones in Germany. This resulted in
universal Jewish support for Zionism and the refusal of the U.S. Congress to
grant economic aid to Britain. In addition, Zionist groups attacked the British
in Palestine and, with its empire facing bankruptcy, Britain was forced to
refer the issue to the newly created United Nations. In 1947, the United
Nations Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP) recommended that western
Palestine should be partitioned into a Jewish state, an Arab state and a UN-
controlled territory, "Corpus separatum", around Jerusalem. This partition plan
was adopted on November 29, 1947 with UN GA Resolution 181, 33 votes in favor,
13 against, and 10 abstentions. The vote led to celebrations in the streets of
Jewish cities. However, the Palestinian Arabs and the Arab states rejected the
UN decision, demanding a single state and removal of Jewish migrants, leading
to the 1948 Arabâ€“Israeli War. On May 14, 1948, at the end of the British
mandate, the Jewish Agency, led by David Ben-Gurion, declared the creation of
the State of Israel, and the same day the armies of seven Arab countries
invaded Israel. The conflict led to an exodus of about 711,000 Arab
Palestinians, known to Palestinians as Al Nakba (the "catastrophe"), and the
exodus of 850,000 Jews from the Arab world, mostly to Israel. Later, a series
of laws passed by the first Israeli government prevented Palestinians from
returning to their homes, or claiming their property. They and many of their
descendants remain refugees. The expulsion of the Palestinians has since been
widely, and controversially, described as having involved "ethnic cleansing".
Since the creation of the State of Israel, the World Zionist Organization has
functioned mainly as an organization dedicated to assisting and encouraging
Jews to migrate to Israel. It has provided political support for Israel in
other countries but plays little role in internal Israeli politics. The
movement's major success since 1948 was in providing logistical support for
migrating Jews and, most importantly, in assisting Soviet Jews in their
struggle with the authorities over the right to leave the USSR and to practice
their religion in freedom. Non-Jewish support for Zionism. Political support
for the Jewish return to the Land of Israel predates the formal organization of
Jewish Zionism as a political movement. In the 19th century, advocates of the
Restoration of the Jews to the Holy Land were called Restorationists. The
return of the Jews to the Holy Land was widely supported by such eminent
figures as Queen Victoria, Napoleon Bonaparte, King Edward VII, President John
Adams of the United States, General Smuts of South Africa, President Masaryk of
Czechoslovakia, philosopher and historian Benedetto Croce from Italy, Henry
Dunant (founder of the Red Cross and author of the Geneva Conventions), and
scientist and humanitarian Fridtjof Nansen from Norway. The French government
through Minister M. Cambon formally committed itself to "...Â the renaissance
of the Jewish nationality in that Land from which the people of Israel were
exiled so many centuries ago." In China, top figures of the Nationalist
government, including Sun Yat-sen, expressed their sympathy with the
aspirations of the Jewish people for a National Home. Christians supporting
Zionism. Some Christians have actively supported the return of Jews to
Palestine even prior to Zionism, as well as subsequently. One of the principal
Protestant teachers who promoted the biblical doctrine that the Jews would
return to their national homeland was John Nelson Darby. He is credited with
being the major promoter of the idea following his 11 lectures on the hopes of
the church, the Jew and the gentile given in Geneva in 1840. His views were
embraced by many evangelicals and also affected international foreign policy.
Notable early supporters of Zionism include British Prime Ministers David Lloyd
George and Arthur Balfour, American President Woodrow Wilson and British Major-
General Orde Wingate, whose activities in support of Zionism led the British
Army to ban him from ever serving in Palestine. According to Charles Merkley of
Carleton University, Christian Zionism strengthened significantly after the
Six-Day War of 1967, and many dispensationalist Christians, especially in the
United States, now strongly support Zionism. The founder of Latter Day Saint
movement, Joseph Smith, Jr., in his last years alive, declared "the time for
Jews to return to the land of Israel is now." In 1842, Smith sent Orson Hyde,
an Apostle of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, to Jerusalem to
dedicate the land for the return of the Jews. Some Arab Christians publicly
supporting Israel include US author Nonie Darwish, and former Muslim Magdi
Allam, author of "Viva Israele", both born in Egypt. Brigitte Gabriel, a
Lebanese-born Christian US journalist and founder of the American Congress for
Truth, urges Americans to "fearlessly speak out in defense of America, Israel
and Western civilization". Muslims supporting Zionism. In 1873, Shah of Persia
Naser al-Din Shah Qajar met with British Jewish leaders, including Sir Moses
Montefiore, during his journey to Europe. At that time, the Persian king
suggested that the Jews buy land and establish a state for the Jewish people.
Muslims who publicly defended Zionism include Dr. Tawfik Hamid, former member
of a terror organization and current Islamic thinker and reformer, Sheikh Prof.
Abdul Hadi Palazzi, Director of the Cultural Institute of the Italian Islamic
Community, and Tashbih Sayyed, a Pakistani-American scholar, journalist, and
author. On occasion, some non-Arab Muslims such as some Kurds and Berbers have
also voiced support for Zionism. During the Palestine Mandate era, As'ad
Shukeiri, a Muslim scholar ('alim) of the Acre area, and the father of PLO
founder Ahmad Shukeiri, rejected the values of the Palestinian Arab national
movement and was opposed to the anti-Zionist movement. He met routinely with
Zionist officials and had a part in every pro-Zionist Arab organization from
the beginning of the British Mandate, publicly rejecting Mohammad Amin al-
Husayni's use of Islam to attack Zionism. Some Indian Muslims have also
expressed opposition to Islamic anti-Zionism. In August 2007, a delegation of
the All India Organization of Imams and mosques led by Maulana Jamil Ilyas
visited Israel. The meet led to a joint statement expressing "peace and
goodwill from Indian Muslims", developing dialogue between Indian Muslims and
Israeli Jews, and rejecting the perception that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is of a religious nature. The visit was organized by the American
Jewish Committee. The purpose of the visit was to create meaningful debate
about the status of Israel in the Muslim eyes worldwide, and strengthen the
relationship between India and Israel. It is suggested that the visit could
"open Muslim minds across the world to understand the democratic nature of the
state of Israel, especially in the Middle East". Hindu support for Zionism.
After Israel's creation in 1948, the Indian National Congress government
opposed Zionism. Some writers have claimed that this was in order to get more
Muslim votes in India (where Muslims numbered over 30 million at the time).
However, conservative Hindu nationalists, led by the Sangh Parivar, openly
supported Zionism, as did Hindu Nationalist intellectuals like Vinayak Damodar
Savarkar and Sita Ram Goel. Zionism as a national liberation movement to
repatriate the Jewish people to their ancestral homeland appealed to many Hindu
Nationalists, who viewed their struggle for independence from British rule and
the Partition of India as national liberation for long-oppressed Hindus. An
international opinion survey has shown that India is the most pro-Israel
country in the world. In more current times, conservative Indian parties and
organizations tend to support Zionism. This has invited attacks on the Hindutva
movement by parts of the Indian left opposed to Zionism, and allegations that
Hindus are conspiring with the "Jewish Lobby." Marcus Garvey and Black Zionism.
Zionist success in winning British support for formation of a Jewish National
Home in Palestine helped to inspire the Jamaican nationalist Marcus Garvey to
form a movement dedicated to returning Americans of African origin to Africa.
During a speech in Harlem in 1920, Garvey stated: "other races were engaged in
seeing their cause throughÂ â€” the Jews through their Zionist movement and the
Irish through their Irish movementÂ â€” and I decided that, cost what it might,
I would make this a favorable time to see the Negro's interest through." Garvey
established a shipping company, the Black Star Line, to allow Black Americans
to emigrate to Africa, but for various reasons failed in his endeavour. Garvey
helped inspire the Rastafari movement in Jamaica, the Black Jews and the
African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem who initially moved to Liberia before
settling in Israel. Opposition to Zionism. Zionism is opposed by a wide variety
of organizations and individuals. Among those opposing Zionism are some secular
Jews, some branches of Judaism (Satmar Hasidim and Neturei Karta), the former
Soviet Union, some African-Americans, many in the Muslim world, and
Palestinians. Reasons for opposing Zionism are varied, and include the
perceptions of unfair land confiscation, expulsions of Palestinians, violence
against Palestinians, and alleged racism. Arab states in particular strongly
oppose Zionism, which they believe is responsible for the 1948 Palestinian
exodus. Zionism had also been opposed by some Jews for other reasons even
before the establishment of the state of Israel because "Zionism constitutes a
danger, spiritual and physical, to the existence of our people.'.". The book
also states "The booklet which we are publishing here, 'Serufay. Ha Kivshbnim
Maashimim' ('The Holocaust Victims Accuse'), serves as an attempt to show, by
means of testimonies., documents and reports, how Zionism and its high-level
organizations brought a catastrophe upon our people during the era of the Nazi
holocaust." Catholic Church and Zionism. The initial response of the Catholic
Church seemed to be one of strong opposition to Zionism. Shortly after the 1897
Basle Conference, the semi-official Vatican periodical (edited by the Jesuits)
Civilta Cattolica gave its biblical-theological judgement on political Zionism:
"1827 years have passed since the prediction of Jesus of Nazareth was
fulfilledÂ ... that the destruction of Jerusalem the Jews would be led away to
be slaves among all the nations and that they would remain in the dispersion
galut until the end of the world." The Jews should not be permitted to return
to Palestine with sovereignty: "According to the Sacred Scriptures, the Jewish
people must always live dispersed and vagabondo wandering among the other
nations, so that they may render witness to Christ not only by the
ScripturesÂ ... but by their very existence". Nonetheless, Theodore Herzl
travelled to Rome in late January 1904, after the sixth Zionist Congress
(August, 1903) and six months before his death, looking for some kind of
support. In January 22, Herzl first met the Secretary of State, Cardinal Rafael
Merry del Val. According to Herzl's private diary notes, the Cardinal agreed on
the history of Israel being the same as the one of the Catholic Church, but
asked beforehand for a conversion of Jews to Catholicism. Three days later,
Herzl met Pope Pius X, who replied to his request of support for a Jewish
return to Israel in the same terms, saying that "we are unable to favor this
movement. We cannot prevent the Jews going to Jerusalem, but we could never
sanction itÂ ... The Jews have not recognized our Lord, therefore we cannot
recognize the Jewish people." In 1922 the same recourse of preordained divine
judgment in the Bible was utilized by the same periodical to oppose Zionism,
alleging that the rejection and killing of Jesus by the Jews condemned them in
the eyes of Catholics. This initial attitude changed over the next 50 years,
until 1997, when at the Vatican symposium of that year, Pope John Paul II
rejected the Christian roots of anti-Semitism, expressing that "...Â the wrong
and unjust interpretations of the New Testament relating to the Jewish people
and their supposed guilt Christ's death circulated for too long, engendering
sentiments of hostility toward this people." Characterization as colonialism.
Zionism has been characterized as colonialism, and Zionism has been criticized
for promoting unfair confiscation of land, involving expulsion of indigenous
peoples, and causing violence towards Palestinians. The characterization of
Zionism as colonialism has been described by, among others, Nur Masalha,
Gershon Shafir, Michael Prior, Ilan Pappe, and Baruch Kimmerling. Others, such
as Shlomo Avineri and Mitchell Bard, view Zionism not as colonialist movement,
but as a national movement that is contending with the Palestinian one. David
Hoffman rejected the claim that Zionism is a 'settler-colonial undertaking' and
instead characterized Zionism as a national program of affirmative action,
adding that there is unbroken Jewish presence in Israel back to antiquity. Noam
Chomsky, John P. Quigly, Nur Masalha, and Cheryl Rubenberg have criticised
Zionism, saying it unfairly confiscates land and expels Palestinians. Edward
Said and Michael Prior claim that the notion of expelling the indigenous
population was an early component of Zionism, citing Herzl's diary from 1895
which states "we shall endeavour to expel the poor population across the border
unnoticedÂ â€” the process of expropriation and the removal of the poor must be
carried out discreetly and circumspectly." Derek Penslar says that Herzl may
have been considering either South America or Palestine when he wrote the diary
entry about expropriation. Ilan Pappe argued that Zionism results in ethnic
cleansing. This view diverges from other New Historians, such as Benny Morris,
who accept the Palestinian exodus narrative but place it in the context of war,
not ethnic cleansing. Saleh Abdel Jawad, Nur Masalha, Michael Prior, Ian
Lustick, and John Rose have criticised Zionism for having been responsible for
violence against Palestinians, such as the Deir Yassin massacre, Sabra and
Shatila massacre, and Cave of the Patriarchs massacre. In 1938, Mahatma Gandhi
rejected Zionism, saying that the establishment of a Jewish national home in
Palestine is a religious act and therefore must not be performed by force. He
wrote, "Palestine belongs to the Arabs in the same sense that England belongs
to the English or France to the French. It is wrong and inhuman to impose the
Jews on the ArabsÂ ... Surely it would be a crime against humanity to reduce
the proud Arabs so that Palestine can be restored to the Jews partly or wholly
as their national homeÂ ... They can settle in Palestine only by the goodwill
of the Arabs. They should seek to convert the Arab heart." Characterization as
racist. Critics of Zionism consider it a colonialist or racist movement. Some
scholars consider certain forms of opposition to Zionism to constitute
Antisemitism. According to new historian Avi Shlaim, throughout its history up
to present day, Zionism "is replete with manifestations of deep hostility and
contempt towards the indigenous population." Shlaim balances this by pointing
out that there have always been individuals within the Zionist movement that
have criticized such attitudes. He cites the example of Ahad Ha'am, who after
visiting Palestine in 1891, published a series of articles criticizing the
aggressive behaviour and political ethnocentrism of Zionist settlers. Ha'am
wrote that the Zionists "behave towards the Arabs with hostility and cruelty,
trespass unjustly upon their boundaries, beat them shamefully without reason
and even brag about it, and nobody stands to check this contemptible and
dangerous tendency" and that they believed that "the only language that the
Arabs understand is that of force." Some critics of Zionism describe it as
racist or discriminatory. Some criticisms of Zionism specifically identify
Judaism's notion of the "chosen people" as the source of racism in Zionism,
despite that being a religious concept unrelated to Zionism. In December 1973,
the UN passed a series of resolutions condemning South Africa and included a
reference to an "unholy alliance between Portuguese colonialism, Apartheid and
Zionism." At the time there was little cooperation between Israel and South
Africa, although the two countries would develop a close relationship during
the 1970s. Parallels have also been drawn between aspects of South Africa's
apartheid regime and certain Israeli policies toward the Palestinians, which
are seen as manifestations of racism in Zionist thinking. In 1975 the UN
General Assembly passed Resolution 3379, which said "Zionism is a form of
racism and racial discrimination". According to the resolution, "any doctrine
of racial differentiation of superiority is scientifically false, morally
condemnable, socially unjust, and dangerous." The resolution named the occupied
territory of Palestine, Zimbabwe, and South Africa as examples of racist
regimes. Resolution 3379 was pioneered by the Soviet Union and passed with
numerical support from Arab and African states amidst accusations that Israel
was supportive of the apartheid regime in South Africa. In 1991 the resolution
was repealed with UN General Assembly Resolution 46/86, after Israel declared
that it would only participate in the Madrid Conference of 1991 if the
resolution were revoked. Arab countries sought to associate Zionism with racism
in connection with a 2001 UN conference on racism, which took place in Durban,
South Africa, which caused the United States and Israel to walk away from the
conference as a response. The final text of the conference did not connect
Zionism with racism. A human rights forum arranged in connection with the
conference, on the other hand, did equate Zionism with racism and censured
Israel for what it called "racist crimes, including acts of genocide and ethnic
cleansing". The African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights was adopted in
1981 by the Organisation of African Unity, which has since evolved into the
African Union. The preamble of the charter includes a call to "eliminate
colonialism, neo-colonialism, apartheid, zionism and to dismantle aggressive
foreign military bases and all forms of discrimination, particularly those
based on race, ethnic group, color, sex. language, religion or political
opinions". The charter has been ratified by 53 African countries. Some
supporters of Zionism, such as Chaim Herzog, argue that the movement is non-
discriminatory and contains no racist aspects. Anti-Zionism as anti-Semitism.
It is argued by some scholars that the opposition to Zionism at the more
extreme fringes may be hard to separate from antisemitism. Anti-semites have
alleged that Zionism was, or is, part of a Jewish plot to take control of the
world. One particular version of these allegations, "The Protocols of the
Elders of Zion" (subtitle "Protocols extracted from the secret archives of the
central chancery of Zion") achieved global notability. The protocols are
fictional minutes of an imaginary meeting by Jewish leaders of this plot.
Analysis and proof of their fraudulent origin goes as far back as 1921. A 1920
German version renamed them "The Zionist Protocols". The protocols were
extensively used as propaganda by the Nazis and remain widely distributed in
the Arab world. They are referred to in the 1988 Hamas charter. There are
examples of anti-Zionists using accusations, slanders, imagery and tactics
previously associated with anti-semites. On October 21, 1973, then-Soviet
ambassador to the United Nations Yakov Malik declared: "The Zionists have come
forth with the theory of the Chosen People, an absurd ideology." Similarly, an
exhibit about Zionism and Israel in the Museum of Religion and Atheism in Saint
Petersburg designates the following as Soviet Zionist material: Jewish prayer
shawls, "tefillin" and Passover" Hagaddahs", even though these are all
"religious" items used by Jews for thousands of years. Noam Chomsky, Norman
Finkelstein, Irfan Khawaja, and Tariq Ali have suggested that the
characterization of anti-Zionism as anti-Semitic is inaccurate, sometimes
obscures legitimate criticism of Israel's policies and actions, and is
sometimes a political ploy to stifle criticism of Israel. External links.
ref>Netanyahu: Israel's Arabs are the real demographic threat (Haaretz, Dec.
18, 2003)
