Germanic neopaganism Germanic neopaganism, also known as Heathenry, √Åsatr√∫,
Odinism, Forn Si√∞r, Wotanism, Theodism, Thorism, and other names, is the
contemporary revival of historical Germanic paganism. Precursor movements
appeared in the early 20th century in Germany and Austria, and a second wave of
revival began in the United States, Great Britain, Iceland, Australia, and
other places in the late 1960's. Dedicated to the ancient gods and goddesses of
the North, the focus of Germanic neopagans varies considerably, from strictly
historical polytheistic reconstructionism to syncretist (eclectic), pragmatic
psychologist, occult or mysticist approaches. Germanic neopagan organizations
cover a wide spectrum of belief and ideals. Beliefs. Germanic Neopaganism (as
opposed to Neopaganism in general) is often defined as reconstructionist.
Adherents are mostly polytheists, having faith in a number of gods and
goddesses, but in practice a pantheistic or "soft polytheistic" outlook is
common; the Icelandic √Åsatr√∫arf√©lagi√∞ defines "Asatru" as "Nordic
pantheism". Most Germanic traditions share a worldview underlain by the
concepts of Wyrd, Orlog, Rita and Yggdrasil (or Irminsul). According to this
concept, the entire cosmos (the Nine Worlds), goes through a process of birth,
death, and rebirth in the cycle of time. The cosmos is eternal, but at the same
time it is perpetually changing. The Wyrd is the interconnectedness of all
events and things, the wholeness of all nature. The Wyrd is sometimes described
somewhat narrowly as "Fate"; it is not fatalistic, since it is being
transformed constantly by the ongoing action, but the future is always shaped
to a certain degree by "wires" of the past. The Wyrd is the connexion of forces
from the past, the present and the future, mythologically represented by the
Norns (or "Wyrdae", "Wyrds", the "Wyrd Sisters"), Urd (who is the Old Norse for
"Wyrd" itself), Verdandi and Skuld. The pantheon of Heathenism comprehends
various gods divided traditionally into three "races", the √Üsir, the Vanir,
and the Giants or J√∂tuns. Every Germanic neopagan tradition uses different
names for the gods based on the particular ethnic culture they are drawing
from. The Aesir mostly pertain to the sphere of human society, they govern the
arts, force, law, wisdom, "et cetera"; on the other hand the Vanir embody
elements and forces of nature, such as fertility, water, beauty. The Jotuns are
the gigantic, elemental, primordial chaotic forces which the gods interact with
and sublimate in their creative action of shaping reality. The different divine
races often overlap in domain and function. Germanic Neopaganism has a strong
leaning towards animism. This is most apparent in the worship of "√Ålfar" (or
Elves), land-spirits, the various beings of folklore (Kobold, Hulduf√≥lk), and
the belief that inanimate objects can have a fate of their own. It is believed
that Elves or land-spirits can inhabit natural objects such as trees or stones.
These spirits can, and do, take sides in the affairs of the inhabitants of
their land. This is in imitation of historical Norse paganism, which had strong
animistic tendencies, as reflected in sagas such as that of a wizard who goes
to Iceland in whale-shape to see if it can be invaded, who is attacked by land-
spirits while going on shore, and is forced to flee. It is believed by some
Heathens that inanimate objects can have a soul of their own, or a fate, and
therefore should be given a name, the most common cases being the naming of
weapons like Gram. The objects are not ‚Äúcharged‚Äù before use, but have the
fate or innate power within them "a priori". Ethics and soteriology. Ethics in
Germanic Neopaganism are guided by a concept of personal "√∏rl√∂g" or "wyrd",
encompassing the notions of both fate and luck. The belief in Wyrd¬ ‚Äî a
concept of fatalism or determinism, similar to some Graeco-Roman concepts of
destiny is a commonly held belief amongst most Germanic Neopagans. People's
personal destinies are shaped in part by what is past, in part by what they and
others are now doing, by the vows they take and contracts they enter into. The
Germanic Neopagan community is primarily bound together by common symbological
and social concepts. Personal character and virtue is emphasized: truthfulness,
self-reliance, and hospitality are important moral distinctions, underpinning
an especially cherished notion of honour. Germanic Neopaganism notably lacks
any discussion of redemption or salvation. The Asatru Folk Assembly and the
Odinic Rite encourages recognition of an ethical code, the Nine Noble Virtues,
which are culled from various sources, including the "H√°vam√°l" from the
Poetic Edda. In addition to the Nine Noble Virtues there are other ethical
axioms, such as the Nine Charges recognised mostly by the Odinic Rite members.
Specific Heathen denominations may implement also their own sets of values, for
example Fyrnsidu has the Twelve Great Thews and the "Sidungas", Urglaawe has
additional nine "ancillary virtues" called "Newwereenheide": Generosity,
Spirituality, Curiosity, Compassion, Introspection, Self-Improvement,
Stewardship, Kinship, and Wisdom. Although Germanic Neopagans revere the forces
of nature, Germanic Neopaganism is not a "nature religion" in the sense of
other currents often found in Neopaganism, and adherents oppose neither
technology nor its material rewards. More mystical currents of Heathenry may be
critical of industrialization or modern society, but even such criticism will
focus on decadence, lack of virtue or balance, rather than being a radical
criticism of technology itself. Regarding afterlife, the Heathens may hold
different views. According to the Heathen lore, the soul is not a single
entity, but a composite of parts both physical and metaphysical, a microcosm of
the immense macrocosm. The soul is typically thought to have nine to twelve
parts, however some Heathens combine some of the soul parts. These beliefs
makes sense since according to myths man was created by the gifts of three
gods, Odin, Hoenir and Lodur. The most famous post-death destination is
Valhalla. The devotees of Odin who die heroic deaths will be his guests in
Valhalla. The death-song of Ragnar Lodbr√≥k describes this belief, so, too,
does the poet of Eir√≠ksm√°l. In Ynglinga Saga it is further said that all
those who are cremated with their possessions after death will also go to Odin.
A popular belief among Germanic Neopagans is reincarnation; the Heathen view of
reincarnation is exposed in the concept of "Apterburder" contained in the Edda.
Edred Thorsson. "Runecaster's Handbook: The Well of Wyrd". Red Wheel/Weiser,
1999. pp.¬ 14‚Äì15. The "Apterburder" (roughly "rebirth") is the process
whereby the essence of a man is handed down to his generations allowing him to
be reborn later in the same kinship; in other words Heathens believe that
reincarnation happens within the boundaries of a kinship, a genetic lineage ‚Äî
for example the grandson is the reincarnation of the grandfather or even
earlier generations. Rites and practices. The primary deities of Germanic
Neopaganism are those of the Germanic pantheons. Heathenry also has a component
of ancestor worship or veneration. In the simplest form of the adherent's
personal practices, direct ancestors (sometimes referred to as "Dis") are often
praised and honoured during the rituals of sumble and blot. Animism or land
veneration is most evident in the rituals dedicated to the Elves and Wights
(spirits similar to the Shinto lesser "Kami"). Bl√≥t. Bl√≥t is the historical
Norse term for sacrifice or ritual slaughter. The word bl√≥t actually
translates to "blood." Historically, the ritual slaughter of a farm animal was
central to the rite. Germanic Neopaganism does not usually include this
practice. In Germanic Neopaganism, bl√≥ts are often celebrated outdoors in
nature. A bl√≥t may be highly formalized, but the underlying intent resembles
inviting and having an honored guest or family member in for dinner. Food and
drink may be offered. Most of this will be consumed by the participants, and
some of the drink will be poured out onto the soil as a libation. Home-brewed
mead as the "Germanic" drink "par excellence" is popular.[http://asatru.org/
gothar.html][http://www.thetroth.org/memsvc/stewards/flyers/tarndt/
Blot_Basics_10_31_03.pdf] Offerings during a bl√≥t usually involve mead or
other alcohol, sometimes food, sometimes song or poetry, specially written for
the occasion or for a particular deity, is delivered as an offering. The bl√≥t
ritual may be based on historical example, scripted for the occasion or may be
spontaneous. Certain Germanic Neopagan groups, most notably the Theodish,
strictly adhere to historical formulaic ritual, while other groups may use
modernized variants. Usual dress for a bl√≥t is whatever suits the seasons¬ ‚Äî
many bl√≥ts are outdoors, sometimes at sacred sites. Some Germanic Neopagans,
most notably the Theodish, wear clothing modeled on those of the Anglo-Saxon or
Norse 'Viking' during ritual, while others eschew this practice. When the
rituals are communal, the officiant is normally a priest. Heathen priests are
usually called "godi" or "godman/men", and priestesses are called "gydia" or
"godwoman/women". The proper plural of "godi" (or "gothi") and "gydia" (or
"gythia") is "godar" (or "gothar"). Heathen places of worship can be "ve",
simply "sacred enclosures" which can be woods or natural shrines, and hofs or
"hovs", temple buildings which can be constructed within a ve or not. Currently
two hofs are planned for construction in Iceland, one in Reykjav√≠k and one in
Akranes, the latter designed by Heathen artist Haukur Halld√≥rsson. Sometimes,
communal blots may include ‚Äî or be part of ‚Äî rites of passage. Examples of
these last are the naming of newborn children to whom the parents give names of
Germanic origin, a ceremony which takes place nine days after the birth, but
also handfastings and funerals. Sumbel. "Symbel" (OE) and "sumbel" (ON) are
terms for "feast, banquet, (social) gathering", occasionally used to refer to a
special type of solemn drinking ritual attested in more or less comparable
forms among various Germanic warrior elites. In such instances, symbel involved
a formulaic ritual which was more solemn and serious than mere drinking or
celebration. The primary elements of symbel are drinking ale or mead from a
horn, speech making (which often included formulaic boasting and oaths), and
gift giving. According to the reconstruction by Bauschatz (1983), eating and
feasting were specifically excluded from symbel, and no alcohol was set aside
for the gods or other deities in the form of a sacrifice. The host of the
symbel was called the "symbelgifa". One of the officiants of symbel was the
"thyle" (ON "√æulr"), who challenged and questioned those who made boasts
("gielp") or oaths ("b√©ot", "bregofull"), if necessary with taunts or mockery
("flyting"). Oaths said over the symbel-horn were seen as binding and affecting
the luck and wyrd of all in attendance. The alcoholic drink was served by women
or alekeepers ("ealu bora" "ale bearer"), the first round usually poured by the
lady of the house. The "bragarfull" "promise-cup" or "bragafull" "best cup" or
"chieftain's cup" was in Norse culture a particular drinking from a cup or
drinking horn on ceremonial occasions, often involving the swearing of oaths
when the cup or horn was drunk by a chieftain or passed around and drunk by
those assembled. In American √Åsatr√∫ as developed by McNallen and Stine, the
"sumbel" is a drinking-ritual in which a drinking horn full of mead or ale is
passed around and a series of toasts are made, first to the Aesir, then to
other supernatural beings, then to heroes or ancestors, and then to others.
Participants may also make boasts of their own deeds, or oaths or promises of
future actions. Words spoken during the sumbel are considered and consecrated,
becoming part of the destiny of those assembled. The name "sumbel" (or
"symbel") is mainly derived from Anglo-Saxon sources. For this reason, the
ritual is not known by this name among Icelandic Nordic pagans, who
nevertheless practice a similar ritual as part of their "blot". In Theodism and
Fyrnsidu in particular, the "symbel" has a particularly high importance,
considered ""the highest and most important rite"" or ""amongst the most holy
rites"" celebrated. It is considered a fate-weaving ritual, a commitment to
future evolution, a ritual conditioning the Wyrd of the community. Each action
of which the sumble is composed serves to strengthen the unity and
interconnected luck between the participants. In sumble, the Heathens are
called to remember those past deeds which strengthened their luck and brought
might to the group, and they are called to rise above unshining deeds. The
sumble reinforces the cohesiveness of the community setting each person not
only in the active flow of Wyrd, but bringing them in alignment with the wisdom
of their collective ancestry. It reaffirms the ethnic identity of a group.
Sei√∞r. Sei√∞r and Spae are forms of "sorcery" or "witchcraft", the latter
having aspects of prophecy and shamanism. Seid and spae are not common rituals,
and are not engaged in by many adherents of Germanic Neopaganism. Usually seid
or spae rituals are modeled after the ritual detailed in the Saga of Eric the
Red: a "sei√∞kona" dressed in traditional garb will sit on a high-seat or
platform and prophesy in a formulaic manner as women sing or chant galdr around
her. In the UK, seidr relies less on formal ritual and more informal practices
of healing (Blain, 2002b), protection, and for developing links with land and
ancestors. It may be related¬ ‚Äî in past and present¬ ‚Äî to alterations of
consciousness and negotiations with otherworld beings. The "berserkergangr" may
be described as a sort of religious ecstasy, associated with Odin, and thus a
masculine variant of the 'effeminate' ecstasy of Seid.[http://www.ealdriht.org/
spa.html] History. Romanticist Germanic mysticism. The first modern attempt at
revival of ancient Germanic religion took place in the 19th century during the
late Romantic Period amidst a general resurgence of interest in traditional
Germanic culture, in particular in connection with romantic nationalism in
Scandinavia and the related Viking revival in Victorian era Britain‚Äîthe
latter having associations with earlier Romanticism. Germanic mysticism is an
occultist current loosely inspired by "Germanic" topics, notably runes, which
has its beginnings in the early 20th century (Guido von List's "Armanism", Karl
Maria Wiligut's "Irminism" etc.) The last traditional pagan sacrifices in
Scandinavia, at Trollkyrka, appear to date to about this time. Organized
Germanic pagan or occult groups such as the Germanische Glaubens-Gemeinschaft
emerged in Germany in the early 20th century. The connections of this movement
to historical Germanic paganism are tenuous at best, with emphasis lying on the
esoteric as taught by the likes of Julius Evola, Guido von List and Karl Maria
Wiligut. In the first two decades of the twentieth century an overtly heathen
movement known as "heroic vitalism" became mainstream in Australian art. It had
no connection with isolated Continental thinkers like von List. Most leading
Australian painters, sculptors and poets of that generation, such as Norman
Lindsay, Rayner Hoff and Kenneth Slessor, pioneered this movement. In the 1930s
Odinism became an established faith in Australia, led by such people as Rud
Mills, Evelyn Price and Annie Lennon. Nazi period and World War II. Several
early members of the Nazi Party belonged to the Thule Society, a study group
for German antiquity. While it is postulated (by Louis Pauwels and Jacques
Bergier in The Morning of the Magicians in 1960 and by Gerald Suster in "Hitler
and the Age of Horus" in 1981) that occult elements played an important role in
the formative phase of Nazism, and of the SS in particular, after his rise to
power Adolf Hitler discouraged such pursuits. Point 24 of the National
Socialist Program stated that the party endorsed "positive Christianity". The
eclectic German Faith Movement ("Deutsche Glaubensbewegung"), founded by the
Sanskrit scholar Jakob Wilhelm Hauer, enjoyed a degree of popularity during the
Nazi period. Some Germanic mysticists were victimized by the Nazis: Friedrich
Bernhard Marby spent 99 months in KZ Dachau, and Siegfried Adolf Kummer's fate
is unknown. Several books published by the Nazi party - including "Die
Gestaltung der Feste im Jahres- und Lebenslauf in der SS-Familie (The
Celebrations in the Life of the SS Family)" by Fritz Weitzel, as well as the
"SS Tante Friede" - illustrate how the National Socialists regarded traditional
Germanic heathenry as primitive superstition which needed reworking to better
serve the state. Celebrating the traditional festivals like Jul and
Sommersonnenwende were encouraged and recast into veneration of the Nazi state
and F√ºhrer. The appropriation of "Germanic antiquity" by the Nazis was at
first regarded with skepticism and sarcasm by British Scandophiles. W. H. Auden
in his "Letters from Iceland" (1936) makes fun of the idea of Iceland as an
"Aryan vestige", but with the outbreak of World War II, Nordic romanticism in
Britain became too much associated with the enemy's ideology to remain
palatable, to the point that J. R. R. Tolkien, an ardent Septentrionalist, in
1941 found himself moved to state that he had a "burning private grudge ...
against that ruddy little ignoramus Adolf Hitler" for "ruining, perverting,
misapplying, and making for ever accursed, that noble northern spirit, a
supreme contribution to Europe, which I have ever loved, and tried to present
in its true light." Meanwhile, in Australia, several leading Odinists
(including Rud Mills and Les Cahill) were imprisoned for advocating that
Australian troops should be withdrawn from Europe to Australia to defend that
country against Japanese aggression and for their political associations. Their
formal religious organisation, the Anglecyn Church of Odin, was dissolved and
went underground (1942). In time, older members of the Australian Odinist
movement tutored a later generation, which formed the Odinic Rite of Australia
in 1994. Second revival, 1960s to present. Another revival, this time based on
folklore and historical research rather than on mysticist speculation, took
place in the late 1960s and early 1970s. In Iceland, √Åsatr√∫arf√©lagi√∞, led
by farmer Sveinbj√∂rn Beinteinsson, was recognized as a religious organization
by the Icelandic government in 1973. In the United States, around the same
period, Else Christensen began publishing "The Odinist" newsletter and Stephen
McNallen began publishing a newsletter titled "The Runestone." McNallen formed
an organization called the "Asatru Free Assembly", which was later renamed the
"√Åsatr√∫ Folk Assembly" (AFA). The AFA fractured in 1987-88, resulting in the
creation of the "√Åsatr√∫ Alliance", headed by Valgard Murray, publisher of the
"Vor Tru" newsletter. Around the same time, the "Ring of Troth" (now simply
"The Troth") was founded by other former members of the AFA. In 1972 the
spiritual descendants of Mills' Odinist movement in Australia obtained from the
Attorney-General of the Commonwealth of Australia a written undertaking that
open profession of Odinism in Australia would not be persecuted. The Odinic
Rite of Australia subsequently obtained tax deductible status from the
Australian Tax Office. The ATO accepts this as the definition of Odinism: "the
continuation of ... the organic spiritual beliefs and religion of the
indigenous peoples of northern Europe as embodied in the Edda and as they have
found expression in the wisdom and in the historical experience of these
peoples". The Odinic Rite was established in England in 1972, and in the 1990s
expanded to include chapters or kindred bodies in Germany (1995), Australia
(1995) and North America (1997) and later (2006) to the Netherlands. In 1992,
"The Odin Brotherhood" by Mark Mirabello contained claims of a surviving
Odinist "secret society", allegedly founded in 1421 to pagan tradition from
Christian persecution, comparable to the Witch-cult hypothesis forwarded by
Gerald Gardner (1954). Neopagan groups calling themselves the Odin Brotherhood
based on Mirabello's account have since been listed in the 8th edition of the
The Encyclopedia of American Religions. In Germany, the "Heidnische
Gemeinschaft" (HG) founded by G√©za von Nem√©nyi in 1985. In 1991 the
"Germanische Glaubens-Gemeinschaft" (GGG), led by von Nem√©nyi, split off from
the HG. In 1997 the "Nornirs √Ütt" was founded as part of the "Rabenclan" and
in 2000 the Eldaring was founded. The Eldaring is affiliated with the US based
Troth. In Scandinavia, the "Swedish Asatru Society" formed in 1994, and in
Norway the √Ösatrufellesskapet Bifrost formed in 1996 and Foreningen Forn Sed
formed in 1999. They have been recognized by the Norwegian government as a
religious society, allowing them to perform "legally binding civil ceremonies"
(i. e. marriages). In Denmark Forn Si√∞r also formed in 1999 (and was
recognized by the state in 2003) and in Sweden "N√§tverket Gimle" formed in
2001, as an informal community for individual heathens. "N√§tverket Forn Sed"
formed in 2004, and has a network consisting of local groups ("blotlag") from
all over the Sweden. Terminology and groupings. "Heathen" (Old English
"h√¶√∞en", Old Norse "hei√∞inn", Old High German "heidan") was coined as a
translation of Latin "paganus", in the Christian sense of "non-Abrahamic
faith". In the Sagas, the terms "hei√∞ni" and "kristni" (Heathenry and
Christianity) are used as polar terms to describe the older and newer faiths.
Historically, the term was influenced by the Gothic term "*hai√æi", appearing
as "hai√æno" in Ulfilas' bible for translating "gunƒì Hellƒìnis", "Greek (i.e.
gentile) woman" of Mark 7:26, probably with an original meaning "dwelling on
the heath", but it was also suggested by Jacob Grimm in his "Deutsche
Mythologie" (Teutonic Mythology) that it was chosen because of its similarity
to Greek "ethne" "gentile" or even that it is not related to "heath" at all,
but rather a loan from Armenian "hethanos", itself loaned from Greek "ethnos".
√Åsatr√∫. "√Åsatr√∫" (pronounced in Icelandic, in Old Norse) is a modern
Icelandic compound derived from √Åss, which refers to the √Üsir, an Old Norse
term for the gods, and "tr√∫", literally "faith". Thus, √Åsatr√∫ is the "faith
in the gods". The term is the Icelandic translation of "Asetro", a neologism
coined in the context of 19th century romantic nationalism, used by Edvard
Grieg in his 1870 opera "Olaf Trygvason" . "√Åsatr√∫ar", sometimes used as a
plural in English, is properly the genitive of √Åsatr√∫. Modern Scandinavian
forms of the term, Norwegian √Ösatru, Swedish Asatro, Danish Asetro
(ƒísatrƒìow√∞ in Anglo-Saxon), were introduced in Neopaganism in Scandinavia in
the 1990s. In Germany, the terms "Asatru" and "Odinism" were borrowed from the
Anglosphere in the 1990s, with a chapter of Odinic Rite formed in 1995 and the
Eldaring as a partner organization of The Troth formed in 2000. "Eldaring"
takes "Asatru" as a synonym of Germanic neopaganism in general, following usage
by "The Troth". Other organizations avoid "Asatru" in favour of "Germanisches
Heidentum" ("Germanic Heathenry"). "Eldaring" is the only pagan organization at
the national level in Germany self-described as "Asatru". The term "Vanatru" is
coined after "√Åsatr√∫", implying a focus on the Vanir (another Old Norse word
for "gods", possibly denoting another divine group) rather than the √Üsir.
After that, the word Rokkatru was coined to imply a focus on the Rokkr or Norse
Underworld Deities, such as Loki. Forn Si√∞r. Old Norse "Forn Si√∞r", Anglo-
Saxon "Fyrnsidu", Old High German "Firner situ" and its modern Scandinavian
("Forn Sed") and modern German ("Firne Sitte") analogues, all meaning "old
custom", is used as a term for pre-Christian Germanic culture in general, and
for Germanic Neopaganism in particular, mostly by groups in Scandinavia and
Germany. Old Norse "forn" "old" is cognate to Sanskrit "purana", English "
(be)fore" and "far". Old Norse "si√∞r" "custom", Anglo-Saxon "sidu", "seodu"
"custom", cognate to Greek "ethos", in the sense of "traditional law, way of
life, proper behaviour". In meaning, the term corresponds closely to Sanskrit
"sanƒÅtana dharma", a term coined as a "native" equivalent of "Hinduism" in
Hindu revivalism. In contradistinction to "√Åsatr√∫", "inn forni si√∞r" is
actually attested in Old Norse, contrasting with "inn n√Ωi si√∞r" "the new
custom", and similarly "Hei√∞inn si√∞r", contrasting with "Kristinn si√∞r", and
"√≠ fornum si√∞" "in old (heathen) times". "Forn Si√∞r" is also the name of the
largest Danish pagan society, which since 2003 is recognized as a religion by
the Danish government, meaning they have the right to conduct weddings and
funerals. Odinism. The term Odinism was coined by Orestes Brownson in his 1848
"Letter to Protestants". The term was re-introduced in the late 1930s by
Alexander Rud Mills in Australia with his "First Anglecyn Church of Odin" and
his book "The Call of Our Ancient Nordic Religion". In the 1960s and early
1970s, Else Christensen's "Odinist Study Group" and later the Odinist
Fellowship brought the term into usage in North America. In the UK, Odinic Rite
has specifically identified themselves as "Odinists" since the 1970s, and is
the largest group to do so. Although one Odinist group, the Odin Brotherhood,
is neither racist nor folkish, the term "Odinism" is sometimes associated with
racialist Nordic ideology, as opposed to "Asatru" which may or may not refer to
racialist or "folkish" ideals. As defined by Goodrick-Clarke (2002), "Nordic
racial paganism" is synonymous with the Odinist movement (including some who
identify as Wotanist). He describes it as a "spiritual rediscovery of the Aryan
ancestral gods...intended to embed the white races in a sacred worldview that
supports their tribal feeling", and expressed in "imaginative forms of ritual
magic and ceremonial forms of fraternal fellowship". Odinists are "hard
polytheists", and they believe that the gods and goddesses are real beings with
distinct personalities. In the words of the Odinist Fellowship, "Odinism is a
polytheistic religion. We believe in and honour the life-giving and bountiful
gods and goddesses of the Odinic pantheon, whom we refer to collectively as the
High Gods of Asgarth, or as the √Üsir and Vanir. Our gods are true gods,
divine, living, spiritual entities, endowed with power and intelligence, able
and willing to intervene in the course of Nature and of human lives. It behoves
us to seek their goodwill and succour through prayer and sacrifice. But the
gods do not require us to abase and humble ourselves; they do not seek to make
of us craven slaves. Odinists therefore do not bow or kneel or kow-tow to the
gods, but address them proudly like free, upstanding men and women. Odinists
regard our gods, not as our masters, but as firm friends and powerful allies."
In more recent times, the Odinist community in Australia has endorsed the
"Melbourne Creed" of Odinism, which is a 9-point statement of belief, "An
Odinist Creed." Theodism. Theodism, or "√û√©odisc Gel√©afa" originally sought
to reconstruct the beliefs and practices of the Anglo-Saxon tribes which
settled in England. "√æ√©odisc" is the adjective of "√æ√©od" "people, tribe",
cognate to "deutsch". As it evolved, the Theodish community moved past solely
Anglo-Saxon forms and other Germanic tribal groups were also being
reconstituted; Theodism, in this larger sense, now encompass groups practicing
tribal beliefs from Scandinavia and the Continent, following in the model set
forth by the Anglo Saxon theods founded in the 1970s. The term Theodism now
encompasses Norman, Frisian, Angle, Saxon, Jutish, Gothic, Alemannic,
Thuringian, Swedish and Danish tribal cultures. This relaxing of the original
term "Theodism" functionally identifies Germanic Neopagans who practice or
advocate Neo-Tribalism. [http://www.thetroth.org/memsvc/stewards/flyers/benw/
doctorbeowulf.pdf] Urglaawe. "Main Article on Pennsylvania German Wikipedia:
Urglaawe" "Urglaawe" ("primal faith" in Deitsch) is a North American tradition
within Heathenry and bears some affinity with other traditions related to
historical Continental Germanic paganism. It derives its core from the Deitsch
healing practice of Braucherei, from Deitsch folklore and customs, and from
other Germanic and Scandinavian sources. Urglaawe uses both the English and
Deitsch languages. As with other Teutonic religious and philosophical
traditions, adherents of Urglaawe may have differing beliefs in worldview and
theological view. One of the main deities Urglaawers worship is Holle, an
ancient Germanic mother goddess passed down in the Deitsch folklore. Wotanism.
The term "Wotanism" distinguishes a form of Heathenry with political overtones.
Wotanism is the name of a white supremacist current initiated by David Lane. It
is based on the essay entitled "Wotan" by Carl Jung. Unlike other Heathens,
most Wotanists emphasize dualism and view the gods as Jungian archetypes.
Wotanists consider the "Havamal" to be their holiest text. Distribution of
adherents. Demographics. Today, Germanic Neopaganism is practiced throughout
the world. Scandinavia, Germany, Britain, North America, South Africa,
Australia and New Zealand all have numerous Germanic Neopagan organizations.
Groups and practitioners also exist in other parts of Europe and in Latin
America. The exact number of adherents worldwide is unknown, partly because of
the lack of a clear definition separating Asatru (or Odinism) from other
similar religions. There are perhaps a few thousand practitioners in North
America (10,000 to 20,000 according to McNallen), about 1950 in Iceland, a
thousand or so in Melbourne, Australia, and 350 organized Asatru in Germany,
with other groups scattered world wide. These figures, however, do not include
the many thousands of Germanic heathens in Russia (see below). North America.
As of 2001, the City University of New York estimated that some 360,000 people
in the USA self-identify as "Pagan" (excluding Wiccan (134,000), New Age
(68,000), Druid (33,000), Spiritualist (116,000) and aboriginal religions
(4,000)). The total number of Neopagans worldwide has been estimated at roughly
three million and according to these findings, a third each are located in the
UK, the USA, and over the rest of the world. In Canada according to the 2001
Census 21,080 people identified as Pagan, a 381% increase from 5,530 in 1991.
How many of these are Heathen can only be speculated and it is possible that
the number may be higher, but out of fear of prejudice they do not disclose.
However, Heathenry in Canada has grown greatly in Canada since 2001 with the
creation of many independent kindreds and some provincial organizations. UK.
The Odinic Rite (OR) was founded in 1973 under the influence of Else
Christensen's "Odinist Study Group". On 24 February 1988 the Rite became the
first polytheistic religious organisation to be granted "Registered Charity"
status in the UK. This led to some controversy that the Rite had presented
Odinism as a monotheistic religion in order to gain acceptance by the Charity
Commission. In 1990 a split occurred in the Rite. Two organisations were formed
from the schism, initially each claiming the same name and therefore known by
their postal addresses. "BCM Runic" is now known as the Odinic Rite with the
motto "Faith, Folk and Family". "BM Edda", now known as the Odinist Fellowship,
is the part of the organisation which retains charitable status. An annual
gathering of Heathens in the UK called Heathenfest has been held at
Peterborough since 2005, it is organised by Woden's Hearth. Past speakers have
included Pete Jennings, Jenny Blain, Thorskegga Thorn and Stephen Pollington.
Scandinavia. "√Åsatr√∫arf√©lagi√∞" was recognized as an official religion by
the Icelandic government in 1973. For its first 20 years it was led by farmer &
poet Sveinbj√∂rn Beinteinsson. As of 2008, it had 1,270 members, corresponding
to 0.4% of the Icelandic population. In Sweden, the "Swedish AsatruSociety"
("Sveriges asatrosamfund") formed in 1994. In Denmark "Forn Si√∞r" was formed
in 1999, and was officially recognized in 2003 The Norwegian
"√Ösatrufellesskapet Bifrost" was formed in 1996; as of 2011, the fellowship
has some 300 members. "Foreningen Forn Sed" was formed in 1999, and has been
recognized by the Norwegian government as a religious organization. Continental
Europe. Interest in Germanic neopaganism in particular becomes apparent in
Germany in the later 1990s, based on inspiration from the English speaking
world rather than historical "Deutschgl√§ubig" groups, foundation of the
"Rabenclan" (1994), a German chapter of Odinic Rite in 1995, followed by
Nornirs √Ütt in 1997 and the Eldaring as a chapter of the US The Troth in 2000.
Werkgroep Traditie is a Flemish (Belgian) group founded by Koenraad Logghe in
the 1990s. In Russia the many neo-pagan groups venerate the "Golden Age of the
pre-Christian Rus" (the Rus being early Scandinavian settlers in Russia), and
"In general, Neo-pagan newspapers ... appear irregularly in editions ranging
from 10‚Äì50,000 copies, or more rarely, as many as 500,000 copies". Structure
and subgroupings. Solitary practice, or practice in small circles of friends or
family is common. These are often called kindreds or hearths, although often
they are not formal.Germanic Neopagan organizations have been active since the
1970s, but most of these larger groups are loose federations and do not require
committed membership comparable to a church. Consequently, there is no central
authority, and associations remain in a state of fluidity as factions form and
break up.[http://asatru.org/thekinrd.html [http://www.heathenthing.org/
whatisheathenry.html] There are several possibilities to analyse Germanic
Neopaganism into individual currents or subgroupings. One common approach is
the classification by notions of ethnicity ("folk"). This may range from ethnic
nationalist ("v√∂lkisch") attitudes with far right tendencies on one hand (the
"Nouvelle Droite" of Alain de Benoist notably has ties to such currents of
Neopaganism) to moderate "tribalist" notions of ethnicity as based in tradition
and culture, and to "universalist" approaches which de-emphasize differences
between ethnic traditions (e.g. Seax Wicca). Another classification is by
approach to historicity and historical accuracy. On one hand, there are
reconstructionists who aim to understand the pre-Christian Germanic religion
based on academic research and implement these reconstructed . Contrasting with
this is the "traditionalist" or "folklorist", in Scandinavia known as
"Folketro" or "Funtrad" (short for "Fundamentalistisk Traditionalisme")
approach which emphasizes living local tradition as central. Traditionalists
will not reconstruct, but base their rituals on intimate knowledge of regional
folklore. Proponents of traditionalism include the Norwegian Foreningen Forn
Sed and the Swedish Samf√§lligheten f√∂r Nordisk Sed. Both religions reject the
ideas of Romanticist or New Age currents as reflected in Asatru. At the other
end of this scale are syncretist or eclectic approaches which merge innovation
or "personal gnosis" into historical or folkloristic tradition. Note that this
scale is largely independent of the approaches to "ethnicity" outlined above.
Both ethnocentric and universalist Neopagans may de-emphasize historical
tradition in favour of "personal gnosis", albeit for different reasons.
"Folkish" currents may rely on postulated racial memory ("metagenetics") as
rendering historical tradition superfluous, while universalists may welcome
ahistorical input as ultimately of the same universal validity as historical
tradition. Political ideologies. Despite a common Norse or Germanic cosmology
and belief system, adherents of Germanic neopaganism hold a wide spectrum of
political beliefs from left to right and green. Mattias Gardell, reader for
religious history at the University of Stockholm, categorizes Germanic
neopaganism (particularly in North America) into "militant racist," "ethnic,"
and "nonracist." In the militant racist position, Asatru is an expression of
the "Aryan racial soul". The ethnic position is that of "tribalism",
ethnocentric but opposed to the militant racist position. According to Gardell,
the militant racist faction has grown significantly in North America during the
early 2000s, estimating that, as of 2005, it accounts for 40-50% of North
American Odinists or Asatruar with the other two factions at close to 30% each.
Germanic Neopagan groups are generally organized into democratic and republican
forms of church government, as inspired by the parliamentary Things of the
Viking era and subsequent parliamentary systems of Britain and the Scandinavian
countries. They promote individual rights and freedom of speech reminiscent of
the free jarls of Norse saga. In the USA, early Germanic Neopagan groups such
as Else Christensen's Odinist Fellowship held National Socialist philosophies,
but later dropped these associations. Currently, the three largest Germanic
Neopagan groups in the USA specifically denounce racism and National Socialism.
There is an antagonistic relationship between many neo-Nazis and the membership
of most "√Åsatr√∫" organizations in the USA, who view "national socialism as an
unwanted totalitarian philosophy incompatible with freedom-loving Norse
paganism". Germanic Neopaganism and Racism. Odalism (a philosophy of Social
Darwinism) and Wotanism (a racist / neo-Nazi position held by e.g. David Lane)
are two terms primarily focused on politics rather than religion. On his
homepage, Varg Vikernes, notorious Black Metal musician and proponent of
Odalism, explains his understanding of 'Paganism' with explicit racist
referencing. Kaplan (1996) documents the growth of Odinism in the United States
and its link with the American Neo-Nazi scene. He notes that there is a
division between Odinists embracing Nazi ideology and others without racist
motivations responding to "childhood memories". The tensions between racist and
non-racist Odinists are cast into the "folkish" ("traditional √Åsatr√∫") vs.
"universalist" ("New Age √Åsatr√∫") debate. It was these tensions that led to
the demise of the √Åsatr√∫ Free Assembly in 1986 and the emergence of two
separate movements, the √Åsatr√∫ Alliance and The Troth in the following year.
Two groups, The Troth and the Asatru Alliance, explicitly denounce racism. The
homepage of The Troth states that 'The Troth does not support any misuse of
Germanic religion and culture to advance causes of racism, white supremacy, or
any other form of discrimination'. The Asatru Alliance webpage states that,
"The Asatru Alliance promotes the native culture of the Northern European
peoples. However, we do not practice, preach, or promote hatred, bigotry, or
racism." In addition, prominent figures in √Åsatr√∫ today such as Steven
McNallen and Freya Aswynn have expressed their distaste for the racist
connotations of some of the more radical practitioners of √Åsatr√∫. When the
FBI identified potential threats towards the domestic security of the USA
related to the turn of the Millennium in 2000 in the Project Megiddo report, it
stated that: "Without question, this initiative Project Megiddo itself has
revealed indicators of potential violent activity on the part of extremists in
this country. Militias, adherents of racist belief systems such as Christian
Identity and Odinism, and other radical domestic extremists are clearly
focusing on the millennium as a time of action." added. The report also states
that 'the Project Megiddo intelligence initiative has identified very few
indications of specific threats to domestic security'. This report, published
in 1999, describes 'threats', however since the turn of the millennium no
terrorist activities have been attributed to any Odinist group.
