Anti-Italianism Anti-Italianism or Italophobia is a negative attitude toward
Italian people, as well as people with Italian ancestry, expressed by using
stereotypes about them, such as the idea that the Italians are tolerant of
violence, political corruption, Italy's former alliance with Nazi Germany and
criminal groups such as the Mafia. Its opposite is Italophilia. Anti-Italianism
in the United States. Anti-Italianism in the United States is a fairly recent
phenomenon that coincides with the period of large-scale Italian immigration
beginning in the last part of the 19th century. Prior to that time Italians,
who had lived in America from the beginning of the 17th century, were respected
craftmen, musicians, soldiers, merchants, missionaries, educators, artists and
architects. Filippo Mazzei, an Italian and close friend and confidant of Thomas
Jefferson, is credited with the phrase "All Men Are Created Equal". Italians
played an important role in the settling of the country, and were generally
well regarded. Later immigrants, who were escaping poverty and turmoil in
Italy, had a much different reception. In United States, and other English-
speaking countries to which they immigrated, such as Canada and Australia, the
later Italian immigrants were often viewed as perpetual foreigners in a lower
class, restricted to blue collar jobs. Their Catholicism, frequent lack of
formal education, folkways and competition with earlier immigrants for lower
paying jobs accounted for much of this prejudice. Ethnocentric chauvinism
exhibited by the earlier Northern European settlers toward the Italian
immigrants were also major factors, this being especially true in the South.
Their experiences in North American countries were notably different than in
the South American countries to which Italians immigrated in large numbers.
Italians were key to developing countries such as Argentina and Brazil, and
quickly rose into the middle and upper classes there. Italian Americans have
often been viewed mainly as construction workers, chefs, plumbers, or other
blue-collar workers. However, by 1990, more than 65% of Italian Americans were
managerial, professional, or white-collar workers. Anti-Italianism can be
closely linked to the anti-Catholic tradition that existed in the United
States. When the United States was founded, it inherited the anti-Catholic,
anti-papal animosity of its original Protestant settlers. Anti-Catholic
sentiments in America reached a peak in the nineteenth century when the
Protestant population became alarmed by the number of Catholics immigrating to
America. This was due in part to the standard tensions that arise between
native-born citizens and immigrants. The resulting anti-Catholic nativist
movement, which achieved prominence in the 1840s, led to hostility that
resulted in mob violence, and the burning of Catholic property. Italian
immigrants, who began arriving in the last quarter of the 19th century, were
especially vilified because of the millennia-long leadership role of Italians
in the Catholic Church and the fact that, from earliest times, the popes were
predominantly Italian (Roman Catholicism in Italy). Many of the later
immigrants from southern Italy brought with them a political disposition toward
socialism and anarchism. This was a reaction to the economic and political
conditions they experienced in Italy. In America, they were in the forefront of
organizing Italian and other immigrant laborers in demanding better working
conditions and shorter working hours in the mining, textile, construction and
other industries. As a result, they were branded as radicals and labor
agitators by many of the business owners and the wealthier class of the time,
and were subjected to intense anti-Italian sentiments. While the vast majority
of Italians immigrants brought with them a tradition of honesty and hard work,
a very small minority brought a very different custom. This criminal element
used intimidation and threats to extract protection money from the wealthier
immigrants and shop owners, and were also involved in other illegal activities.
When the Fascists came to power in Italy, they made the destruction of the
Mafia in Sicily a high priority. Hundreds fled to America in the 1920s and '30s
to avoid prosecution. Prohibition, which went into effect in 1920, proved to be
an economic windfall for those in the Italian American community already
involved in illegal activities, and those who had fled from Sicily. This
entailed smuggling liquor into the country, wholesaling it, and then selling it
through a network of outlets. While other ethnic groups were also deeply
involved in these illegal ventures, and the associated violence between the
various ethnic groups, Italian Americans were among the most notorious. They
came to symbolize in the minds of many the prototypical gangster, which had a
long-lasting effect on the Italian American image. Violence against Italians.
In the United States, Italian immigrants were frequently subjected to
prejudice, bigotry and, in some cases, violence. During the late 19th and early
20th centuries, Italian immigrants were often seen as ignorant uneducatable
peasants. Italians were actively recruited to come to the United States after
the American Civil War to work mainly in agriculture and as laborers. Most soon
found themselves the victims of prejudice, economic exploitation and sometimes
violence. Italian stereotypes abounded during this period as a means of
justifying this maltreatment of the immigrants. Later waves of Italian
immigrants inherited these same virulent forms of discrimination and
stereotyping which, by then, had become ingrained in the American
consciousness. One of the largest mass lynchings in American history involved
eleven Italians in the city of New Orleans in 1891. Nine Italians, who were
thought to have assassinated police chief David Hennessy, were arrested, tried,
and acquitted. Subsequent to the trial, they were dragged from the jail and
lynched by a mob that had stormed the jailhouse, together with two other
Italians who were being held in the jail at the time on unrelated charges. In
1899, in Tallulah, Louisiana three Italian Americans shopkeepers were lynched
because they had given equal status in their shops to blacks. A vigilante mob
hanged five Italian Americans, the three shopkeepers and two bystanders. In
1920 two Italian immigrants, Sacco and Vanzetti, were tried for robbery and
murder. Many historians agree that Sacco and Vanzetti were subjected to a
mishandled trial, and the judge, jury, and prosecution were biased toward them
because of their anarchistic political views and Italian immigrant status.
Despite world-wide protests, Sacco and Vanzetti were eventually executed. In
Australia, anti-Italian demonstrations occurred on a number of occasions after
Italian immigrants first began arriving to the country in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries in the midst of an economic depression. Union members were
averse to these strangers settling in their midst and competing for work, and
it was easy to implant stereotypical fears of high murder rates and secret
societies. Anti-Italianism is believed to have been a factor in the 1971
beating death of Alfredo Zardini, an Italian immigrant to Switzerland. In
Canada, an anti-Jewish-anti-Italian riot occurred in Toronto on August 16,
1933. The Christie Pits riot involved Anglo-Saxon (and ethnic German) members
of a pro-Nazi youth gang called the "Anglo-Canadian Pit Gang" which was
affiliated with the "Anglo Anti-Semitic Swastika Club"s, and predominantly
Jewish and Italian youth members of the "Spadina Avenue Gang". The riot, which
occurred over a six hour period, was sparked by a baseball game at Christie
Pits between two local clubs, one predominantly Jewish and Italian and one
predominantly Anglo-Saxon. About 5 people were arrested and 30 were injured.
The riot occurred in the midst of the Great Depression in Canada. Anti-
Italianism was part of the racist ideology of the Ku Klux Klan, a white
supremacist and nativist group that targeted Italians as foreign Roman
Catholics, as opposed to Anglo-Saxon Protestants. A hotbed of anti-Italian KKK
activity was in Southern New Jersey in the mid 1920s, including a mass protest
against Italian immigrants in Vineland, New Jersey, where in 1933 Italians made
up 20% of the city population. However, during the mass protest, the Italians
drove the KKK out of town. The KKK soon lost all of their power in Vineland and
left the town for good as a result of this incident. Today, over a third of the
current residents in Vineland are of Italian descent. Italian American and
Italian Canadian internment during World War II. During World War II, hundreds
of Italian citizens who were believed to be loyal to Italy were put in
internment camps in the U.S. and Canada. Thousands more Italian citizens
suspected of loyalty to Italy were placed under surveillance. Joe DiMaggio's
father, who lived in San Francisco, had his boat and house confiscated. Unlike
the Japanese Americans, Italian Americans and Italian Canadians have never
received reparations, even though President Bill Clinton made a public
declaration admitting the US government's misjudgement in the internment. Anti-
Italianism in the United Kingdom. After Benito Mussolini's alliance with Nazi
Germany in the late 1930s, there was a growing hostility toward everything
Italian in the United Kingdom. The most famous example is related to the
sinking of the steamship SS "Arandora Star" on 2 July 1940, that resulted in
the loss of over 700 livesâ€”including 446 British-Italians being deported as
enemy aliens. Anti-Italianism after World War II. Former Italian communities
once thrived in their African colonies of Eritrea, Somalia and Libya, and in
the areas at the borders of the Kingdom of Italy. These communities have now
been reduced to a few hundred people, mainly due to violent expulsion and
persecution. Italian-American Stereotyping. While Italian Americans in
contemporary American society are generally not subjected to the same virulent
discrimination and bigotry endured by the early Italian immigrants, they are
faced with a different issue that many Italian Americans consider problematic
for their community, which is pervasive negative stereotyping. The stereotype
of Italian-Americans is the standardized mental image which has been fostered
by the entertainment media and movies, especially movies such as "The
Godfather", "GoodFellas" and "Casino", and TV programs such as "The Sopranos".
This follows a known pattern in which it is possible for the mass media to
effectively create universally recognized, and sometimes accepted, stereotypes.
The stereotype of Italian Americans is continuously reinforced by the frequent
replay of these movies and series on cable and network TV. Other reinforcements
of the stereotype have come from video games and board games with Mafia themes,
and TV and radio commercials using these same themes. Movies from early on
included portrayals of Italian gangsters. After the early decades of the 20th
century, poignant melodramas of destitution and misfortune gave way to a
combination of muted "otherness" and grossly stereotypical characterizations.
Because of the common association made, many Italian Americans see films and TV
dramas about the Mafia as harmful to their community. This became something of
an issue for the HBO series "The Sopranos" when people complained about the
stereotypical nature of the show. Other Italian Americans feel that such shows
are problematic only if they feature the Mafia as a common or accepted part of
Italian American life. The entertainment media, as well as fictional films,
have stereotyped the Italian American community as tolerant of violent,
sociopathic gangsters. Other stereotypes portray Italian Americans as overly-
emotional, hot-blooded, aggressive, obsessed with food, and prone to violence.
MTV's series, " Jersey Shore", which is considered by many to be very
offensive, portrays Italian American men as ultra-macho types of low
intelligence, and Italian American women as promiscuous. The effective
stereotyping of Italian Americans as being associated with organized crime was
shown by a comprehensive study of Italian American culture on film, conducted
from 1996 to 2001, by the Italic Institute of America. The findings showed that
over two thirds of the more than 2,000 films studied portray Italian Americans
in a negative light. Further, close to 300 movies featuring Italian Americans
as criminals have been produced since "The Godfather", an average of nine per
year. The study also cites recent FBI statistics which indicate that Italian-
American organized crime members and associates number approximately 3,000 and,
given an Italian American population estimated to be approximately 18 million,
shows that only one in 6,000 has any involvement with organized crime.
According to the Italic Institute of America: "The mass media has consistently
ignored five centuries of Italian American history, and has elevated what was
never more than a minute subculture to the dominant Italian American culture".
Italian-American Organizations. A number of organizations have been active in
combatting media stereotyping and defamation of Italian Americans. The
country's largest Italian American anti-bias organization, the Italian American
One VOICE Coalition, has a nationwide network of activists who are dedicated to
fighting stereotypes and defending Italian culture and heritage. Three major
Italian American fraternal and service organizations, Order Sons of Italy in
America, Unico National and National Italian American Foundation have active
anti-defamation arms. Another prominent organization, the Italic Institute of
America, is also in the forefront of these activities. Three Internet-based
organizations are: Annotico Report, the Italian-American Discussion Network,
and ItalianAware.
