Asian American Asian Americans are Americans of Asian descent. The U.S. Census
Bureau definition of "Asians" refers to a person having origins in any of the
original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent.
It includes people who indicated their race(s) as "Asian" or reported entries
such as "Chinese," "Filipino," "Indian," "Vietnamese," "Korean," "Japanese,"
and "Other Asian" or provided other detailed Asian responses. They comprise
4.8% of the U.S. population alone, while people who are Asian combined with at
least one other race make up 5.6%. The term "Asian American" was used
informally by activists in the 1960s who sought an alternative to the term
"Oriental", arguing that the latter was derogatory and colonialist. Formal
usage was introduced by academics in the early 1970s, notably by historian Yuji
Ichioka, who is credited with popularizing the term. Today, "Asian American" is
the accepted term for most formal purposes, such as government and academic
research, although it is often shortened to "Asian" in common usage. As with
other racial and ethnicity based terms, formal and common usage have changed
markedly through the short history of this term. The most significant change
occurred when the Hart-Celler Act of 1965 eliminated highly restrictive
"national origins" quotas, designed, among other things, to restrict
immigration of those of Asian racial background. The new system, based on
skills and family connections to U.S. residents, enabled significant
immigration from every nation in Asia, which led to dramatic and ongoing
changes in the Asian American population. As a result of these population
changes, the formal and common understandings of what defines Asian American
have expanded to include more of the peoples with ancestry from various parts
of Asia. Because of their more recent immigration, new Asian immigrants also
have had different educational, economic and other characteristics than early
20th century immigrants. They also tend to have different employment and
settlement patterns in the United States. , Asian Americans had the highest
educational attainment level and median household income of any racial
demographic in the country, and they attained the highest median personal
income overall. Terminology. The most commonly used definition of "Asian
American" is the US Census Bureau definition of "Asian", chiefly because the
Census definitions determine many government classifications, notably for equal
opportunity programs and measurements. People with origins in the Far East,
Southeast Asia and the Indian Subcontinent are included in the Census
definition of Asia. The use of a separate "Asian" category in the Census is a
recent addition, beginning in 1990. Since then, the Census definitions have
varied. The 2000 census divided the "Asian-Pacific Islander" group and created
"Pacific Islander" ethnicities as a separate category. According to the Oxford
English Dictionary, "Asian person" in the United States is sometimes thought of
as a person of East Asian descent. In vernacular usage, "Asian" is often used
to refer to those of East Asian descent or anyone else of Asian descent with
epicanthic eyefolds. This differs from the U.S. Census definition and the Asian
American Studies departments of many universities consider those of East, South
or Southeast Asian descent with or without epicanthic eyefolds to be "Asian".
In the US Census, people who originate from the original peoples of the East
Asia, South Asia, and Southeast Asia are classified as part of the Asian race;
while peoples from Siberia, Central Asia, and Western Asia are classified as
"White". Before 1980, Census forms listed particular Asian ancestries as
separate groups, along with "White" and "Black or Negro". Asian Americans had
also been classified as "other". In 1977, the federal Office of Management and
Budget issued a directive requiring government agencies to maintain statistics
on racial groups, including on "Asian or Pacific Islander". The 1980 census
marked the first classification of Asians as a large group, combining several
individual ancestry groups into "Asian or Pacific Islander." By the 1990
census, "Asian or Pacific Islander (API)" was included as an explicit category,
although respondents had to select one particular ancestry. In the 2000 census,
people reporting Jewish or Arab ancestry but not reporting race are presumed to
be in the white race category rather than Asian. The definition of "Asian
American" has variations that derive from the use of the word "American" in
different contexts. Immigration status, citizenship (by birthright and by
naturalization), acculturation, and language ability are some variables that
are used to define "American" for various purposes and may vary in formal and
everyday usage. For example, restricting "American" to include only U.S.
citizens conflicts with discussions of Asian American businesses, which
generally refer both to citizen and non-citizen owners. In a recent PBS
interview, a panel of Asian American writers discussed how some groups include
people of Middle Eastern descent in the Asian American category. Asian American
author Stewart Ikeda has noted, "The definition of "Asian American" also
frequently depends on who's asking, who's defining, in what context, and why...
the possible definitions of "Asian-Pacific American" are many, complex, and
shifting... some scholars in Asian American Studies conferences suggest that
Russians, Iranians, and Israelis all might fit the fieldâ€™s subject of study."
Demographics. The demographics of Asian Americans describe a heterogeneous
group of people in the United States who can trace their ancestry to one or
more countries in Asia. Because Asian Americans total less than 6% of the
entire U.S. population, the diversity of the group is often disregarded in
media and news discussions of "Asians" or of "Asian Americans." While there are
some commonalities across ethnic sub-groups, there are significant differences
among different Asian ethnicities that are related to each group's history.
History. In 1763, Filipinos established the small settlement of Saint Malo,
Louisiana, after fleeing mistreatment aboard Spanish ships. Since there were no
Filipino women with them, the Manilamen, as they were known, married Cajun and
Native American women. Chinese sailors first came to Hawaii in 1778, the same
year that Captain James Cook came upon the island. Many settled and married
Hawaiian women. Some Island-born Chinese can claim to be 7th generation. Most
Chinese, Korean and Japanese immigrants in Hawaii arrived in the 19th century
as laborers to work on sugar plantations. Later, Filipinos also came to work as
laborers, attracted by the job opportunities, although they were limited.
Numerous Chinese and Japanese began immigrating to the U.S. in the mid-19th
century for work, because of poor economic conditions in their home nations.
Many of the immigrants worked as laborers on the transcontinental railroad.
Although the absolute numbers of Asian immigrants in the late 19th century were
small compared to that of immigrants from other regions, much of it was
concentrated in the West, and the increase caused some Americans to fear the
change represented by the growing number of Asians. This fear was referred to
as the "yellow peril". The United States passed laws such as Asian Exclusion
Act and Chinese Exclusion Act to sharply restrict Asian immigration.
Immigration trends. Filipinos have been in the territories that would become
the United States since the 16th century. There were thousands of Asians in
Hawaii when it was annexed to the United States in 1898, and they all gained
full US citizenship at that time. The United States Supreme Court in United
States v. Wong Kim Ark (1898) interpreted the 14th amendment to mean that every
person born in the United States, regardless of race or ancestry is a citizen
of the United States. Congress passed restrictive legislation to nearly all
Chinese immigration in the 1880s, which was in effect until the 1940s. Japanese
immigration was sharply curtailed by a gentleman's agreement brokered by
President Theodore Roosevelt. The immigration restriction laws of the 1920s
produced quotas for all countries, with Asian countries getting a zero quota.
After World War II legislation was passed, and judicial rulings gradually
increased the ability of Asian Americans to immigrate and become naturalized
citizens. Immigration rapidly increased following the enactment of the
Immigration and Nationality Act Amendments of 1965 as well as naturalization of
refugees from conflicts that occurred in the late 20th century in Southeast
Asia. Asian American immigrants have a significant percentage of individuals
who have already achieved professional status, a first among immigration
groups. In 2009, Asian Americans surpassed Hispanic Americans as the largest
plurality of immigrants to the United States. Notable contributions. Arts and
entertainment. Asian Americans have been involved in the entertainment industry
since the first half of the 19th century, when Chang and Eng Bunker (the
original "Siamese Twins") became naturalized citizens. Acting roles in
television, film, and theater were relatively few, and many available roles
were for narrow, stereotypical characters. More recently, young Asian American
comedians and film-makers have found an outlet on YouTube allowing them to gain
a strong and loyal fanbase among their fellow Asian Americans. Business. When
Asian Americans were largely excluded from labor markets in the 19th century,
they started their own businesses. They have started convenience and grocery
stores, professional offices such as medical and law practices, laundries,
restaurants, beauty-related ventures, hi-tech companies, and many other kinds
of enterprises, becoming very successful and influential in American society.
They have dramatically expanded their involvement across the American economy.
Asian Americans have been disproportionately successful in the hi-tech sectors
of California's Silicon Valley, as evidenced by the Goldsea 100 Compilation of
America's Most Successful Asian Entrepreneurs. Compared to their population
base, Asian Americans today are well represented in the professional sector and
tend to earn higher wages. The Goldsea compilation of Notable Asian American
Professionals show that many have come to occupy high positions at leading U.S.
corporations, including a surprising number as Chief Marketing Officers. Asian
Americans have made major contributions to the American economy. Fashion
designer and mogul Vera Wang, who is famous for designing dresses for high-
profile celebrities, started a clothing company, named after herself, which now
offers a broad range of luxury fashion products. An Wang founded Wang
Laboratories in June 1951. Amar Bose founded the Bose Corporation in 1964.
Charles Wang founded Computer Associates, later became its CEO and chairman.
David Khym founded hip-hop fashion giant Southpole (clothing) in 1991. Jen-Hsun
Huang co-founded the NVIDIA corporation in 1993. Jerry Yang co-founded Yahoo!
Inc. in 1994 and became its CEO later. Andrea Jung serves as Chairman and CEO
of Avon Products. Vinod Khosla was a founding CEO of Sun Microsystems and is a
general partner of the prominent venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield
& Byers. Steve Chen and Jawed Karim were co-creators of YouTube, and were
beneficiaries of Google's $1.65 billion acquisition of that company in 2006. In
addition to contributing greatly to other fields, Asian Americans have made
considerable contributions in science and technology in the United States, in
such prominent innovative R&D regions as Silicon Valley and The Triangle.
Government and politics. Asian Americans have a high level of political
incorporation in terms of their actual voting population. Since 1907, Asian
Americans have been active at the national level and have had multiple
officeholders at local, state and national levels. the highest ranking Asian
American is Senator and President Pro Tempore Daniel Inouye. Journalism. Connie
Chung was one of the first Asian American national correspondents for a major
TV news network, reporting for CBS in 1971. She later co-anchored the "CBS
Evening News" from 1993 to 1995, becoming the first Asian American national
news anchor. At ABC, Ken Kashiwahara began reporting nationally in 1974. In
1990, Sheryl WuDunn, a foreign correspondent in the Beijing Bureau of The New
York Times, became the first Asian American to win a Pulitzer Prize. Ann Curry
joined NBC News as a reporter in 1990, later becoming prominently associated
with "The Today Show" in 1997. Carol Lin is perhaps best known for being the
first to break the news of 9-11 on CNN. Dr. Sanjay Gupta is currently CNN's
chief health correspondent. Lisa Ling, a former co-host on "The View", now
provides special reports for CNN and "The Oprah Winfrey Show", as well as
hosting National Geographic Channel's "Explorer." Fareed Zakaria, a naturalised
Indian-born immigrant, is a prominent journalist, and author specialising in
international affairs. He is the editor-at-large of Time magazine, and the host
of Fareed Zakaria GPS on CNN. Juju Chang, James Hatori, John Yang, Veronica De
La Cruz, Michelle Malkin, Betty Nguyen, and Julie Chen have become familiar
faces on television news. John Yang won a Peabody Award. Alex Tizon, a Seattle
Times staff writer, won a Pulitzer Prize in 1997. Military. Since the War of
1812 Asian Americans have served and fought on behalf of the United States.
Serving in both segregated and non-segregated units until the desegregation of
the US Military in 1948, 31 have been awarded the nation's highest award for
combat valor, the Medal of Honor. Twenty-one of these were conferred upon
members of the mostly Japanese American 100th Infantry Battalion of the 442nd
Regimental Combat Team of World War II, the most highly decorated unit of its
size in the history of the United States Armed Forces. Science and technology.
Asian Americans have made many prominent and notable contributions to Science
and Technology. Chien-Shiung Wu was known to many scientists as the "First Lady
of Physics" and played a pivotal role in experimentally demonstrating the
violation of the law of conservation of parity in the field of particle
physics. Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen Ning Yang received the 1957 Nobel Prize in
Physics for theoretical work demonstrating that the conservation of parity did
not always hold and later became American citizens. Har Gobind Khorana shared
the 1968 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his work in genetics and
protein synthesis. Samuel Chao Chung Ting received the 1976 Nobel Prize in
physics for discovery of the subatomic particle J/Ïˆ. The mathematician Shing-
Tung Yau won the Fields Medal in 1982 and Terence Tao won the Fields Medal in
2006. The geometer Shiing-Shen Chern received the Wolf Prize in Mathematics in
1983. Andrew Yao was awarded the Turing Award in 2000. Subrahmanyan
Chandrasekhar shared the 1983 Nobel Prize in Physics and had the Chandra X-ray
Observatory named after him. In 1984, Dr. David D. Ho first reported the
"healthy carrier state" of HIV infection, which identified HIV-positive
individuals who showed no physical signs of AIDS. Charles J. Pedersen shared
the 1987 Nobel Prize in chemistry for his methods of synthesizing crown ethers.
Steven Chu shared the 1997 Nobel Prize in Physics for his research in cooling
and trapping atoms using laser light. Daniel Tsui shared the 1998 Nobel Prize
in Physics in 1998 for helping discover the fractional Quantum Hall effect. In
2008, biochemist Roger Tsien won the Nobel in Chemistry for his work on
engineering and improving the green fluorescent protein (GFP) that has become a
standard tool of modern molecular biology and biochemistry. Yoichiro Nambu
received the 2008 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the consequences of
spontaneously broken symmetries in field theories. In 2009, Charles K. Kao was
awarded Nobel Prize in Physics "for groundbreaking achievements concerning the
transmission of light in fibres for optical communication" and Venkatraman
Ramakrishnan won the prize in Chemistry "for studies of the structure and
function of the ribosome". Ching W. Tang was the inventor of the Organic light-
emitting diode and Organic solar cell and was awarded the 2011 Wolf Prize in
Chemistry for this achievement. Min Chueh Chang was the co-inventor of the
combined oral contraceptive pill and contributed significantly to the
development of in vitro fertilisation at the Worcester Foundation for
Experimental Biology. David T. Wong was one of the scientists credited with the
discovery of ground-breaking drug Fluoxetine as well as the discovery of
atomoxetine, duloxetine and dapoxetine with colleagues. Michio Kaku has
popularized science and has appeared on multiple programs on television and
radio. Space. LTC Ellison Onizuka became the first Asian American (and third
person of Asian descent) when he made his first space flight aboard STS-51-C in
1985. Onizuka later died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. Taylor
Gun-Jin Wang became the first person of Chinese ethnicity and first Chinese
American, in space in 1985; he has since been followed by Leroy Chiao in 1994,
and Ed Lu in 1997. In 1986, Franklin Chang-Diaz became the first Asian Latin
American in space. Eugene H. Trinh became the first Vietnamese American in
space in 1992. In 2001, Mark L. Polansky, a Jewish Korean American, made his
first of three flights into space. In 2003, Kalpana Chawla became the first
Indian American in space, but died aboard the ill fated Space Shuttle Columbia.
She has since been followed by CDR Sunita Williams in 2006. Sports. Basketball.
Wataru Misaka broke the NBA color barrier when he played for the New York
Knicks in the 1947â€“48 season. The next Asian American NBA player was Raymond
Townsend, who played for the Golden State Warriors and Indiana Pacers from 1978
to 1982. Rex Walters, played from 1993 to 2000 with the Nets, Philadelphia
76ers and Miami Heat; he is presently the head coach for the University of San
Francisco basketball team. After playing basketball at Harvard University,
point guard Jeremy Lin signed with the NBA's Golden State Warriors in 2010 and
now plays for the Houston Rockets. Erik Spoelstra became the youngest coach
ever in NBA history. He is currently the head coach of the Miami Heat. Current
Kansas Jayhawks assistant coach Kurtis Townsend is Raymond Townsend's brother.
Football. In football, Asian Americans' contributions are also gaining notice.
Wally Yonamine played professionally for the San Francisco 49ers in 1947. Norm
Chow is currently the head coach for the University of Hawaii and former
offensive coordinator for UCLA after a short stint with the Tennessee Titans of
the NFL, after 23 years of coaching other college teams, including four
successful years as offensive coordinator at USC. Dat Nguyen was an NFL middle
linebacker who was an all-pro selection in 2003 for the Dallas Cowboys. In
1998, he was named an All-American and won the Bednarik Award as well as the
Lombardi Award, while playing for Texas A&M. Hines Ward, with a Korean mother
and an African American father, is a former NFL wide receiver who was the MVP
of Super Bowl XL. Ward is also notable as the celebrity winner of the 12th
season of the U.S. version of "Dancing with the Stars". Mixed Martial Arts.
There are several top ranked Asian American mixed martial artists. BJ Penn is a
former UFC lightweight and welterweight champion. Cung Le is a former
Strikeforce middleweight champion. Ben Henderson is the former WEC lightweight
champion and current UFC lightweight champion. Olympics. Asian Americans first
made an impact in Olympic sports in the late 1940s and in the 1950s. Sammy Lee
became the first Asian American to earn an Olympic Gold Medal, winning in
platform diving in both 1948 and 1952. Victoria Manalo Draves won both gold in
platform and springboard diving in the 1948. Harold Sakata won a weightlifting
silver medal in the 1948 Olympics, while Tommy Kono (weightlifting), Yoshinobu
Oyakawa (100-meter backstroke), and Ford Konno (1500-meter freestyle) each won
gold and set Olympic records in the 1952 Olympics. Konno won another gold and
silver swimming medal at the same Olympics and added a silver medal in 1956,
while Kono set another Olympic weightlifting record in 1956. Also at the 1952
Olympics, Evelyn Kawamoto won two bronze medals in swimming. Amy Chow was a
member of the gold medal women's gymnastics team at the 1996 Olympics; she also
won an individual silver medal on the uneven bars. Gymnast Mohini Bhardwaj won
a team silver medal in the 2004 Olympics. Hapa Bryan Clay won the decathlon
gold medal in the 2008 Olympics, the silver medal in the 2004 Olympics, and was
the sport's 2005 world champion. Since Tiffany Chin won the women's US Figure
Skating Championship in 1985, Asian Americans have been prominent in that
sport. Kristi Yamaguchi won three national championships, two world titles, and
the 1992 Olympic Gold medal. Michelle Kwan has won nine national championships
and five world titles, as well as two Olympic medals (silver in 1998, bronze in
2002). Other sports. Michael Chang was a top-ranked tennis player for most of
his career. He won the French Open in 1989. Tiger Woods, who is of mostly Asian
descent, is the most successful golfer of his generation and one of the most
famous athletes in the world. Eric Koston is one of the top street
skateboarders and placed first in the 2003 X-Games street competition. Cultural
influence. Health and medicine. Asian immigrants are also changing the American
medical landscape through increasing number of Asian medical practitioners in
this country. Beginning in the 1960s and 1970s, the US government invited a
number of foreign physicians particularly from India and the Philippines to
address the acute shortage of physicians in rural and medically-underserved
urban areas. The trend in importing foreign medical practitioners, however,
became a long-term, chronic solution as US medical schools failed to produce
enough physicians to match the increasing American population. Amid decreasing
interest in medicine among American college students due to high rates job
dissatisfaction, loss of morale, stress, and lawsuits, Asian American
immigrants maintained a supply of healthcare practitioners for millions of
Americans. It is well documented that Asian American international medical
graduates including highly skilled guest workers using the J1 Visa program for
medical workers, tend to serve in health professions shortage areas (HPSA) and
specialties that are not filled by US medical graduates especially primary care
and rural medicine. Thus, Asian American immigrants play a key role in averting
a medical crisis in the US. A lasting legacy of Asian American involvement in
medicine is the forcing of US medical establishment to accept minority medical
practitioners. One could speculate that the introduction of Asian physicians
and dentists to the American society could have triggered an acceptance of
other minority groups by breaking down stereotypes and encouraging trust.
Traditional Asian concepts and practices in health and medicine have attracted
greater acceptance and are more widely adopted by American doctors. Indiaâ€™s
Ayurveda and traditional Chinese medicine (which also includes acupuncture) are
two alternative therapy systems that have been studied and adopted to a great
extent. For instance, in the early 1970s the US medical establishment did not
believe in the usefulness of acupuncture. Since then studies have proven the
efficacy of acupuncture for different applications, especially for treatment of
chronic pain. It is now covered by many health insurance plans. Meditation and
mindfulness practices are taught in mainstream medical schools and hospitals.
Increasingly they are seen as part of a holistic approach to health. Doctors
and hospitals treating diseases such as heart disease and cancer have adopted
meditation as a practice recommended for patients. Herbalism and massage
therapy (from Ayurveda) are sweeping the spas across America. Meditation and
yoga (from India) have also been widely adopted by health spas, and spiritual
retreats of many religious bases. They are also part of the spiritual practice
of the many Americans who are not affiliated with a mainline religious group.
Education. Among America's major racial categories, Asian Americans have the
highest educational qualifications. This varies, however, for individual ethnic
groups. Dr. C.N. Le, Director of the Asian & Asian American Studies Certificate
Program at the University of Massachusetts, writes that although 42% of all
Asian American adults have at least a college degree, Vietnamese Americans have
a degree attainment rate of only 16% while Laotians and Cambodians only have
rates around 5%. ^ About me, C.N. Le, asian-nation.org. According to the US
Census Bureau, while the high school graduation rate for Asian Americans is on
par with those of other ethnic groups, 48% of Asian Americans have attained at
least a bachelor's degree as compared with the national average of 27%, and 29%
for non-Hispanic Whites. Indian Americans have some of the highest education
rates, with nearly 68% having attained at least a bachelor's degree. Cultural
issues. Illegal immigration. , Filipinos and Indians accounted for the highest
number of illegal immigrants for "Asian Americans" with an estimated illegal
population of 270,000 and 200,000 respectively. Indian Americans are also the
fastest growing illegal immigrant group in the United States, an increase in
illegal immigration of 125% since 2000. This is followed by Koreans (200,000)
and Chinese (120,000). Due to the stereotype of Asian Americans being
successful as a group, the immigration debate often leaves out Asians and
focuses on those from Latin America. Asians are the second largest racial/
ethnic illegal immigrant group in the U.S. behind Hispanics and Latinos. While
the majority of Asian immigrants to the United States immigrate legally, up to
15% of those immigrants immigrate illegally. Race based violence. Historically
Asian Americans have been the target of violence based on their race and or
ethnicity. This includes, but are not limited to, such events as the Rock
Springs massacre, Watsonville Riots, attacks upon Japanese Americans following
the attack on Pearl Harbor., and Korean American businesses targeted during the
1992 Los Angeles riots. Violence against Asian Americans continue to occur
based on their race, with one source asserting that Asian Americans are the
fastest growing targets of hate crimes and violence. After the September 11
attacks, Sikh Americans were targeted, being the recipient of numerous hate
crimes including murder. Other Asian Americans have also been the victim of
race based violence in Brooklyn, Indiana, Philadelphia, and San Francisco.
Furthermore, it has been reported that young Asian Americans are more likely to
be a target of violence than their peers. Racism and discrimination still
persists against Asian Americans occurring not only to recent immigrants but
also towards well-educated and highly trained professionals. Examples include a
boycott of Asian-owned businesses in Dallas in 2012, and looting of Asian-owned
businesses during the 1992 Los Angeles riots. Stereotypes. Until the late 20th
century, the term "Asian American" was adopted mostly by activists, while the
average person of Asian ancestries identified with his specific ethnicity. The
murder of Vincent Chin in 1982 was a pivotal civil rights case, and it marked
the emergence of Asian Americans as a distinct group in United States. Study
has indicated that most non-Asian Americans do not generally differentiate
between Asian Americans of different ethnicities. Stereotypes of both groups
are nearly identical. A 2002 survey of Americans' attitudes toward Asian
Americans and Chinese Americans indicated that 24% of the respondents
disapprove of intermarriage with an Asian American, second only to African
Americans; 23% would be uncomfortable supporting an Asian American presidential
candidate, compared to 15% for an African American, 14% for a woman and 11% for
a Jew; 17% would be upset if a substantial number of Asian Americans moved into
their neighborhood; 25% had somewhat or very negative attitude toward Chinese
Americans in general. The study did find several positive perceptions of
Chinese Americans: strong family values (91%); honesty as business people
(77%); high value on education (67%). There is a widespread perception that
Asian Americans are not "American" but are instead "perpetual foreigners".
Asian Americans often report being asked the question, "Where are you really
from?" by other Americans, regardless of how long they or their ancestors have
lived in United States. Many Asian Americans are themselves not immigrants but
rather born in the United States. Many are asked if they are Chinese or
Japanese, an assumption based on major groups of past immigrants. Model
minority. Asian Americans are sometimes characterized as a model minority
because many of their cultures encourage a strong work ethic, a respect for
elders, a high degree of professional and academic success, a high valuation of
family, education and religion. Statistics such as high household income and
low incarceration rate, low rates of many diseases and higher than average life
expectancy are also discussed as positive aspects of Asian Americans. The
implicit advice is that the other minorities should stop protesting and emulate
the Asian American work ethic and devotion to higher education. Some critics
say the depiction replaces biological racism with cultural racism, and should
be dropped. This concept appears to elevate Asian Americans by portraying them
as an elite group of successful, highly educated, intelligent, and wealthy
individuals, but it can also be considered an overly narrow and overly one-
dimensional portrayal of Asian Americans, leaving out other human qualities
such as vocal leadership, negative emotions, risk taking, ability to learn from
mistakes, and desire for creative expression. Furthermore, Asian Americans who
do not fit into the model minority mold can face challenges when people's
expectations based on the model minority myth do not match with reality. Traits
outside of the model minority mold can be seen as negative character flaws for
Asian Americans despite those very same traits being positive for the general
American majority (e.g., risk taking, confidence, empowered). For this reason,
some believe Asian Americans encounter a "bamboo ceiling," the Asian American
equivalent of the glass ceiling in the workplace. The model minority concept
can also affect Asians' public education. By comparison with other minorities,
Asians often achieve higher test scores and grades compared to other Americans.
Stereotyping Asian American as over-achievers can lead to harm if school
officials or peers expect all to perform higher than average. The very high
educational attainments of Asian Americans has often been noted; in 1980, for
example, 74% of Chinese Americans, 62% of Japanese Americans, and 55% of Korean
Americans aged 20â€“21 were in college, compared to a third of the whites. The
disparity at postgraduate levels is even greater, and the differential is
especially notable in fields making heavy use of mathematics. By 2000, a
majority of undergraduates at such elite public California schools as UC
Berkeley and UCLA, which are obligated by law to not consider race as a factor
in admission, were Asian American. The pattern is rooted in the pre-World War
II era. Native-born Chinese and Japanese Americans reached educational parity
with majority whites in the early decades of the 20th century. Those who
consider Asian Americans a "model minority" fail to realize that Asian American
is a broad category encompassing many different ethnic groups with different
histories. When divided up by ethnicity, it can be seen that the economic and
academic successes supposedly enjoyed by Asian Americans are concentrated into
a few ethnic groups. Cambodians, Hmong, and Laotians (and to a lesser extent,
Vietnamese), all of whose relatively low achievement rates are possibly due to
their refugee status, and that they are non voluntary immigrants as other
ethnicities are more likely to be. Furthermore, the model minority concept can
be emotionally damaging to Asian Americans, particularly since they are
expected to live up to those peers who fit the stereotype. Studies have shown
that Asian Americans suffer from higher rates of stress, depression, mental
illnesses, and suicides in comparison to other races, indicating that the
pressures to achieve and live up to the model minority image may take a mental
and psychological toll on Asian Americans. Further reading. Journals
