Bombing of Dresden in World War II The Bombing of Dresden was a military attack
on the city of Dresden, the capital of the German state of Saxony, that took
place in the final months of the Second World War. In four raids between 13 and
15 February 1945, 722 heavy bombers of the British Royal Air Force (RAF) and
527 of the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) dropped more than 3,900 tons
of high-explosive bombs and incendiary devices on the city. The resulting
firestorm destroyed fifteen square miles (39 square kilometres) of the city
centre and caused tens of thousands of civilian casualties. Post-war discussion
of whether or not the attacks were justified has led to the bombing becoming
one of the moral "causes cÃ©lÃ¨bres" of the Second World War. A 1953 United
States Air Force report defended the operation as the justified bombing of a
military and industrial target, which was a major rail transportation and
communication centre, housing 110 factories and 50,000 workers in support of
the German war effort. However, several researchers have claimed that not all
of the communications infrastructure, such as the bridges, were targeted, nor
were the extensive industrial areas outside the city centre. Critics of the
bombing argue that Dresdenâ€”sometimes referred to as "Florence on the Elbe"
("Elbflorenz")â€”was a cultural landmark of little or no military significance,
and that the attacks were indiscriminate area bombing and not proportionate to
the commensurate military gains. Large variations in the claimed death toll
have fuelled the controversy. In March 1945, the Nazi regime ordered its press
to publish a falsified casualty figure of 200,000 for the Dresden raids, and
death toll estimates as high as 500,000 have been given. However the city
authorities at the time estimated around 25,000 victims; a figure which
subsequent investigations, including one commissioned by the city council in
2010, support. Background. At the end of 1944, the German army was retreating
on both fronts, but not yet defeated. In the east, the Soviets were pushing the
Germans westward. On 8 February 1945, they crossed the Oder River, with
positions just 70Â km from Berlin. As the Eastern and Western Fronts were
getting closer, the Western Allies started to consider how they might aid the
Soviets with the use of the strategic bomber force. The plan was to bomb Berlin
and several other eastern cities in conjunction with the Soviet advance, in
order to cause confusion among German troops and refugees evacuating from the
east and to hamper their reinforcement from the west. A special British Joint
Intelligence Subcommittee report titled "German Strategy and Capacity to
Resist", prepared for Winston Churchill's eyes only, predicted that Germany
might collapse as early as mid-April if the Soviets overran them at their
eastern defences. Alternatively, the report warned that the Germans might hold
out until November if they could prevent the Soviets from taking Silesia. Hence
any assistance provided to the Soviets on the Eastern Front could shorten the
war. Plans for a large and intense offensive targeting Berlin and the other
eastern cities had been discussed under the code name Operation Thunderclap in
mid-1944, but it had been shelved on 16 August. These were now re-examined, and
the decision made to draw up a more limited operation. On 22 January, the RAF
director of bomber operations, Air Commodore Sydney Bufton, sent a memo to the
Deputy Chief of the Air Staff, Air Marshal Sir Norman Bottomley, suggesting
that what appeared to be a coordinated air attack by the RAF to aid the current
Soviet offensive would have a detrimental effect on German morale. On 25
January, the Joint Intelligence Committee expressed support for the idea, as it
tied in with the ULTRA-based intelligence that dozens of German divisions which
had been deployed in the west were being moved to reinforce the Eastern Front
and that the interdiction of these troop movements should be given a high
priority. Arthur Harris, AOC Bomber Command (nicknamed "Bomber" Harris in the
British press, and known as an ardent supporter of area bombing) was asked for
his opinion, and proposed a simultaneous attack on Chemnitz, Leipzig and
Dresden. That evening Churchill asked the Secretary of State for Air, Sir
Archibald Sinclair, what plans had been drawn up to carry out these proposals.
He passed on the request to Sir Charles Portal, the Chief of the Air Staff, who
answered that "We should use available effort in one big attack on Berlin and
attacks on Dresden, Leipzig, and Chemnitz, or any other cities where a severe
blitz will not only cause confusion in the evacuation from the East, but will
also hamper the movement of troops from the West". However, he mentioned that
aircraft diverted to such raids should not be taken away from the current
primary tasks of destroying oil production facilities, jet aircraft factories,
and submarine yards. Churchill was not satisfied with this answer and, on 26
January, pressed Sinclair for a plan of operations: "I asked night whether
Berlin, and no doubt other large cities in east Germany, should not now be
considered especially attractive targets... Pray report to me tomorrow what is
going to be done." In response to Churchill's enquiry Sinclair approached
Bottomley, who asked Harris to undertake attacks on Berlin, Dresden, Leipzig,
and Chemnitz, as soon as moon light and weather allowed, "with the particular
object of exploiting the confused conditions which are likely to exist in the
above mentioned cities during the successful Russian advance." This activity
allowed Sinclair to inform Churchill on 27 January of Air Staff agreement,
"subject to the overriding claims" on other targets under the Pointblank
Directive, strikes against communications in these cities to disrupt civilian
evacuation from the east and troop movement from the west would be made. On 31
January, Bottomley sent a message to Portal saying a heavy attack on Dresden
and other cities "will cause great confusion in civilian evacuation from the
east and hamper movement of reinforcements from other fronts". British
historian Frederick Taylor mentions a further memo sent to the Chiefs of Staff
Committee by Sir Douglas Evill on 1 February, in which Evill states interfering
with mass civilian movements was a major, even key, factor in the decision to
bomb the city center. Attacks there, where main rail junctions, telephone
systems, city administration, and utilities were located, would result in
chaos. Britain had learned this after the Coventry Blitz, when loss of this
crucial infrastructure had longer-lasting effects than attacks on war plants.
During the Yalta Conference on 4 February, the Deputy Chief of the Soviet
General Staff, General Aleksei Antonov, raised the issue of hampering the
reinforcement of German troops from the western front by paralysing the
junctions of Berlin and Leipzig with aerial bombardment. In response, Portal,
who was in Yalta, asked Bottomley to send him a list of objectives to be
discussed with the Soviets. Bottomley's list included oil plants, tank and
aircraft factories, and the cities of Berlin and Dresden. A British interpreter
later claimed that Antonov and Joseph Stalin asked for the bombing of Dresden,
but there is no mention of these requests in the official record of the
conference and the claim may be Cold War propaganda. Military and industrial
profile. Dresden was Germany's seventh-largest city and, according to the RAF
at the time, the largest remaining unbombed built-up area. Taylor writes that
an official 1942 guide to the city described it as "one of the foremost
industrial locations of the Reich" and in 1944, the German Army High Command's
Weapons Office listed 127 medium-to-large factories and workshops that were
supplying the army with materiel. The contribution to the Nazi war effort may
not have been as significant as the planners thought. The US Air Force
Historical Division wrote a report in response to the international concern
about the bombing, which was classified until December 1978. This said that
there were 110 factories and 50,000 workers in the city supporting the German
war effort at the time of the raid. According to the report, there were
aircraft components factories; a poison gas factory (Chemische Fabrik Goye and
Company); an anti-aircraft and field gun factory (Lehman); an optical goods
factory (Zeiss Ikon AG); as well as factories producing electrical and X-ray
apparatus (Koch & Sterzel AG); gears and differentials (Saxoniswerke); and
electric gauges (GebrÃ¼der Bassler). It also said there were barracks, hutted
camps, and a munitions storage depot. The USAF report also states that two of
Dresden's traffic routes were of military importance: north-south from Germany
to Czechoslovakia, and east-west along the central European uplands. The city
was at the junction of the Berlin-Prague-Vienna railway line, as well as the
Munich-Breslau, and Hamburg-Leipzig. Colonel Harold E. Cook, a US POW held in
the Friedrichstadt marshaling yard the night before the attacks, later said
that "I saw with my own eyes that Dresden was an armed camp: thousands of
German troops, tanks and artillery and miles of freight cars loaded with
supplies supporting and transporting German logistics towards the east to meet
the Russians." In the raid, major industrial areas in the suburbs, which
stretched for miles, were not targeted. According to Donald Miller "the
economic disruption would have been far greater had Bomber Command targeted the
suburban areas where most of Dresden's manufacturing might was concentrated".
The attacks. The night of 13/14 February. The Dresden attack was to have begun
with a USAAF Eighth Air Force bombing raid on 13 February 1945. The Eighth Air
Force had already bombed the railway yards near the centre of the city twice in
daytime raids: once on 7 October 1944 with 70 tons of high-explosive bombs
killing more than 400, then again with 133 bombers on 16 January 1945, dropping
279 tons of high-explosives and 41 tons of incendiaries. On 13 February 1945,
bad weather over Europe prevented any USAAF operations, and it was left to RAF
Bomber Command to carry out the first raid. It had been decided that the raid
would be a double strike, in which a second wave of bombers would attack three
hours after the first, just as the rescue teams were trying to put out the
fires. Other raids were carried out that night to confuse Nazi air defences.
Three hundred and sixty heavy bombers (Lancasters and Halifaxes) bombed a
synthetic oil plant in BÃ¶hlen, from Dresden, while de Havilland Mosquito
medium bombers attacked Magdeburg, Bonn, Misburg near Hannover, and Nuremberg.
The first of the British aircraft took off at around 17:20 hours CET for the
journey. This was a group of Lancasters from Bomber Command's 83 Squadron, No.
5 Group, acting as the Pathfinders, or flare force, whose job it was to find
Dresden and drop magnesium parachute flares to light up the area for the
bombers. The next set of aircraft to leave England were the twin-engined
Mosquito marker planes who would identify the target areas and drop 1,000-pound
target indicators (TIs), known to the Germans as "Christmas trees," which gave
off a red glow for the bombers to aim at. The attack was to be centred on the
Ostragehege sports stadium, next to the city's medieval "Altstadt" (old town),
with its congested, and highly combustible, timbered buildings. The main bomber
force, called "Plate Rack", took off shortly after the Pathfinders. This was a
group of 254 Lancasters carrying 500 tons of high explosives and 375 tons of
incendiaries, or fire bombs. There were 200,000 incendiaries in all, with the
high-explosive bombs ranging in weight from 500 pounds to 4,000 pounds â€” the
so-called two-ton "cookies", also known as "blockbusters," because they had the
power to destroy a city block. The high explosives were intended to rupture
water mains, and blow off roofs, doors, and windows, creating an air flow that
would feed the fires caused by the incendiaries that followed. The Lancasters
crossed into French airspace near the Somme, then into Germany just north of
Cologne. At 22:00 hours, the force heading for BÃ¶hlen split away from Plate
Rack, which turned south east toward the Elbe. By this time, ten of the
Lancasters were out of service, leaving 244 to continue to Dresden. The sirens
started sounding in Dresden at 21:51 (CET). Wing Commander Maurice Smith,
flying in a Mosquito, gave the order to the Lancasters: "Controller to Plate
Rack Force: Come in and bomb glow of red target indicators as planned. Bomb the
glow of red TIs as planned.". The first bombs were released at 22:14, the
Lancasters flying in low at , with all but one Lancaster's bombs released
within two minutes, and the last one releasing at 22:22. The fan-shaped area
that was bombed was long, and at its extreme about wide. The shape and total
devastation of the area was created by the bombers of No. 5 Group flying over
the head of the fan (Ostragehege stadium) on prearranged compass bearings and
releasing their bombs at different prearranged times. The second attack, three
hours later, was by Lancaster aircraft of 1, 3, 6 and 8 (Pathfinder Force)
Groups, 8 Group being the Pathfinders. By now, the thousands of fires from the
burning city could be seen more than away on the ground, and away in the air,
with smoke rising to . The Pathfinders therefore decided to expand the target,
dropping flares on either side of the firestorm, including the "Hauptbahnhof",
the main train station, and the "GroÃŸer Garten", a large park, both of which
had escaped damage during the first raid. The German sirens sounded again at
01:05, but as there was practically no electricity, these were small hand-held
sirens that were heard within only a block. Between 01:21 and 01:45, 529
Lancasters dropped more than 1,800 tons of bombs. 14â€“15 February. On the
morning of 14 February 431 bombers of the 1st Bombardment Division of the
United States VIII Bomber Command were scheduled to bomb Dresden at around
midday, and the 3rd Bombardment Division were to follow the 1st and bomb
Chemnitz, while the 2nd Bombardment Division would bomb a synthetic oil plant
in Magdeburg. The bomber groups would be protected by the 784 P-51 Mustangs of
VIII Fighter Command which meant that there would be almost 2,100 aircraft of
the United States Eighth Air Force over Saxony during 14 February. There is
some confusion in the primary sources over what was the target in Dresden,
whether it was the marshalling yards near the centre or centre of the built up
area. The report by the 1st Bombardment Division's commander to his commander
states that the targeting sequence was to be the centre of the built up area in
Dresden if the weather was clear. If clouds obscured Dresden and if it was
clear over Chemnitz, then Chemnitz was to be the target. If both were obscured
then the centre of Dresden would be bombed using H2X radar. The mix of bombs to
be used on the Dresden raid was about 40% incendiaries, much closer to the RAF
city busting mix than that usually used by the USAAF in precision bombardments.
This was quite a common mix when the USAAF anticipated cloudy conditions over
the target. 316 B-17 Flying Fortresses bombed Dresden, dropping 771 tons of
bombs. The rest misidentified their targets. Sixty bombed Prague, dropping 153
tons of bombs on the Czech city while others bombed Brux and Pilsen. The 379th
bombardment group started to bomb Dresden at 12:17 aiming at marshalling yards
in the Friedrichstadt district west of the city centre as the area was not
obscured by smoke and cloud. The 303rd group arrived over Dresden 2 minutes
after the 379th found that the their view was obscured by clouds so they bombed
Dresden using H2X radar to target this location. The groups that followed the
303rd, (92nd, 306th, 379th, 384th and 457th) also found Dresden obscured by
clouds and they too used H2X to locate the target. H2X aiming caused the groups
to bomb inaccurately with a wide dispersal over the Dresden area. The last
group to bomb Dresden was the 306th and they had finished by 12:30. Strafing of
civilians has become a traditional part of the oral history of the raids since
a March 1945 article in the Nazi-run weekly newspaper Das Reich claimed that
this had occurred. For example, British historian Alexander McKee in "Dresden
1945" (1982) quotes eyewitnesses who state that strafing did occur. According
to an RAF webpage on the history of RAF Bomber Command, "of the American
Mustang-fighter escort was ordered to strafe traffic on the roads around
Dresden to increase the chaos and disruption to the important transportation
network in the region." (see also Yeager's description of similar WWII
missions) Historian Gotz Bergander â€“ an eyewitness of the raids himself â€“
found no reports on strafing for 13â€“15 February, neither by any of the pilots
nor the German military and police. He asserted in "Dresden im Luftkrieg"
(1977, new edition 1998) that only few tales of civilians being strafed were
reliable in details, and all were related to the daylight attack on 14
February. He concluded that some memory of eyewitnesses was real, but
misinterpreted firing in an airfight as deliberately aimed at people on the
ground. Historian Helmut Schnatz found, in 2000, that there was an explicit
order to RAF pilots not to strafe civilians on the way back home from Dresden.
He also reconstructed timelines with the result that strafing would have been
almost impossible due to lack of time and fuel. Frederick Taylor in "Dresden",
(2004) basing most of his analysis on the work of Bergander and Schnatz,
concludes that no strafing took place, although some stray bullets from an
aerial dog fight may have hit the ground and been mistaken for strafing by
those in the vicinity. The official historian commission collected 103 detailed
eyewitness accounts and let the local bomb disposal services search according
to their assertions: They did not find any bullets or fragments thereof which
would have been used by planes of the Dresden raids. On 15 February, the 1st
Bombardment Division's primary target â€” the BÃ¶hlen synthetic oil plant near
Leipzig â€” was obscured by cloud so the Division's groups diverted to their
secondary target which was the city of Dresden. As Dresden was also obscured by
clouds the groups targeted the city using H2X. The first group to arrive over
the target was the 401st, but they missed the centre and bombed southeastern
suburbs with bombs landing on the nearby towns of Meissen and Pirna. The other
groups all bombed between 12:00 and 12:10. They failed to hit the marshalling
yards in the Friedrichstadt district and, as on the previous raid, their
ordnance was scattered over a wide area. On the ground. The sirens had started
sounding in Dresden at 21:51 (CET). Frederick Taylor writes that the Germans
could see that a large enemy bomber formation â€” or what they called ""ein
dicker Hund"" (lit: a fat dog, a "major thing") â€” was approaching somewhere
in the east. At 21:39, the Reich Air Defence Leadership issued an enemy
aircraft warning for Dresden, although, at that point, it was thought Leipzig
might be the target. At 21:59, the Local Air Raid Leadership confirmed that the
bombers were in the area of Dresden-Pirna. Taylor writes the city was largely
undefended; a night fighter force of ten Messerschmitts at Klotzsche airfield
was scrambled, but it took them half an hour to get into an attack position. At
22:03, the Local Air Raid Leadership issued the first definitive warning:
"Warning! Warning! Warning! The lead aircraft of the major enemy bomber forces
have changed course and are now approaching the city area." By early morning on
14 February, Ash Wednesday, the center of the city, including its "Altstadt",
was engulfed in a firestorm, with temperatures peaking at over 1500 Â°C (2700
Â°F). There were very few public air raid shelters â€” the largest, underneath
the main train station, was housing 6,000 refugees. As a result, most people
took shelter in their cellars, but one of the air raid precautions the city had
taken was to remove the thick cellar walls between rows of buildings, and
replace them with thin partitions that could be knocked through in an
emergency. The idea was that, as one building collapsed or filled with smoke,
those using the basement as a shelter could knock the walls down and run into
adjoining buildings. With the city on fire everywhere, those fleeing from one
burning cellar simply ran into another, with the result that thousands of
bodies were found piled up in houses at the end of city blocks. A Dresden
police report written shortly after the attacks reported that the old town and
the inner eastern suburbs had been engulfed in a single fire that had destroyed
almost 12,000 dwellings. The same report said that the raids had destroyed 24
banks, 26 insurance buildings, 31 stores and retail houses, 640 shops, 64
warehouses, 2 market halls, 31 large hotels, 26 public houses, 63
administrative buildings, 3 theatres, 18 cinemas, 11 churches, 6 chapels; 5
other cultural buildings, 19 hospitals including auxiliary, overflow hospitals,
and private clinics, 39 schools, 5 consulates, the zoo, the waterworks, the
railways, 19 postal facilities, 4 tram facilities, and 19 ships and barges. The
Wehrmacht's main command post in the Taschenbergpalais, 19 military hospitals
and a number of less significant military facilities were also destroyed.
Almost 200 factories were damaged, 136 seriously damaged (including several of
the Zeiss Ikon precision optical engineering works), 28 with medium to serious
damage, and 35 with light damage. An RAF assessment showed that 23 percent of
the industrial buildings, and 56 percent of the non-industrial buildings, not
counting residential buildings, had been seriously damaged. Around 78,000
dwellings had been completely destroyed; 27,700 were uninhabitable, and 64,500
damaged, but readily repairable. During his post-war interrogation, Albert
Speer, Minister of Armaments and War Production for the Third Reich, indicated
that Dresden's industrial recovery from the bombings was rapid. Casualties.
According to official German report "Tagesbefehl" (Order of the Day) no. 47
("TB47") issued on 22 March the number of dead recovered by that date was
20,204, including 6,865 who were cremated on the "Altmarkt" square, and the
total number of deaths was expected to be about 25,000. Another report on 3
April put the number of corpses recovered at 22,096. Three municipal and 17
rural cemeteries outside Dresden recorded up to 30 April 1945 a total of at
least 21,895 buried bodies of the Dresden raids, including those cremated on
the "Altmarkt". A number of refugees fleeing westwards from the advancing
Russian forces were in the city at the time of the bombing. Although exact
figures are unknown, reliable estimates based on train arrivals, foot traffic,
and the extent to which emergency accommodation had to be organised, place the
refugee population at between 100â€“200,000. The city authorities did not
distinguish between residents and refugees when establishing casualty numbers
and "took great pains to count all the dead, identified and unidentified". This
was largely achievable because most of the dead succumbed to suffocation; in
only four places were recovered remains so badly burned that it proved
impossible to ascertain the number of victims. The uncertainty introduced by
this is thought to amount to a total of no more than 100. 35,000 people were
registered with the authorities as missing after the raids, around 10,000 of
whom were later found to be alive. A further 1,858 bodies were discovered
during the reconstruction of Dresden between the end of the war and 1966. Since
1989, despite extensive excavation for new buildings, no war-related bodies
have been found. Seeking to establish a definitive casualty figureâ€”in part to
address propagandisation of the bombing by far-right groupsâ€”an independent
investigation conducted in 2010 on behalf of the Dresden city council stated
that a maximum of 25,000 people were killed, of which 20,100 are known by name.
Wartime political responses. German. Development of a German political response
to the raid took several turns. Initially, some of the leadership, especially
Robert Ley and Joseph Goebbels, wanted to use it as a pretext for abandonment
of the Geneva Conventions on the Western Front. In the end, the only political
action the German government took was to exploit it for propaganda purposes.
Goebbels is reported to have wept with rage for twenty minutes after he heard
the news of the catastrophe, before launching into a bitter attack on Hermann
GÃ¶ring, the commander of the Luftwaffe: "If I had the power I would drag this
cowardly good-for-nothing, this Reich marshal, before a court... How much guilt
does this parasite not bear for all this, which we owe to his indolence and
love of his own comforts..." On 16 February, the Propaganda Ministry issued a
press release that stated that Dresden had no war industries; it was a city of
culture. On 25 February, a new leaflet with photographs of two burned children
was released under the title "Dresden â€” Massacre of Refugees," stating that
200,000 had died. Since no official estimate had been developed, the numbers
were speculative, but newspapers such as the Stockholm "Svenska Morgonbladet"
used phrases such as "privately from Berlin," to explain where they had
obtained the figures. Frederick Taylor states that "there is good reason to
believe that later in March copies of â€” or extracts from â€” official police
report were leaked to the neutral press by Goebbels's Propaganda Ministry ...
doctored with an extra zero to make total dead from the raid 202,040." On 4
March, "Das Reich", a weekly newspaper founded by Goebbels, published a lengthy
article emphasizing the suffering and destruction of a cultural icon, without
mentioning any damage the attacks had caused to the German war effort. Taylor
writes that this propaganda was effective, as it not only influenced attitudes
in neutral countries at the time, but also reached the British House of Commons
when Richard Stokes, a Labour Party Member of Parliament (MP), a long term
opponent of area-bombing, quoted information from the German Press Agency
(controlled by the Propaganda Ministry). It was Stokes' questions in the House
of Commons that were in large part responsible for the shift in the UK against
this type of raid. Taylor suggests that, although the destruction of Dresden
would have affected people's support for the Allies regardless of German
propaganda, at least some of the outrage did depend on Goebbels' massaging of
the casualty figures. British. The destruction of the city provoked unease in
intellectual circles in Britain. According to Max Hastings, by February 1945,
attacks upon German cities had become largely irrelevant to the outcome of the
war and the name of Dresden resonated with cultured people all over Europe â€”
"the home of so much charm and beauty, a refuge for Trollopeâ€™s heroines, a
landmark of the Grand Tour." He writes that the bombing was the first time the
public in Allied countries seriously questioned the military actions used to
defeat the Nazis. One of the journalists asked whether the principal aim of
bombing Dresden would be to cause confusion among the refugees or to blast
communications carrying military supplies. Grierson answered that the primary
aim was communications to prevent them moving military supplies, and to stop
movement in all directions if possible. He then added in an offhand remark that
the raid also helped destroy "what is left of German morale." Howard Cowan, an
Associated Press war correspondent, subsequently filed a story saying that the
Allies had resorted to terror bombing. There were follow-up newspaper
editorials on the issue and a longtime opponent of strategic bombing, Richard
Stokes MP, asked questions in the House of Commons on 6 March. Having been
given a paraphrased version of Churchill's memo by Bottomley, on 29 March, Air
Chief Marshal Arthur Harris wrote to the Air Ministry: Reconstruction and
reconciliation. After the war, and again after German reunification, great
efforts were made to rebuild some of Dresden's former landmarks, such as the
Frauenkirche, the Semperoper (the Saxony state opera house) and the Zwinger
Palace (the latter two were rebuilt before reunification). Despite its location
in the Soviet occupation (the "Deutsche Demokratische Republik"), in 1956
Dresden entered a twin-town relationship with Coventry. As a centre of military
and munitions production, Coventry suffered some of the worst attacks on any
English city at the hands of the Luftwaffe during the Coventry Blitzes of 1940
and 1941, which killed over 1,200 civilians and destroyed its cathedral. The
Dresden synagogue, which was burned during "Kristallnacht" on 9 November 1938,
was rebuilt in 2001 and opened for worship on 9 November. The original
synagogue's Star of David was installed above the entrance of the new building
â€“ Alfred Neugebauer, a local firefighter, saved it from the fire and hid it
in his home until the end of the war. Dresden's Jewish population declined from
4675 in 1933, to 1265 in 1941 (the eve of the implementation of the Nazis'
extermination programme), to just a handful after almost all of those who had
remained were forcibly sent to Riga, Auschwitz and Theresienstadt between 1941
and 1945. On the morning of 13 February 1945, the Jews remaining in Dresden
were ordered to report for deportation on 16 February. But as one of them,
Victor Klemperer, recorded in his diaries: "...on the evening of this 13
February the catastrophe overtook Dresden: the bombs fell, the houses
collapsed, the phosphorus flowed, the burning beams crashed on to the heads of
Aryans and non-Aryans alike and Jew and Christian met death in the same
firestorm; whoever of the was spared by this night was delivered, for in the
general chaos he could escape the Gestapo." But in recent years the Jewish
population has swelled in Dresden, as it has elsewhere in Germany. Paul
Spiegel, the then head of Germany's Jewish Community, called the new synagogue
a concrete expression of the Jewish community's desire to stay. In 1990, after
the fall of the Berlin Wall, a group of prominent Dresdeners formed an
international appeal known as the "Call from Dresden" to request help in
rebuilding the Lutheran Frauenkirche, the destruction of which had over the
years become a symbol of the bombing. The baroque Church of Our Lady (completed
in 1743) had initially appeared to survive the raids, but collapsed a few days
later, and the ruins were left in place by later Communist governments as a
symbol of British aggression. A British charity, the Dresden Trust, was formed
in 1993 to raise funds in the UK in response to the call for help, raising
Â£600,000 from 2,000 people and 100 companies and trusts in Britain. One of the
gifts they made to the project was an eight-metre high orb and cross made in
London by goldsmiths Gant MacDonald, using medieval nails recovered from the
ruins of the roof of Coventry Cathedral, and crafted in part by Alan Smith, the
son of a pilot who took part in the raid. During her visit to Germany in
November 2004, Queen Elizabeth II hosted a concert in Berlin to raise money for
the reconstruction of the Frauenkirche. The visit was accompanied by
speculation in the British and German press, fueled mostly by the tabloids,
over a possible apology for the attacks, but none was forthcoming. The new
Frauenkircheâ€”reconstructed over seven years by architects using 3D computer
technology to analyse old photographs and every piece of rubble that had been
keptâ€”was formally consecrated on 30 October 2005, in a service attended by
some 1,800 guests, including Germany's president, Horst KÃ¶hler; previous and
current chancellors, Gerhard SchrÃ¶der and Angela Merkel; and the Duke of Kent.
Post-war debate. British historian Frederick Taylor wrote of the attacks: "The
destruction of Dresden has an epically tragic quality to it. It was a
wonderfully beautiful city and a symbol of baroque humanism and all that was
best in Germany. It also contained all of the worst from Germany during the
Nazi period. In that sense it is an absolutely exemplary tragedy for the
horrors of 20th century warfare and a symbol of destruction." A number of
factors have made the bombing a unique point of contention and debate. These
include the beauty of the city, and its importance as a cultural icon; the
deliberate creation of a firestorm; the number of victims killed; the extent to
which it was a necessary military target; and the fact that it was attacked
toward the end of the war, raising the question of whether the bombing was
needed to hasten the end. Legal considerations. The Hague Conventions,
addressing the codes of wartime conduct on land and at sea, were adopted before
the rise of air power. Despite repeated diplomatic attempts to update
international humanitarian law to include aerial warfare, it was not updated
before the outbreak of World War II. The absence of positive international
humanitarian law does not mean that the laws of war did not cover aerial
warfare, but there was no general agreement of how to interpret those laws.
Falsification of evidence. The bombing of Dresden has been manipulated by
Holocaust deniers and pro-Nazi polemicistsâ€”most notably by the British writer
David Irving in his book "The Destruction of Dresden"â€”in an attempt to
establish a moral equivalence between the death toll of Jews in German
concentration camps and the indiscriminate killing of German civilians by
Allied bombing raids. As such, "grossly inflated" casualty figures have been
promulgated over the years, many based on a figure of over 200,000 deaths
quoted in a forged version of the casualty report, "Tagesbefehl" No. 47, that
originated with Hitler's Reich Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels. That it
was necessary or justified. Marshall inquiry. An inquiry conducted at the
behest of U.S. Army Chief of Staff, General George C. Marshall, stated the raid
was justified by the available intelligence. The inquiry declared the
elimination of the German ability to reinforce a counter-attack against Marshal
Konev's extended line or, alternatively, to retreat and regroup using Dresden
as a base of operations, were important military objectives. As Dresden had
been largely untouched during the war due to its location, it was one of the
few remaining functional rail and communications centres. A secondary objective
was to disrupt the industrial use of Dresden for munitions manufacture, which
American intelligence believed to be the case. The shock to military planners
and to the Allied civilian populations of the German counterattack known as the
Battle of the Bulge had ended speculation that the war was almost over, and may
have contributed to the decision to continue with the aerial bombardment of
German cities. The inquiry concluded that by the presence of active German
military units nearby, and the presence of fighters and anti-aircraft within an
effective range, Dresden qualified as "defended". By this stage in the war both
the British and the Germans had integrated air defences at the national level.
The German national air-defence system could be used to argueâ€”as the tribunal
didâ€”that no German city was "undefended". Marshall's tribunal declared that
no extraordinary decision was made to single out Dresden (e.g. to take
advantage of the large number of refugees, or purposely terrorize the German
populace). It was argued that the intent of area bombing was to disrupt
communications and destroy industrial production. The American inquiry
established that the Soviets, pursuant to allied agreements for the United
States and the United Kingdom to provide air support for the Soviet offensive
toward Berlin, had requested area bombing of Dresden in order to prevent a
counterattack through Dresden, or the use of Dresden as a regrouping point
after a strategic retreat. U.S. Air Force Historical Division report. The first
point regarding the legitimacy of the raid depends on two claims: first, that
the railyards subjected to American precision bombing were an important
logistical target, and that the city was also an important industrial centre.
Even after the main firebombing, there were two further raids on the Dresden
railway yards by the USAAF. The first was on 2 March 1945, by 406 B-17s, which
dropped 940 tons of high-explosive bombs and 141 tons of incendiaries. The
second was on 17 April, when 580 B-17s dropped 1,554 tons of high-explosive
bombs and 165 tons of incendiaries. As far as Dresden being a militarily
significant industrial centre, an official 1942 guide described the German city
as "one of the foremost industrial locations of the Reich" and in 1944, the
German Army High Command's Weapons Office listed 127 medium-to-large factories
and workshops which supplied the army with materiel. Dresden was the seventh
largest German city and by far the largest unbombed built-up area left and thus
was contributing to the defence of Germany itself. According to the USAFHD,
there were 110 factories and 50,000 workers supporting the German war effort in
Dresden at the time of the raid. These factories manufactured fuses and
bombsights (at Zeiss Ikon A.G.), aircraft components, anti-aircraft guns, field
guns, and small arms, poison gas, gears and differentials, electrical and X-ray
apparatus, electric gauges, gas masks, Junkers aircraft engines, and
Messerschmitt fighter cockpit parts. The second of the five points addresses
the prohibition in the Hague Conventions, of "attack or bombardment" of
"undefended" towns. The USAFHD report states that Dresden was protected by
anti-aircraft defences, antiaircraft guns, and searchlights, under the Combined
Dresden (Corps Area IV) and Berlin (Corps Area III) Luftwaffe Administration
Commands. The third and fourth points say that the size of the Dresden raid â€”
in terms of numbers, types of bombs and the means of delivery â€” were
commensurate with the military objective and similar to other Allied bombings.
On 23 February 1945, the Allies bombed Pforzheim and caused an estimated 20,000
civilian fatalities; a raid on Tokyo on 9â€“10 March caused over 100,000
civilian casualties. The tonnage and types of bombs listed in the service
records of the Dresden raid were comparable to (or less than) throw weights of
bombs dropped in other air attacks carried out in 1945. In the case of Dresden,
as in many other similar attacks, the hour break in between the RAF raids was a
deliberate ploy to attack the fire fighters and rescue crews. In late July
1943, the city of Hamburg was bombed in Operation Gomorrah by combined RAF and
USAAF strategic bomber forces. Four major raids were carried out in the span of
10 days, of which the most notable, on 27â€“28 July, created a devastating
firestorm effect similar to Dresden's, killing at least 45,000 people. Two
thirds of the remaining population reportedly fled the city after the raids.
The fifth point is that the firebombing achieved the intended effect of
disabling the industry in Dresden. It was estimated that at least 23% of the
city's industrial buildings were destroyed or severely damaged. The damage to
other infrastructure and communications was immense, which would have severely
limited the potential use of Dresden to stop the Soviet advance. The report
concludes with: and Germany had committed all its fighters originally dedicated
to air defence at the Battle of the Bulge. As for anti-aircraft guns, it took
an average of 16,000 88 mm Flak shells to bring down a single Allied heavy
bomber. --> That it was not necessary or justified. Military reasons. The
historian Alexander McKee has cast doubt on the meaningfulness of the list of
targets mentioned in 1953 USAAF report and point out that the military barracks
listed as a target were a long way out of town and not in fact targeted during
the raid. The 'hutted camps' mentioned in the report as military targets were
also not military but were provided for refugees. It is also pointed out that
the important Autobahn bridge to the west of the city was not targeted or
attacked and that no railway stations were on the British target maps, nor were
the bridges, such as the railway bridge spanning the Elbe River. Commenting on
this Alexander McKee stated that: "The standard whitewash gambit, both British
and American, is to mention that Dresden contained targets X, Y and Z, and to
let the innocent reader assume that these targets were attacked, whereas in
fact the bombing plan totally omitted them and thus, except for one or two mere
accidents, they escaped" McKee further asserts, "The bomber commanders were not
really interested in any purely military or economic targets, which was just as
well, for they knew very little about Dresden; the RAF even lacked proper maps
of the city. What they were looking for was a big built up area which they
could burn, and that Dresden possessed in full measure" According to historian
Sonke Neitzel, "it is difficult to find any evidence in German documents that
the destruction of Dresden had any consequences worth mentioning on the Eastern
Front. The industrial plants of Dresden played no significant role in Germany
industry at this stage in the war" Wing Commander H. R. Allen said, "The final
phase of Bomber Command's operations was far and away the worst. Traditional
British chivalry and the use of minimum force in war was to become a mockery
and the outrages perpetrated by the bombers will be remembered a thousand years
hence" Military facilities in the north. In the north of Dresden there were
remarkable military facilities in the Albertstadt which were not hit by the
bombings. Today they are still there, used as officer education buildings for
the German Bundeswehr and hosting Germany's military-historic museum (from
stone-age to modern times). As an immoral act, but not a war crime. Frederick
Taylor told "Der Spiegel", "I personally find the attack on Dresden horrific.
It was overdone, it was excessive and is to be regretted enormously", but "a
war crime is a very specific thing which international lawyers argue about all
the time and I would not be prepared to commit myself nor do I see why I
should. I'm a historian." Similarly, British philosopher A. C. Grayling has
described British area bombardment as an "immoral act" and "moral crime"
because "destroying everything ... contravenes every moral and humanitarian
principle debated in connection with the just conduct of war", but "it is not
strictly correct to describe area bombing as a 'war crime'." As a war crime.
Though no one involved in the bombing of Dresden was ever charged with a war
crime, there are those that hold the opinion that the bombing was a war crime.
Historian Donald Bloxham states, "The bombing of Dresden on 13â€“14 February
1945 was a war crime." He further argues there was a strong "prima facie" case
for trying Winston Churchill among others and a theoretical case Churchill
could have been found guilty. "This should be a sobering thought. If, however
it is also a startling one, this is probably less the result of widespread
understanding of the nuance of international law and more because in the
popular mind 'war criminal', like 'paedophile' or 'terrorist', has developed
into a moral rather than a legal categorisation." German author GÃ¼nter Grass
is one of a number of intellectuals and commentators who have also called the
bombing a war crime. Proponents of the war crime position argue the devastation
known to be caused by firebombing was greater than anything that could be
justified by military necessity alone, and this establishes their case on a
"prima facie" basis. The Allies were aware of the effects of firebombing, as
British cities had been subject to them during the Blitz. War crime proponents
say that Dresden did not have a military garrison, that most of the industry
was in the outskirts and not in the targeted city centre, and that the cultural
significance of the city should have precluded the Allies from bombing it.
British historian Antony Beevor wrote that Dresden was considered relatively
safe, having been spared previous RAF night attacks, and that at the time of
the raids there were up to 300,000 refugees in the city seeking sanctuary from
the fighting on the Eastern Front. In "Fire Sites", Austrian historian JÃ¶rg
Friedrich agrees the RAF's relentless bombing campaign against German cities in
the last months of the war served no military purpose. Far-right in Germany.
Far-right politicians in Germany have sparked a great deal of controversy by
promoting the term ""Bombenholocaust"" ("holocaust by bomb") to describe the
raids. "Der Spiegel" writes that, for decades, the Communist government of East
Germany promoted the bombing as an example of "Anglo-American terror," and now
the same rhetoric is being used by the far right. An example can be found in
the "Nationaldemokratische Partei Deutschlands" (NPD). A party's
representative, JÃ¼rgen Gansel, described the Dresden raids as "mass murder,"
and "Dresden's Holocaust of bombs." This provoked an outrage in the German
parliament and triggered responses from Jewish interest groups and the media,
especially since German law forbids denial or minimization of the Holocaust.
However, prosecutors said that it was legal to call the bombing a holocaust. In
2010, several demonstrations by organizations opposing the far-right blocked a
demonstration of far-right organizations. In popular culture. Kurt Vonnegut.
Kurt Vonnegut's novel "Slaughterhouse-Five or The Children's Crusade: A Duty-
Dance with Death" (1969) was a satirical novel that used some elements from his
experiences as a prisoner of war at Dresden during the bombing. His account
relates that over 135,000 were killed during the firebombings. Vonnegut
recalled "utter destruction" and "carnage unfathomable." The Germans put him
and other POWs to work gathering bodies for mass burial. "But there were too
many corpses to bury. So instead the Nazis sent in troops with flamethrowers.
All these civilians' remains were burned to ashes." This experience was also
used in several of his other books and is included in his posthumously
published stories: "Armageddon in Retrospect". References to Kurt Vonnegut's
character as a prisoner of war in Dresden can also be found in Joseph Heller's
novel, Closing Time in which one of the characters, Lew Rabinowitz was also a
prisoner of war in Dresden and mentions several times that he knew and worked
with a man called Vonnegut there. Other. The German diarist Victor Klemperer
includes a first-hand account of the firestorm in his published works. Miles
Tripp, who was a bomb aimer in one of the aircraft which bombed Dresden, wrote
a novel, "Faith is a Windsock" (1953), plus a non-fiction work, "The Eighth
Passenger" (1969), based on his experiences. JÃ³zef Mackiewicz, a Polish
writer, included a shockingly realistic description of the bombing of Dresden
in the final part of his quasi-documentary novel "Colonel Miasoyedov's Case"
(1962). The main action of the novel "Closely Observed Trains", by Czech author
Bohumil Hrabal, takes place on the night of the first raid. In the 1983 Pink
Floyd album "The Final Cut", "The Hero's Return", the protagonist lives his
years after WWII tormented by "desperate memories", part of him still flying
"over Dresden at angels 1â€“5" (fifteen-thousand feet). Jonathan Safran Foer's
novel "Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close" (2005) incorporates the bombings
into essential parts of the story. The bombings are a central theme in the 2006
German TV production "Dresden" by director Roland Suso Richter. Despite the
romantic plot between a British bomber pilot and a German nurse, the movie
attempts to reconstruct the facts surrounding the Dresden bombings from both
the perspective of the RAF pilots as well as the Germans in Dresden at the
time. Daniel Bukvich wrote a musical interpretation of the events called
"Symphony No. 1 (In Memorium, Dresden, 1945)". The hatecore band Rahowa, in
their album, "Declaration of War", recorded a song "Avenge Dresden" about the
Bombings, demonizing Churchill and sympathizing with Hitler while alluding to
the Creativity Movement and Holocaust denier David Irving. The protagonist of
The Dresden Files by Jim Butcher uses fire as his main weapon, and a
description of when he destroys a building with it is similar in occurrence to
the Firebombing of Dresden.
