Catalonia Catalonia (, ; or ; ; ) is an autonomous community of Spain, with the
official status of a "nationality". Catalonia comprises four provinces:
Barcelona, Girona, Lleida, and Tarragona. Its capital and largest city is
Barcelona, the second largest city in Spain after Madrid, and the center of one
of the largest metropolitan areas in Europe. Catalonia covers an area of
32,114Â kmÂ² and has an official population of 7,535,251. It comprises the
larger part of the territory of the former Principality of Catalonia, with the
remainder of the historic Catalan region now part of southern France. Catalonia
borders France and Andorra to the north and the Mediterranean Sea to the east
(580Â km coastline). The neighbouring Spanish regions of Aragon and the
Valencian Community lie to the west and south respectively. The official
languages are Catalan, Spanish, and Aranese (Occitan); Catalan Sign Language is
also officially recognized. Etymology. The name "Catalunya" (Catalonia) began
to be used in the late 11th century in reference to the group of counties that
comprised the Marca Hispanica. The origin of the term is subject to diverse
interpretations. A theory suggests that "Catalunya" derives from the term "Land
of Castles", having evolved from the term "castlÃ ", the ruler of a castle (see
castellan). This theory therefore suggests that the names "Castile" and
"Catalonia" have the same etymology. Another theory suggests that "Catalunya"
(Latin "Gathia Launia") derives from the name "Gothia" (or "Gauthia"), "Land of
the Goths", since the Spanish March was first known as "Gothia", whence
"Gothland" > "Gothlandia" > "Gothalania" > "Catalonia" theoretically derived.
During the Middle Ages, Byzantine chroniclers claimed that "Catalania" derives
from the local medley of Goths with Alans, initially constituting a "Goth-
Alania". Another theory points to the source as an indigenous name, of Celtic
origin, meaning "chiefs of battle." Yet another less accepted theory points to
the Lacetani, an Iberian tribe that lived in the area and whose name, due to
the Roman influence, could have evolved by metathesis to "Katelans" and then
"Catalans". History. Like some other parts in the rest of the Mediterranean
coast of the Iberian Peninsula, Catalonia was colonised by Ancient Greeks, who
settled around the Roses area. Both Greeks and Carthaginians (who, in the
course of the Second Punic War, briefly ruled the territory) interacted with
the main Iberian substratum. After the Carthaginian defeat by Rome, it became,
along with the rest of Hispania, part of the Roman Empire, Tarraco being one of
the main Roman posts in the Iberian Peninsula. Catalonia then came under
Visigothic rule for four centuries after Rome's collapse. In the 8th century,
it came under Moorish Al-Andalus control. Still, after the defeat of Emir Abdul
Rahman Al Ghafiqi's troops at Tours in 732, the Franks conquered former
Visigoth states which had been captured by the Muslims or had become allied
with them in what today is the northernmost part of Catalonia. Charlemagne
created in 795 what came to be known as the Marca Hispanica, a buffer zone
beyond the province of Septimania made up of locally administered separate
petty kingdoms which served as a defensive barrier between the Umayyad Moors of
Al-Andalus and the Frankish Kingdom. The Catalan culture started to develop
during the Middle Ages in a number of these petty kingdoms organised as small
counties throughout the northernmost part of Catalonia. The counts of Barcelona
were Frankish vassals nominated by the emperor and then the king of France, to
whom they were feudatories (801â€“987). In 987, the count of Barcelona did not
recognise the French king Hugh Capet and his new dynasty, which put Catalonia
effectively beyond Frankish rule. In 1137, Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of
Barcelona married Queen Petronilla of Aragon, establishing the dynastic union
of the County of Barcelona with the Kingdom of Aragon that was to create the
Crown of Aragon. It was not until 1258, by means of the Treaty of Corbeil, that
the king of France formally relinquished his feudal lordship over the counties
of the Principality of Catalonia to the king of Aragon James I, descendant of
Ramon Berenguer IV. This Treaty transformed the region's "de facto" autonomy
into a "de jure" direct Aragonese rule. As part of the Crown of Aragon,
Catalonia became a maritime power, helping expand the Crown by trade and
conquest into the Kingdom of Valencia, the Balearic Islands, and ultimately
even Sardinia, Sicily, Corsica, Naples, Athens. Aragon had been very severely
hit by the Black Death and by continuing outbreaks of plague. According to John
Huxtable Elliott, "Between 1347 and 1497 the Principality had lost 37% of its
inhabitants, and was reduced to a population of something like 300,000." In
1410, King Martin I died without surviving descendants. As a result, by the
Pact of Caspe, Ferdinand of Antequera from the Castilian dynasty of TrastÃ¡mara
received the Crown of Aragon as Ferdinand I of Aragon. His grandson, King
Ferdinand II of Aragon, and Queen Isabella I of Castile married in 1469,
becoming the Catholic Monarchs; subsequently, this event was seen as the dawn
of the Kingdom of Spain. At that point, though united by marriage, the Crowns
of Castile and Aragon maintained distinct territories, each keeping its own
traditional institutions, Parliaments, and laws. Castile commissioned the
expeditions to the Americas, and benefited from the colonial riches. Political
power had shifted away from Aragon toward Castile and, subsequently, from
Castile to the unified Spanish Empire. By virtue of descent from his maternal
grandparents, Ferdinand II and Isabella I, in 1516 Charles I (Carlos I) became
the first king to rule Castile-LeÃ³n and Aragon simultaneously in his own
right. Following the death of his paternal (Habsburg) grandfather, Maximilian
I, he was also elected Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire in 1519 as Charles V
For an extended period, Catalonia, as part of the former Crown of Aragon,
continued to retain its own usages and laws, but these gradually eroded in the
course of the transition from feudalism to a modern state, fueled by the kings'
struggle to have more centralized territories. Over the next few centuries,
Catalonia was generally on the losing side of a series of local conflicts that
led steadily to more centralization of power in Spain, like the Reapers' War
(1640â€“52). In 1659 the Spanish Crown offered the Roussillon territory to the
Kingdom of France. Now this territory is the Department of PyrÃ©nÃ©es-
Orientales, and also is named Northern Catalonia ("Catalunya Nord"). The most
significant conflict was the War of the Spanish Succession, which began when
Charles II of Spain (the last Spanish Habsburg) died without a direct heir in
1700. Catalonia, like the other territories that had formed the Crown of Aragon
in the Middle Ages, mostly rose up in support of the Habsburg pretender Charles
VI of Valencia Holy Roman Emperor, while the rest of Spain mostly adhered to
the French Bourbon claimant, Philip V. Following the fall of Barcelona on 11
September 1714, the "special status" of the territories belonging to the former
Crown of Aragon and its institutions was abolished by the Nueva Planta decrees,
under which all its lands were incorporated to the Crown of Castile as
provinces, within a united Spanish administration, as Spain moved towards a
centralised government under the new Bourbon dynasty. In the latter half of the
19th century, Catalonia became an industrial center; to this day it remains one
of the most industrialised parts of Spain. In the first third of the 20th
century, Catalonia gained and lost varying degrees of autonomy several times,
receiving its first statute of autonomy during the Second Spanish Republic
(1931). This period was marked by political unrest and the preeminence of the
Anarchists during the Spanish Civil War (1936â€“39). The Anarchists had been
active throughout the early 20th century, achieving the first eight-hour
workday in the world in 1919. After the defeat of the Republic in the civil
war, which brought General Francisco Franco to power, his regime suppressed any
kind of public activities associated with Catalan nationalism, Anarchism,
Socialism, Democracy or Communism, including the publication of books on those
subjects or simply discussion of them in open meetings. As part of this
suppression, the use of Catalan in government-run institutions and during
public events was banned. The President of Catalonia at the time, LluÃ­s
Companys, was tortured and executed for the crime of 'military rebellion' by
the Franco regime. During later stages of the Franco regime, certain folkloric
and religious celebrations in Catalan resumed and were tolerated. Use of
Catalan in the mass media had been forbidden, but was permitted from the early
1950s in the theatre. Publishing in Catalan continued throughout the
dictatorship. After Franco's death in 1975 and the adoption of a democratic
Spanish Constitution in 1978, Catalonia recovered political and cultural
autonomy. Today, Catalonia is one of the most economically dynamic regions of
Spain. The Catalan capital and largest city, Barcelona, is a major
international cultural centre and a major tourist destination. Geography.
Climate. The climate of Catalonia is diverse. The populated areas lying by the
coast in Tarragona, Barcelona and Girona provinces feature a Mediterranean
climate (KÃ¶ppen "Csa"). The inland part (including the Lleida province and the
inner part of Barcelona province) show a mostly continental Mediterranean
climate (KÃ¶ppen "Csa"). The Pyrenean peaks have a mountain (KÃ¶ppen "H") or
even Alpine climate (KÃ¶ppen "ET") at the highest summits, while the valleys
have a maritime or oceanic climate sub-type (KÃ¶ppen "Cfb"). In the
Mediterranean area, summers are dry and hot with sea breezes, and the maximum
temperature is around 26-31 Â°C. Winter is cool or slightly cold depending on
the location. It snows frequently in the Pyrenees, and it occasionally snows at
lower altitudes, even by the coastline. Spring and autumn are typically the
rainiest seasons, except for the Pyrenean valleys, where summer is typically
stormy. The inland part of Catalonia is hotter and drier in summer. Temperature
may reach 35 Â°C, some days even 40 Â°C. Nights are cooler there than at the
coast, with the temperature of around 14-16 Â°C. Fog is not uncommon in valleys
and plains; it can be especially persistent, with freezing drizzle episodes and
subzero temperatures during winter, along the Segre and in other river valleys.
Hydrography. Most of Catalonia belongs to the Mediterranean Basin. The Catalan
hydrographic network consists of two important basins, the one of the Ebro and
the one that comprises the internal basins of Catalonia, all of them flow to
the Mediterranean. Furthermore, there is the Garona river basin that flows to
the Atlantic Ocean, but it only covers the 1.73% of the Catalan territory. The
hydrographic network can be divided in two sectors, an occidental slope or Ebre
river slope and one oriental slope constituted by minor rivers that flow to the
Mediterranean along the Catalan coast. The first slope provides an average of
18,700 hm3/year, while the second only provides an average of 2,020 hm3/year.
The difference is due to the big contribution of the Ebre river, from which the
Segre is an important tributary. Moreover, in Catalonia there is a relative
wealth of groundwaters, although there is inequality between "comarques", given
the complex geological structure of the territory. In the Pyrenees there are
many small lakes, remnants of the ice age. The biggest is the one of Banyoles.
The Catalan coast is almost rectilinear, with a length over 500Â km and few
landformsâ€”the most relevant are the Cap de Creus and the Gulf of Roses to the
north and the Ebre Delta to the south. The Catalan Coastal Range hugs the
coastline, and it is split into two segments, one between L'Estartit and the
town of Blanes (the Costa Brava), and the other at the south, at the Costes del
Garraf. The principal rivers in Catalonia are the Ter, Llobregat, and the Ebre,
all of which run into the Mediterranean. Politics. After Franco's death in 1975
and the adoption of a democratic constitution in Spain in 1978, Catalonia
recovered and extended the powers that it had gained in the Statute of Autonomy
of 1932 but lost with the fall of the Second Spanish Republic at the end of the
Spanish Civil War in 1939. The region has gradually achieved more autonomy
since 1979. The Generalitat holds exclusive jurisdiction in culture,
environment, communications, transportation, commerce, public safety and local
government, and shares jurisdiction with the Spanish government in education,
health and justice. A relatively large sector of the population supports the
ideas and policies of Catalan nationalism (also known as Catalanism), a
political movement which defends the notion that Catalonia is a separate nation
and advocates for either further political autonomy or full independence of
Catalonia. In the last Catalan parliamentary election, the parties that are
considered nationalist have obtained 50.02% of the votes and hold 72 of the 135
seats in the Catalan Parliament. Parties supporting full independence from the
rest of Spain have obtained 11.56% of the votes, down from 14.08% in 2006 and
16.5% in 2003. Parties that consider themselves either Catalan nationalist or
independentist have been present in all Catalan governments since 1980. The
largest Catalan nationalist party, Convergence and Union, has ruled Catalonia
from 1980 to 2003, and has come back to power in the 2010 election. Between
2003 and 2010, a leftist coalition, composed by the Catalan Socialists' Party,
the pro-independence Republican Left of Catalonia and the leftist-
environmentalist Initiative for Catalonia-Greens, implemented policies that
widened Catalan autonomy. The support for Catalan nationalism ranges from the
desire for independence from the rest of Spain, expressed by Catalan
independentists, to a more general demand for further autonomy and the
federalisation of Spain. Since 2007, support for Catalan independence has been
on the rise. According to an opinion poll from July 2007, two thirds of
Catalans believed Catalonia should have a higher level of autonomy, but only
16.5% supported full independence from Spain. The first survey following the
Constitutional Court ruling that cut back elements of the 2006 Statute of
Autonomy, published by "La Vanguardia" on July 18, 2010, found that a majority
would support independence in a referendum. Already in February of the same
year, a poll by the Open University of Catalonia gave more or less the same
results. Other polls have shown lower support for independence, ranging from 40
to 49%. In hundreds of non-binding local referendums on independence, organised
across Catalonia from 13 September 2009, a large majority voted for
independence, although critics argued that the polls were mostly held in pro-
independence areas. As of December 2009, 94% of those voting backed
independence from Spain, on a turn out of 25%. The final local referendum was
held in Barcelona, in April 2011. On Sept. 11, 2012, a pro-independence march
pulled in a crowd of an estimated 1.5 million, and poll results revealed that
half the population of Catalonia supported secession from Spain. Two major
factors were Spain's Constitutional Court's 2010 decision to declare part of
the 2006 Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia unconstitutional, as well as the fact
that Catalonia contributes 19.49% of the federal governmentâ€™s tax revenue,
but only receives 14.03% of federal spending. Statutes of Autonomy. The Statute
of Autonomy of Catalonia is the fundamental organic law, second only to the
Spanish Constitution from which the Statute originates. In the Spanish
Constitution of 1978 Catalonia, along with the Basque Country and Galicia, was
defined as a "nationality". The same constitution gave Catalonia the automatic
right to autonomy, which resulted in the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia of
1979. Both the 1979 Statute of Autonomy and the current one, approved in 2006,
state that "Catalonia, as a nationality, exercises its self-government
constituted as an Autonomous Community in accordance with the Constitution and
with the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia, which is its basic institutional
law, always under the law in Spain". The Preamble of the 2006 Statute of
Autonomy of Catalonia states that the Parliament of Catalonia has defined
Catalonia as a nation, but that "the Spanish Constitution recognizes
Catalonia's national reality as a nationality". While the Statute was approved
by and sanctioned by both the Catalan and Spanish parliaments, and later by
referendum in Catalonia, it has been subject to a legal challenge by the
surrounding autonomous regions of Aragon, Balearic Islands and the Valencian
Community, as well as by the conservative People's Party. The objections are
based on various issues such as disputed cultural heritage but, especially, on
the Statute's alleged breaches of the principle of "solidarity between regions"
in fiscal and educational matters enshrined by the Constitution. After
considerable legal debate, Spain's Constitutional Court assessed the disputed
articles and on 28 June 2010, issued its judgment on the principal allegation
of unconstitutionality presented by the People's Party in 2006. The judgment
granted clear passage to 182 articles of the 223 that make up the fundamental
text. The court approved 73 of the 114 articles that the People's Party had
contested, while declaring 14 articles unconstitutional in whole or in part and
imposing a restrictive interpretation on 27 others. The court accepted the
specific provision that described Catalonia as a "nation", however ruled that
it was a historical and cultural term with no legal weight, and that Spain
remained the only nation recognized by the constitution. Government and law.
The Catalan Statute of Autonomy establishes that Catalonia is organised
politically through the "Generalitat de Catalunya", conformed by the
Parliament, the Presidency of the Generalitat, the Government or Executive
Council and the other institutions created by the Parliament. The seat of the
Executive Council is the city of Barcelona. Since the restoration of the
Generalitat on the return of democracy in Spain, the presidents of Catalonia
have been Jordi Pujol (1980â€“2003), Pasqual Maragall (2003â€“2006), JosÃ©
Montilla Aguilera (2006â€“2010) and Artur Mas incumbent . Security forces.
Catalonia has its own police force, the "Mossos d'Esquadra", whose origins date
back to the 18th century. Since 1980 they have been under the command of the
Generalitat, and since 1994 they have expanded in number in order to replace
the national "Guardia Civil" and "PolicÃ­a Nacional", which report directly to
the Homeland Department of Spain. The national bodies retain personnel within
Catalonia to exercise functions of national scope such as overseeing ports,
airports, coasts, international borders, custom offices, the identification of
documents and arms control amongst others. Most of the justice system is
administered by national judicial institutions. The criminal justice system is
uniform throughout Spain, while "civil law" is administered separately within
Catalonia. Navarre, the Basque Country and Catalonia are the Spanish regions
with the highest degree of autonomy in terms of law enforcement. Administrative
and territorial division. Catalonia is organised territorially into provinces,
further subdivided into comarques and municipalities. The 2006 Statute of
Autonomy of Catalonia establishes the administrative organization of three
local authorities: vegueries, comarques, and municipalities. Municipalities.
There are at present 947 municipalities in Catalonia. Comarques. Comarques are
entities composed by the municipalities to manage their responsibilities and
services. The current regional division has its roots in a decree of the
Generalitat de Catalunya of 1936, in effect until 1939, when it was suppressed
by Franco. In 1987 the Government adopted the territorial division again and in
1988 three new comarques were added (Alta RibagorÃ§a, Pla d'Urgell i Pla de
l'Estany). At present there are 41. The comarca of Val d'Aran (Aran Valley) has
a special status and its autonomous government is named Conselh Generau d'Aran.
Vegueries. The "vegueria" is a new type of division defined as a specific
territorial area for the exercise of government and inter-local cooperation
with legal personality. The current Statute of Autonomy states vegueries are
intended to supersede provinces in Catalonia, and take over many of functions
of the comarques. The territorial plan of Catalonia ("Pla territorial general
de Catalunya") provided six general functional areas, but was amended by Law
24/2001, of December 31, recognizing the Alt Pirineu i Aran as a new functional
area differentiated of Ponent. On 14 July 2010 the Catalan Parliament approved
the creation of the functional area of the PenedÃ¨s. Economy. In 2008, the
regional GDP of Catalonia was â‚¬216.9 billion ($314.4 billion), the highest in
Spain, and per capita GDP was â‚¬30,700 â€“ similar to that of countries such
as the United Kingdom or Austria. However, it had the fourth per capita GDP in
Spain, considerably behind the Basque Country (â‚¬34,100), Madrid (autonomous
community) (â‚¬34,100) and Navarra (â‚¬32,900). In that year, the GDP growth
was 3.7%. In the context of the 2008 financial crisis, Catalonia was expected
to suffer a recession amounting to almost a 2% contraction of its regional GDP
in 2009. In 2011, Catalonia ranked the 50th largest country subdivision by GDP
(nominal), just behind Queensland (Australia) and ahead Rio de Janeiro state
(Brazil). Catalonia is one of the Four Motors for Europe. The main tourist
destinations in Catalonia are the city of Barcelona, the beaches of the Costa
Brava in Girona, the beaches of Costa Barcelona from MatarÃ³ to Vilanova i la
GeltrÃº and the Costa Daurada in Tarragona. In the Pyrenees there are several
ski resorts, near Lleida Many savings banks are based in Catalonia, with 10 of
the 46 Spanish savings banks having headquarters in the region. This list
includes Europe's premier savings bank, La Caixa. The first private bank in
Catalonia is Banc Sabadell, ranked fourth among all Spanish private banks. The
stock market of Barcelona, which in 2004 traded almost â‚¬205,000 million, is
the second largest of Spain after Madrid, and Fira de Barcelona organizes
international exhibitions and congresses to do with different sectors of the
economy. The main economic cost for the Catalan families is the purchase of a
home. According to data from the Society of Appraisal on the 31 December 2005
Catalonia is, after Madrid, the second most expensive region in Spain for
housing: 3,397 â‚¬/mÂ² on average (see Spanish property bubble). Demographics.
Catalonia covers an area of 32,114Â kmÂ² with an official population of
7,354,411 (2008), of which non-Spanish immigrants represent an estimated 12.3%.
The Urban Region of Barcelona includes 5,217,864 people and covers an area of
2.268Â kmÂ², and about 1.7 million people live in a radius of 15Â km from
Barcelona. The metropolitan area of the Urban Region includes cities such as
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Sabadell, Terrassa, Badalona, Santa Coloma de
Gramenet and CornellÃ  de Llobregat. In 1900, the population of Catalonia was
1,984,115 people and in 1970 it was 5,107,606. That increase was due to the
demographic boom in Spain during the 60s and early 70s and also to the large-
scale internal migration from the rural interior of Spain to its industrial
cities. In Catalonia that wave of internal migration arrived from several
regions of Spain, especially Andalusia, Murcia and Extremadura. Immigrants from
other countries settled in Catalonia in the 1990s and 2000s; a large percentage
came from Africa and Latin America, and smaller numbers from Asia and Eastern
Europe, often settling in urban centers such as Barcelona and industrial areas.
Languages. According to the most recent linguistic census held by the
Government of Catalonia , a plurality claims Spanish as "their own language"
(46.53% Spanish compared to 37.26% Catalan). In everyday use, 11.95% of the
population claim to use both languages equally, while 45.92% mainly use Spanish
and 35.54% mainly use Catalan. There is a significant difference between the
Barcelona metropolitan area (and, to a lesser extent, the Tarragona area),
where Spanish is more spoken than Catalan, and the rest of Catalonia, where
Catalan clearly prevails over Spanish. Since the Statute of Autonomy of 1979,
Aranese (a dialect of Gascon Occitan) has also been official and subject to
special protection in Val d'Aran. This small area of 7,000 inhabitants was the
only place where a dialect of Occitan has received full official status. Then,
on 9 August 2006, when the new Statute came into force, Occitan became official
throughout Catalonia. Occitan is the mother tongue of 22.4% of the population
of Val d'Aran. Originating in the historic territory of Catalonia, Catalan has
enjoyed special status since the approval of the Statute of Autonomy of 1979
which declares it to be the "own language of Catalonia", a term which signifies
a language given special legal status within a Spanish territory, or which is
historically spoken within a given region. The other languages with official
status are Spanish, which has official status throughout Spain, and Aranese
Occitan, which enjoys co-official status with Catalan and Spanish in the Val
d'Aran. Although not considered an "official language" in the same way as
Catalan, Spanish, and Aranese, Catalan Sign Language, with about 18,000 users
in Catalonia, is granted official recognition and support: "The public
authorities shall guarantee the use of Catalan sign language and conditions of
equality for deaf people who chooses to use this language, which shall be the
subject of education, protection and respect." Under the Franco dictatorship,
Catalan was excluded from the public education system and all other official
use, so that for example families were not allowed to officially register
children with Catalan names. While never completely banned, Catalan language
publishing was severely restricted during the early '40s, with only religious
texts and small-run self-published texts being released. Some books were
published clandestinely or circumvented the restrictions by showing publishing
dates prior to 1936. This policy was changed in 1946, when unrestricted
publishing in Catalan resumed. Rural-urban migration originating in other parts
of Spain also reduced the social use of the language in urban areas, while
increasing the use of Spanish. Lately, a similar sociolinguistic phenomenon has
occurred with foreign immigration. Catalan cultural activity increased in the
1960s and Catalan classes began thanks to the initiative of associations such
as Ã’mnium Cultural. After the end of Franco's dictatorship, the newly
established self-governing democratic institutions in Catalonia embarked on a
long-term language policy to increase the use of Catalan and has, since 1983,
enforced laws which attempt to protect and extend the use of Catalan. This
policy, known as the "linguistic normalization" ("normalitzaciÃ³ lingÃ¼Ã­stica"
in Catalan, "normalizaciÃ³n lingÃ¼Ã­stica" in Spanish) has been supported by
the vast majority of Catalan political parties through the last thirty years.
Some groups consider these efforts a way to discourage the use of Spanish,
while some others, including the Catalan government and the European Union
consider the policies respectful, or even as an example which "should be
disseminated throughout the Union". Recently, some of these policies have been
criticized for trying to promote Catalan by imposing fines on businesses. For
example, following the passage of a March 2010 law on Catalan cinema, which
establishes that half of the movies shown in Catalan cinemas must be in
Catalan, a general strike of 75% of the cinemas took place. These criticisms
mostly come from outside Catalonia, especially from conservative, conservative
liberal and classical liberal circles of Spanish society. In Catalonia, on the
other hand, there is a high social and political consensus on the language
policies favoring Catalan, also among Spanish speakers and speakers of other
languages. In Catalonia, the Catalan language policy has been challenged by
some anti-nationalist intellectuals like Albert Boadella. Since 2006, the
liberal Citizens - Party of the Citizenry has been one of the most consistent
critics of the Catalan language policy within Catalonia. The local Catalan
branch of the People's Party has a more ambiguous position on the issue: on one
hand, it demands a bilingual Catalan-Spanish education and a more balanced
language policy that would defend Catalan without favoring it over Spanish,
while on the other, a few local PP politicians have supported in their
municipalities measures privileging Catalan over Spanish and it has defended
some aspects of the official language policies, sometimes against the positions
of its colleagues from other parts of Spain. Today, Catalan is the main
language of the Catalan autonomous government and the other public institutions
that fall under its jurisdiction. Basic public education is given in Catalan,
except for two hours per week of Spanish medium instruction. Businesses are
required to display all information (e.g., menus, posters) in Catalan under
penalty of fines. There is no obligation to display this information in either
Occitan or Spanish, although there is no restriction on doing so in these or
other languages. The use of fines was introduced in a 1997 linguistic law that
aims to increase the public use of Catalan and defend the rights of Catalan
speakers. The law ensures that both Catalan and Spanish â€“ being official
languages â€“ can be used by the citizens without prejudice in all public and
private activities, but primary education can only be taken in Catalan
language. The Generalitat uses Catalan in its communications and notifications
addressed to the general population, but citizens can also receive information
from the Generalitat in Spanish if they so desire. debates in the Catalan
Parliament take place almost exclusively in Catalan and the Catalan public
television broadcasts programs only in Catalan. Due to the intense immigration
which Spain in general and Catalonia in particular experienced in the first
decade of the 21st century, many foreign languages are spoken in various
cultural communities in Catalonia, of which Rif-Berber, Moroccan Arabic,
Romanian and Urdu are the more common. Transport. Airports. Airports in
Catalonia are owned and operated by Aena (a Spanish Government entity) except
two airports in Lleida which are operated by Aeroports de Catalunya (an entity
belonging to the Government of Catalonia). Commercial and passenger ports. The
two main commercial and passenger ports in Catalonia are owned and operated by
Puertos del Estado (a Spanish Government entity). Roads. There are 12,000Â km
of roads throughout Catalonia. The principal highways are Â AP-7Â  ("Autopista
del Mediterrani") and Â A-7Â  ("Autovia del Mediterrani"). It follows the coast
from the French border to Valencia, Murcia and Andalusia. The main roads
generally radiate from Barcelona. The A-2 and AP-2 connect inland and onward to
Madrid. Public-own roads in Catalonia are either managed by the autonomous
government of Catalonia (e.g., Â C-Â  roads) or the Spanish Government (e.g.,
Â AP-Â , Â A-Â , Â N-Â  roads). Railways. Catalonia saw the first railway
construction in the Iberian Peninsula in 1848, linking Barcelona with MatarÃ³.
Given the topography most lines radiate from Barcelona. The city has both
suburban and inter-city services. The main east coast line runs through the
province connecting with the SNCF (French Railways) at Portbou on the coast.
There are two publicly owned railway companies operating in Catalonia: the
Catalan FGC that operatates commuter and regional services, and the Spanish
national RENFE that operates long-distance and high speed rail services (AVE
and Avant). High speed rail (AVE) services from Madrid currently reach Lleida,
Tarragona and Barcelona. The official opening between Barcelona and Madrid took
place 20 February 2008. The journey between Barcelona and Madrid now takes
about 2 and a half hours. Construction has commenced to extend the high speed
line northwards to connect with the French high speed TGV network. This new
line passes through Girona and there will be a tunnel through the Pyrenees.
There is a direct train from Barcelona EstaciÃ³ de FranÃ§a to Paris. Culture.
Popular culture. Castells are one of the main manifestations of Catalan popular
culture. The activity consists in constructing human towers by competing
"colles castelleres" (teams). This practice originated in the southern part of
Catalonia during the 18th century. The sardana is the most characteristic
Catalan popular dance, other groups also practice "Ball de bastons",
"moixiganga", galops or "jota" in the southern part. Musically, the "Havaneres"
are also characteristic in some marine localities of the Costa Brava especially
during the summer months when these songs are sung outdoors accompanied by a
"cremat" of burned rum. Other music styles are Catalan rumba, Catalan rock and
Nova CanÃ§Ã³. In the greater celebrations other elements of the Catalan popular
culture are usually present: the parades of "gegants" (giants) and "correfocs"
of devils and firecrackers. Another traditional celebration in Catalonia is "La
Patum de Berga" declared Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of
Humanity by UNESCO in 25 November 2005. In addition to traditional local
Catalan culture, traditions from other parts of Spain can be found as a result
of migration from other regions. On July 28, 2010, Catalonia became the second
Spanish territory, after the Canary Islands, to forbid bullfighting. The ban,
which went into effect on January 1, 2012, had originated in a popular petition
supported by over 180,000 signatures.
