Catalan language Catalan (, , or ; autonym: "catal√ " or ) is a Romance
language named for its origins in the historical region of Catalonia in the
northeastern part of the Iberian Peninsula and adjoining parts of what is now
France. It is the national and only official language of Andorra, a European
microstate, and a co-official language of the Spanish autonomous communities of
Catalonia, the Balearic Islands, and the Valencian Community, where it is known
as Valencian. It also has semi-official status in the city of Alghero (where
the Algherese dialect is spoken) on the Italian island of Sardinia. It is also
spoken with no official recognition in the autonomous communities of Aragon (in
La Franja) and Murcia (in Carche) in Spain, and in the historic Roussillon
region of southern France, roughly equivalent to the current "d√©partement" of
the Pyr√©n√©es-Orientales (Northern Catalonia). Although recognized as a
regional language of the department Pyr√©n√©es-Orientales since 2007, Catalan
has no official recognition in France, as French is the only official language
of that country, according to the French Constitution of 1958. History. Middle
Ages: origin. The Catalan language developed from Vulgar Latin on both sides of
the eastern end of the Pyrenees mountains and valleys (counties of Raz√®s,
Conflent, Rossell√≥-Vallespir, Emp√∫ries, Besal√∫, Cerdanya, Urgell, Pallars
and Ribagor√ßa). It shares many features with Gallo-Romance, Ibero-Romance, and
the Gallo-Italian speech types of Northern Italy. While Catalan has therefore
been varyingly assigned to Ibero-Romance or Gallo-Romance, neither
classification may be entirely appropriate. Catalan diverged from Old Occitan
between the 11th and 14th centuries, early texts in the Catalan dialect being
the "Homilies d'Organy√ " and the "Greuges de Guitard Isarn". Catalan is
therefore united with Occitan into an Occitano-Romance group. Still in the
modern period, the area covered from Liguria (on the present Italian coast) to
Alicante (in Spain) can be seen as a classic dialect continuum, with some
perturbation as a result of political divisions and overlay of standard
national languages. The mainstream historical account is that as a consequence
of the conquests of Al-Andalus to the south and to the west by the Crown of
Aragon, the language spread to all of present-day Catalonia, the Balearic
Islands and most of the Valencian Community. In the 15th century, during the
Valencian Golden Age, literature in Catalan reached its apex, which was not
matched again until La Renaixen√ßa, four centuries later. Even though the
official organizations state that the languages spoken in Catalonia and
Valencia are the same, some Valencian scholars hold that Valencian owes more to
the language already spoken there before the Catalan‚ÄìAragonese conquest than
to the language brought by conquerors. Their main argument lies in the small
number of Catalan colonists, as registered in documents such as the "Llibre de
repartiment". However, similar statistical studies based on town tax lists
reject these thesis, claiming that 90% were Catalan. This conflict is known as
the Valencian language controversy. 18th century to the present: France. After
the Treaty of the Pyrenees, a royal decree by Louis XIV of France on 2 April
1700 prohibited the use of Catalan language in present-day Northern Catalonia
in all official documents under the threat of being invalidated. Shortly after
the French Revolution, the French First Republic prohibited official use of,
and enacted discriminating policies against, the nonstandard languages of
France ("patois"), such as Catalan, Breton, Occitan, Flemish, and Basque. The
deliberate process of eradicating non-French vernaculars in modern France and
disparaging them as mere local and often strictly oral dialects was formalized
with Abb√© Gr√©goire's "Report on the necessity and means to annihilate the
patois and to universalize the use of the French language", which he presented
on 4 June 1794 to the National Convention; thereafter, all languages other than
French were officially banned in the administration and schools for the sake of
linguistically uniting post-Bastille Day France. To date, the French government
continues its policy of recognizing only French as an official language in
France. Nevertheless, on 10 December 2007, the General Council of the
Pyr√©n√©es-Orientales officially recognized Catalan as one of the languages of
the department in the Article 1 (a) of its "Charte en faveur du Catalan" and
seek to further promote it in public life and education. 18th century to the
present: Spain. After the Nueva Planta Decrees, administrative use of Catalan,
and Catalan language education, were also banned in the territories of the
Kingdom of Spain. It was not until the Renaixen√ßa that use of the Catalan
language started to recover. In Francoist Spain (1939‚Äì1975), the use of
Spanish in place of Catalan was promoted, and public use of Catalan was
initially repressed and discouraged by official propaganda campaigns. The use
of Catalan in government-run institutions and in public events was banned.
During later stages of the Francoist regime, certain folkloric or religious
celebrations in Catalan were resumed and tolerated. Use of Catalan in the mass
media was initially forbidden, but was permitted from the early 1950s in the
theatre. Publishing in Catalan continued throughout the dictatorship. There was
no official prohibition of speaking Catalan in public or in commerce, but all
advertising and signage had to be in Spanish alone, as did all written
communication in business. Following the death of Franco in 1975 and the
restoration of democracy under a constitutional monarchy, the use of Catalan
increased significantly because of new affirmative action and subsidy policies
and the Catalan language is now used in politics, education and the media,
including the newspapers "Avui" ("Today"), "El Punt" ("The Point"), "Ara"
("Now"), "La Vanguardia" and "El Peri√≥dico de Catalunya" (sharing content with
"El Peri√≤dic d'Andorra", printed in Andorra); and the television channels of
"Televisi√≥ de Catalunya" (TVC): TV3, the main channel, and Canal 33 (culture
channel), Super3/3XL (cartoons channel) as well as a 24-hour news channel 3/24
and the sports channel Esport 3; in Valencia Canal Nou, 24/9 and Punt 2; in the
Balearic islands IB3; in Catalonia there are also some private channels such as
8TV, Bar√ßa TV, Estil9 or Canal Catal√ , in others. Furthermore, everywhere in
the Catalan-speaking territories, there are local channels available in
Catalan. Classification. The ascription of Catalan to the Occitano-Romance
branch of Gallo-Romance languages is not shared by all linguists, particularly
those from Spanish-speaking areas. Catalan bears varying degrees of similarity
to the linguistic varieties subsumed under the cover term "Occitan language"
(see also differences between Occitan and Catalan and Gallo-Romance languages).
Thus, as it should be expected from closely related languages, Catalan today
shares many traits with other Romance languages. Geographic distribution.
Catalan-speaking territories. These territories are sometimes referred to as
the "Pa√Øsos Catalans" (Catalan Countries), a denomination based on cultural
affinity and common heritage, that has also had a subsequent political
interpretation but no official status. Various interpretations of the term may
include some or all of these regions. Number of speakers. The number of persons
known to be fluent in Catalan varies depending on the sources used. A 2004
language study did not indicate the total number of speakers, but showed a
total estimate of 9‚Äì9.5 million, by matching the percentage of speakers to
the population of each area where Catalan is spoken. The web site of the
Generalitat de Catalunya estimated that as of 2004 there were 9,118,882
speakers of Catalan. These figures only reflect potential speakers; today it is
the native language of only 35.6% of the Catalan population. And according to
"Ethnologue: Languages of the World", Catalan has a total of 11,530,160
speakers. Dialects. The dialects of the Catalan language feature a relative
uniformity, specially when compared to other Romance languages. The only
exception is the isolated idiosyncratic Alguerese dialect. In 1861, Manuel
Mil√  i Fontanals proposed a division of Catalan into two major dialect blocks:
Eastern Catalan and Western Catalan. The different Catalan dialects show
differences in lexicon, grammar, morphology and pronunciation due to historical
isolation. Each dialect also encompasses several regional varieties. The
transitions between dialects tend to be smooth. The main difference between the
Eastern and Western blocks is their treatment of unstressed ‚ü®a‚ü© and
‚ü®e‚ü©; which have merged to /…ô/ in Eastern dialects, but which remain
distinct as /a/ and /e/ in Western dialects. Standards. Catalan is a
pluricentric language with two main standards; one regulated by the "Institut
d'Estudis Catalans" (IEC), general standard, with Pompeu Fabra's orthography as
axis, keeping features from Central Catalan, and the other regulated by the
"Acad√®mia Valenciana de la Llengua" (AVL), restricted scale standard, focused
on Valencian standardization on the basis of Normes de Castell√≥, that is,
Pompeu Fabra's orthography but more adapted to Western Catalan pronunciation
and features of Valencian dialects. IEC's standard, apart from the basis of
Central Catalan features, takes also other dialects' features in consideration
as standard. Despite this, the most notable difference between both standards
is some tonic ‚ü®e‚ü© accentuation, for instance: "franc√®s, angl√®s" (IEC) ‚Äì
"franc√©s, angl√©s" (AVL) ('French, English'), "caf√®" (IEC) ‚Äì "caf√©" (AVL)
('coffee'), "con√®ixer" (IEC) ‚Äì "con√©ixer" ('to know'), "compr√®n" (IEC) ‚Äì
"compr√©n" (AVL) ('he understands'). This is because of the different
pronunciation of some stressed ‚ü®e‚ü©, especially tonic (long e) and (short i)
from Latin, in both Catalan blocks ( in Eastern Catalan and in Western
Catalan). Nevertheless, AVL's standard keeps the grave accent ‚ü®√®‚ü©, without
pronouncing this ‚ü®e‚ü© as , in some words like: "qu√®" ('what'), "Val√®ncia",
"√®ter" ('ether'), "s√®sam" ('sesame'), "s√®rie" ('series') and "√®poca"
('age'). There are also some other divergences like the digraph ‚ü®tl‚ü© used
by AVL in some words instead of ‚ü®tll‚ü© like in "ametla"/"ametlla"
('almond'), "espatla"/"espatlla" ('back' an.) or "butla"/"butlla" ('bull'), the
use of elided demonstratives ("este" 'this', "eixe" 'that' -near-) in the same
level as reinforced ones ("aquest, aqueix") or the use of many verbal forms
common in Valencian, and some of these common in the rest of Western Catalan
too, like subjunctive mood or inchoative conjugation in -"ix"- at the same
level as -"eix"- or the priority use of -"e" morpheme in 1st person singular in
present indicative (-"ar" verbs): "jo compre" instead of "jo compro" ('I buy').
In the Balearic Islands, IEC's standard is used but adapted for the Balearic
dialect by the University of the Balearic Islands's philological section,
"Govern de les Illes Balears"'s consultative organ. In this way, for instance,
IEC says it is correct writing "cantam" as much as "cantem" ('we sing') but the
University says that the priority form in the Balearic Islands must be
""cantam"" in all fields. Another feature of the Balearic standard is the non-
ending in the 1st person singular present indicative: "jo compr" ('I buy'), "jo
tem" ('I fear'), "jo dorm" ('I sleep'). In Alghero, the IEC has adapted its
standard to the Alguerese dialect. In this standard one can find, among other
features: the definite article "lo" instead of "el", special possessive
pronouns and determinants "la mia" ('mine'), "lo sou/la sua" ('his/her'), "lo
tou/la tua" ('yours'), and so on, the use of "-v-" in the imperfect tense in
all conjugations: "cantava", "creixiva", "llegiva"; the use of many archaic
words, usual words in Alguerese: "manco" instead of "menys" ('less'), "calqui
u" instead of "alg√∫" ('someone'), "qual/quala" instead of "quin/quina"
('which'), and so on; and the adaptation of weak pronouns. In 2011, the
Aragonese government passed a decree for the establishment of a new language
regulator of Catalan in La Franja (the so-called Catalan-speaking areas of
Aragon). The new entity, designated as "Acad√®mia Aragonesa del Catal√ ", shall
allow a facultative education in Catalan and a standardization of the Catalan
language in La Franja. The official language academy of the Valencian Community
(the "Acad√®mia Valenciana de la Llengua") considers "Catalan" and "Valencian"
simply to be two names for the same language. All universities teaching Romance
languages, and virtually all linguists, consider these two to be linguistic
variants of the same language (similar to Canadian French versus Metropolitan
French, and European versus Brazilian Portuguese). There is a roughly
continuous set of dialects covering the regional forms of Catalan/Valencian,
with no break at the border between Catalonia and the Valencian Community, and
the various forms of Catalan and Valencian are mutually intelligible This is
not to say that there are no differences between them; the speech of Valencians
is recognizable both in pronunciation as well as in morphological and lexical
peculiarities. However, these differences are not any wider than among North-
Western Catalan and Eastern Catalan. In fact, Northern Valencian (spoken in the
Castell√≥ province and Matarranya valley, a strip of Aragon) is more similar to
the Catalan of the lower Ebro basin (spoken in southern half of Tarragona
province and another strip of Aragon) than to "apitxat" Valencian (spoken in
the area of L'Horta, in the province of Valencia). What gets called a language
(as opposed to a dialect) is defined partly by mutual comprehensibility as well
as political and cultural factors. In this case, the perceived status of
Valencian as a dialect of Catalan has historically had important political
implications including Catalan nationalism and the idea of the Catalan
Countries. Arguing that Valencian is a separate language may sometimes be part
of an effort by Valencians to resist a perceived Catalan nationalist agenda
aimed at incorporating Valencians into what they feel is a "constructed"
nationality centered on Barcelona. As such, the issue of whether Catalan and
Valencian constitute different languages or merely dialects has been the
subject of adversarial discussions for over a century and political agitation
several times since the end of the Franco era. The latest political controversy
regarding Valencian occurred on the occasion of the drafting of the European
Constitution in 2004. The Spanish government supplied the EU with translations
of the text into Basque, Galician, Catalan, and Valencian, but the Catalan and
Valencian versions were identical. While professing the unity of the Catalan
language, the Spanish government claimed to be constitutionally bound to
produce distinct Catalan and Valencian versions because the Statute of Autonomy
of the Valencian Community refers to the language as "Valencian". In practice,
the Catalan, Valencian, and Balearic versions of the EU constitution are
identical: the government of Catalonia accepted the Valencian translation
without any changes under the premise that the Valencian standard is accepted
by the norms set forth by the IEC. Catalan may be seen instead as a multi-
centric language (much like English); there exist two standards, one regulated
by the IEC, which is centered on Central Catalan (with slight variations to
include Balearic verb inflection) and one regulated by the AVL, centered on
Valencian. The AVL accepts the conventions set forth in the Normes de Castell√≥
as the normative spelling, shared with the IEC that allows for the diverse
idiosyncrasies of the different language dialects and varieties. As the
normative spelling, these conventions are used in education, and most
contemporary Valencian writers make use of them. Nonetheless, a small minority
mainly of those who advocate for the recognition of Valencian as a separate
language, use in a non-normative manner an alternative spelling convention
known as the Normes del Puig. Vocabulary. Lexical comparison. Despite being
mostly situated the Iberian Peninsula, the Catalan vocabulary exhibits marked
lexical differences with Ibero-Romance (Spanish and Portuguese); while showing
general affinity towards the Gallo-Romance group. These similarities are most
notable with Occitan. There is evidence that at least from the 2nd century CE
that the vocabulary and phonology of Roman Tarraconensis was different from the
rest of Roman Hispania. It has been generally Spanish, with its archaisms
(Spanish "hervir" vs. Catalan "bullir" ("to boil")) and innovations (Spanish
"novillo" vs. Catalan "vedell" ("young bull")) what has caused differentiation.
Also, the Germanic superstrate has had different outcomes in Spanish and
Catalan. For example, Catalan "fang" ("mud") and "rostir" ("to roast"), of
Germanic origin, contrast with Spanish "lodo" and "asar", of Latin origin;
while Catalan "filosa" ("spinning wheel") and "pols" ("temple"), of Latin
origin, contrast with Spanish "rueca" and "sien". The same happens with Arabic
loanwords. Thus, Catalan "alf√ bia" ("large earthware jar") and "rajola"
("tile"), of Arabic origin, contrast with Spanish "tinaja" and "ladrillo", of
Latin origin; while Catalan "oli" ("oil") and "oliva" ("olive"), of Latin
origin, contrast with Spanish "aceite" and "aceituna". However, the Arabic
element in Spanish is generally much more prevalent. However, being placed
between to large linguistic blocks (Iberic and Gallic), Catalan has many unique
lexical choices, like "enyorar" ("to miss somebody"), "apaivagar" ("to calm
down somebody"), or "rebutjar" ("reject"). Word choices. Despite it's relative
lexical unity, the two dialectal blocks of Catalan (Eastern and Western) show
some differences in word choices. Any lexical divergence within any of the two
groups can be explained as an archaism. Also, usually Central Catalan acts as
an innovative element. Literary Catalan allows the use of words from different
dialects, except those of very restricted use. However, from the 19th century
onwards, there is a tendency of favoring words of Northern dialects in
detriment of others, even though nowadays there is a greater freedom of choice.
Like other languages, Catalan has a large list of learned words from Greek and
Latin. This process started very early, and one can find such examples in Ramon
Llull's work. On the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries Catalan had a number of
Greco-Latin learned words much superior to other Romance languages, as it can
be attested for example in Ro√≠s de Corella's writings. Writing system. The
Catalan alphabet consists of the twenty-six letters of the basic Modern Latin
alphabet. The letters "K", "W" and "Y" are only used in loanwords, and in the
case of "Y" also in the palatal digraph "ny". Modified letters with diacritics
include "√Ä", "√â", "√à", "√ç", "√è", "√ì", "√í", "√ö", "√ú" and "√á". The
Catalan spelling has a number of distinctive features. The graph "l¬∑l" (named
"ela geminada" 'geminate-l') is composed of an interpunct (or middot) between
two ‚ü®l‚ü© (e.g. "intel¬∑ligent" 'intelligent', "novel¬∑la" 'novel') and is
used to distinguish phonetically from (written "ll" as in Spanish). Another
special grapheme is the digraph "ny" , found in Hungarian, Malay and in some
African languages (e.g. "banys" 'baths'). Also of note is the final digraph
"ig", pronounced after a vowel (e.g. "raig" 'ray', "veig" 'I see') and after a
consonant (e.g. "mig" 'half', "desig" 'desire'). The combination of "t" + nasal
or lateral consonant is pronounced as a geminate of the second consonant: "tm"
, "tn" , "tl" and "tll" (e.g. "setmana" 'week', "cotna" 'pork rind', "Betlem"
'Betlehem', "bitllet" 'bank note'), whereas "t" + sibilant consonant indicates
affrication: "tx" , "ts" , "tz" , "tg" and "tj" (e.g. "fletxa" 'arrow',
"potser" 'maybe', "dotze" 'twelve', "jutge" 'judge', "platja" 'beach').
Similarly, the less common graphemes "dj" and "ds" also stand for affricates.
Other digraphs are "rr" , "ss" , "ix" , "gu" and "qu" . Catalan spelling
utilizes "√ß" (called "ce trencada", literally 'broken cee') when ‚ü®c‚ü© takes
the soft sound before ‚ü®a, o, u‚ü© (e.g. "ca√ßa" 'hunt') or in final position
(e.g. "dol√ß" 'sweet'). The letter "x" is normally pronounced as a voiceless
postalveolar (usually affricated to in many Western Catalan dialects); e.g.
"xic" ('little'). In Latin and Greek learned words it represents (e.g. "fixar"
'fix') and (e.g. "exacte" 'exact'), as in other closely related languages. The
digraph "ix" instead, always represents ( in Western Catalan dialects); e.g.
"calaixos" ('drawers'). Phonology. The Catalan phonology varies depending on
the dialect. Notable features include: In contrast with other Romance
languages, Catalan has many monosyllabic words; and those ending in a wide
variety consonants and some consonant clusters. Also, Catalan has final
obstruent devoicing, thus featuring many couplets like "amic" "(male friend")
vs. "amiga" ("female friend"). Grammar. Catalan is an inflected language. Nouns
and pronouns are inflected for number (singular or plural); adjectives, for the
number and gender (masculine or feminine) of their nouns; personal pronouns,
for person, number, gender, and case; and verbs, for mood, tense, aspect and
the person and number of their subjects. Case is primarily marked using word
order and prepositions. Gender and number inflection. Catalan has few
suppletive couplets, like Italian and Spanish, and unlike French. Thus, Catalan
has "noi"/"noia" ("boy"/"girl") and "gall"/"gallina" ("cock"/"chicken"), while
French has "gar√ßon"/"fille" and "coq"/"poule". There is a tendency to abandon
traditionally gender-invariable adjectives in favour of marked ones, something
prevalent in Occitan and French. Thus, one can find "bullent"/"bullenta"
("boiling") in constrast with traditional "bullent"/"bullent". Like in the
other Western Romance languages, the main plural expression is the suffix "-s",
which may create morphological alternations akin the ones found in gender
inflection, albeit more rarely. The most important one is the addition of "-o-
" before certain consonant groups, a phonetic phenomenon that does not affect
feminine forms: "el pols"/"els polsos" ("the pulse"/"the pulses") vs. "la
pols"/"les pols" ("the dust"/"the dusts"). Determiners. The inflection of
determinatives is complex, specially because of the high number of elisions,
but is similar to the neighboring languages. Catalan has more contractions of
preposition + article than Spanish, like "dels" ("of + the "), but not as many
as Italian (which has "sul", "col", "nel", etc.). Central Catalan has abandoned
almost completely unstressed possessives ("mon", etc.) in favour of
constructions of article + stressed forms ("el meu", etc.), a feature shared
with Italian. Personal pronouns. The morphology of Catalan personal pronouns is
complex, specially in unstressed forms, which are numerous (13 distinct forms,
compared to 11 in Spanish or 9 in Italian; French has such a different system
that comparisons are not factible). Features include the neuter gender ("ho")
and the great degree of freedom when combining different unstressed pronouns
(65 combinations). This flexibility allows Catalan to use extraposition
extenively, much more than French or Spanish. Thus, Catalan can have "m'hi
recomanaren" ("they recommended me to him"), while French must say "ils m'ont
recommend√© √  lui", and Spanish "me recomendaron a √©l". This allows the
placement of almost any nominal term as a sentence topic, without having to use
so often the passive voice (as in French or English), or identifying the direct
object with a preposition (as in Spanish). Verbs. Like all the Romance
languages, Catalan verbal inflection is more complex than the nominal.
Suffixation is omnipresent, while morphological alternations play a secondary
role. Vowel alternances are active, as well as infixation and suppletion.
However, these are not as productive as in Spanish, and are mostly restricted
to irregular verbs. The Catalan verbal system is basically common to all
Western Romance, except that most dialects have substituted the analytic
indicative perfect by a periphrastic form of "anar" ("to go") + infinitive.
Catalan verbs are traditionally divided into three conjugations, with vowel
themes "-a-", "-e-", "-i-", the last two being split into two subtypes.
However, this divison is mostly theoretical. Only the first conjugation is
nowadays productive (with about 3500 common verbs), while the third (the
subtype of "servir", with about 700 common verbs) is semiproductive. The verbs
of the second conjugation are fewer than 100, and it is not possible to create
new ones, except by compounding. Syntax. The grammar of Catalan follows the
general pattern of Western Romance languages. The primary word order is SVO
(subject‚Äìverb‚Äìobject). Catalan names. Catalan naming customs are similar to
those of Spain and Portugal; people take two surnames‚Äìtheir father's and
their mother's‚Äìwhich are separated by the particle "i", meaning 'and' (in
Spanish the equivalent particle is written "y", but often omitted altogether).
For example, the full name of the architect Antoni Gaud√≠ is Antoni "Gaud√≠ i
Cornet" after his parents: Francesc "Gaud√≠" i Serra and Ant√≤nia "Cornet" i
Bertran, meaning he was son of "Gaud√≠" and "Cornet". External links.
Institutions About the Catalan language Monolingual dictionaries Bilingual and
multilingual dictionaries Automated translation systems Phrasebooks Learning
resources Catalan-language online encyclopedia
