Catalan nationalism Catalan nationalism (; , ) or Catalanism (), is a political
movement advocating for either further political autonomy or full independence
of Catalonia. Intellectually, Catalanism departs from the unsuccessful attempts
to establish a federal state in Spain in the context of the First Republic.
Valent√≠ Almirall i Llozer and other intellectuals that participated in this
process set up a new political ideology in the 19th century, to restore self-
government, as well as to obtain recognition for the Catalan language. These
demands were summarized in the so-called "Bases de Manresa" in 1892. It met
very little support at first. But after the Spanish-American war in which the
United States invaded and annexed the last of the Spanish colonies, these early
stages of Catalanism grew in support, mostly because of the weakened Spanish
international position after the war and the loss of the two main destinations
for Catalan exports (Cuba and Puerto Rico). Several forms of contemporary
Catalanism. Being a broad movement, it can be found in several presentations in
the current political scenario. Most of the main Catalan political parties
(Convergence and Union (CiU), Socialists' Party of Catalonia (PSC), Republican
Left of Catalonia (ERC) and Initiative for Catalonia Greens (ICV)) adhere to
Catalanism to some extent, even though some of them (PSC and ICV) reject being
labelled as "independentist". The framework for their national demands diverges
as well. While some restrict them to Catalonia-proper, others claim to seek for
the acknowledgment of the political personality of the so-called "Catalan
Countries", the Catalan-speaking territories as a whole. Such claims, which can
be seen as a form of Pan-nationalism, can be read in official documents of CiU,
ERC and Popular Unity Candidates (CUP). Besides Catalonia, the main Catalan-
speaking regions have their own nationalist parties and coalitions thereof
which support, at some degree, the demands for the building of a national
personality for the Catalan Countries: Valencian Nationalist Bloc (BNV) in the
Valencian Community, Bloc Nacional i d'Esquerres, PSM and Majorcan Union (UM)
in the Balearic Islands. Other nationalist parties existed with additional
affiliation such as PSC - Reagrupament whose leader Josep Pallach i Carol√ 
died in 1977. The two main Catalan nationalist parties have shown their
commitment to the idea of the Catalan Countries in different ways and with
different intensities. For CiU, this issue is not among the main items in their
agenda. Nevertheless, the federation has enjoyed a long term collaboration with
the Valencian party BNV and with the Majorcan parties UM and the Socialist
Party of Majorca (PSM). In contrast, Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya (ERC)
has taken more substantial steps in that direction by expanding the party to
Roussillon, Balearic Islands and (as Republican Left of the Valencian Country
(ERPV)) the Valencian Community. The origins of Catalan national identity.
During the first centuries of the Reconquista, the Franks drove the Muslims
south of the Pyrenees. To prevent future incursions, Holy Roman Emperor
Charlemagne created the Marca Hispanica in 790 CE, which consisted of a series
of petty kingdoms serving as buffer states between the Frankish kingdom and Al-
Andalus. Between 878 and 988 CE, the area became a hotbed of Frankish-Muslim
conflict. However, as the Frankish monarchy and the Caliphate of C√≥rdoba
weakened during the 11th century, the resulting impasse allowed for a process
of consolidation throughout the region's many earldoms, resulting in their
combination into the County of Barcelona, which became the embryo of today's
Catalonia. By 1070, Ramon Berenguer I, Count of Barcelona, had subordinated
other Catalan Counts and intransigent nobles as vassals. His action brought
peace to a turbulent feudal system and sowed the seeds of Catalan identity.
According to several scholars, the term "Catalan" and "Catalonia" emerged near
the end of the 11th century and appeared in the "Usatges" of 1150. Two factors
fostered this identity: stable institutions and cultural prosperity. While the
temporary lack of foreign invasions contributed to Catalonia's stability, it
was not a main cause. Rather, it provided a site for sociopolitical
development. For example, after the County of Barcelona merged with the Kingdom
of Aragon, to create the Crown of Aragon in 1137 through a dynastic union, the
system was designed to mutually check both the king's and nobility's powers,
while the small but growing numbers of free citizens and bourgeoisie would
tactically take sides with the king in order to diminish typically feudal
institutions. By 1150, the king approved a series of pacts, called the Usatges,
which "explicitly acknowledged legal equality between burghers‚Ä¶and nobility"
(Woolard 17). In addition, the Catalan-Aragonese gentry established the
"Corts", a representative body of nobles, bishops, and abbots that
counterbalanced the King's authority. By the end of the 13th century, "the
monarch needed the consent of the Corts to approve laws or collect revenue"
(McRoberts 10). Soon after, the "Corts" elected a standing body called the
"Diputaci√≥ del General" or the "Generalitat", which included the rising high
bourgeoisie. The first Catalan constitutions were promulgated by the "Corts of
Barcelona" in 1283, following the Roman tradition of the Codex. In the 13th
century, King James I of Aragon conquered Valencia and the Balearic Islands.
Subsequent conquests expanded into the Mediterranean, reaching Sardinia,
Corsica, Sicily, Naples and Greece, so by 1350 the Crown of Aragon "presided
over the one of the most extensive and powerful mercantile empires of the
Mediterranean during this period" (Woolard 16). Catalonia's economic success
formed a powerful merchant class, which wielded the Corts as its political
weapon. It also produced a smaller middle class, or "menestralia", that was
"composed of artisans, shopkeepers and workshop owners" (McRoberts 11). Over
the 13th and 14th centuries, these merchants accrued so much wealth and
political sway that placed a significant check on the Aragonese crown. By the
15th century the Aragonese monarch "was not considered legitimate until he had
sworn to respect the basic law of the land in the presence of the "Corts""
(Balcells 9). This balance of power is a classic example of "pactisme", or
contractualism, which seems to be a defining feature of the Catalan political
culture. Along with political and economic success, Catalan culture flourished
in the 13th and 14th centuries. During this period, the Catalan vernacular
gradually replaced Latin as the language of culture and government. Scholars
rewrote everything from ancient Visigothic law to religious sermons in Catalan
(Woolard 14). Wealthy citizens bolstered Catalan's literary appeal through
poetry contests and history pageants dubbed the "Jocs Florals", or "Floral
Games." As the kingdom expanded southeast into Valencia and the Mediterranean,
Catalan followed. The medieval heyday of Catalan culture would not last,
however. After a bout of famine and plague hit Catalonia in the mid-14th
century, the population dropped from 500,000 to 200,000 (McRoberts 13). This
exacerbated feudal tensions, sparking serf revolts in rural areas and political
impasses in Barcelona. Financial issues and the burden of multiple dependencies
abroad further strained the region. In 1410, the king died without leaving an
heir to the throne. Finding no legitimate alternative, leaders of the realms
composing the Crown of Aragon agreed by means of the Compromise of Caspe that
the vacant throne should go to the Castilian Ferdinand I, as he was among the
nearest relatives of the recently extinguished House of Barcelona through a
maternal line. The new dynasty began to assert the authority of the Crown,
leading to a perception among the nobility that their traditional privileges
associated with their position in society were at risk. From 1458 to 1479,
civil wars between King John II and local chieftains engulfed Catalonia. During
the conflict, John II, in the face of French aggression in the Pyrenees "had
his heir Ferdinand married to Isabella I of Castile, the heiress to the
Castilian throne, in a bid to find outside allies" (Balcells 11). Their
dynastic union, which came to be known as the Catholic Monarchs, marked the "de
facto" unification of the Kingdom of Spain. At that point, however, "de jure"
both the Castile and the Crown of Aragon remained distinct territories, each
keeping its own traditional institutions, parliaments and laws. This was a
common practice at this time in Western Europe as the concept of sovereignty
lay in the monarch. With the dawn of the Age of Discovery, led by the
Portuguese, the importance of the Aragonese possessions in the Mediterranean
became drastically reduced and, along the rise of barbary pirates predating
commerce in the Mediterranean, the theater of European power shifted from the
Mediterranean basin to the Atlantic Ocean. These political and economic
restrictions impacted all segments of society. Also, because of the locally
bred social conflicts, Catalonia squandered in one century most of what it had
gained in political rights between 1070 and 1410. Nevertheless, early
political, economic and cultural advances gave Catalonia "a mode of
organization and an awareness of its own identity which might in some ways be
described as national, though the idea of popular or national sovereignty did
not yet exist" (Balcells 9). Other scholars like Kenneth McRoberts and Katheryn
Woolard hold similar views. Both support Pierre Vilar, who contends that in
13th and 14th centuries "the Catalan principality was perhaps the European
country to which it would be the least inexact or risky to use such seemingly
anachronistic terms as political and economic imperialism or ‚Äònation-
state‚Äô" (McRoberts 13). In other words, an array of political and cultural
forces laid the foundations of Catalan "national" identity. Llobera agrees with
this opinion, saying, "By the mid-thirteenth century, the first solid
manifestations of national consciousness can be observed." Indeed, 13th and
14th century Catalonia did exhibit features of a nation-state. The role of
Catalan Counts, the "Corts", Mediterranean rule and economic prosperity support
this thesis. But as Vilar points out, these analogies are only true if we
acknowledge that a 14th century nation-state is anachronistic. In other words,
those living in Catalonia before latter day nationalism possessed something
like a collective identity on which this was to be based, but this does not
automatically equate to the modern concept of nation, neither in Catalonia nor
elsewhere in similar circumstances during the Middle Age. The "Corts" and the
rest of the autochthonous legal and political organization was finally
terminated in 1716, as a result of the War of the Spanish Succession. The local
population mostly took sides and provided troops and resources for Archduke
Charles, the pretender, who was arguably to maintain the legal status quo. His
utter defeat meant the legal and political termination of the autonomous
parliaments in the Crown of Aragon, as the Nueva Planta decrees were passed and
King Philip V of Spain of the new House of Bourbon sealed the transformation of
Spain from a "de facto" unified realm into a "de jure" centralized state. The
development of modern Catalanism. The Renaixen√ßa ("rebirth" or "renaissance")
was a cultural, historical and literary movement that pursued in the wake of
European Romanticism the recovery of the own language and literature. As time
went by, and particularly immediately after the fiasco of the Revolution of
1868 (led by the Catalan general Juan Prim), the movement acquired a clear
political character, directed to the attainment of self-government for
Catalonia within the framework of the Spanish liberal state. Like most Romantic
currents, the Renaixen√ßa gave historical analysis a central role. History, in
fact, was an integral part of Catalonia's "rebirth." Texts on Catalonia's
history‚Äîinspired by the Romantic philosophy of history‚Äîlaid the foundations
of a Catalanist movement. Works like Valent√≠ Almirall i Llozer's "Lo
Catalanisme", Victor Balaguer's "Historia de Catalu√±a y de la Corona de
Arag√≥n" and Prat de la Riba's "La nacionalitat catalana" used history as
evidence for Catalonia's nationhood. According to Elie Kedourie, such claims
were common in 19th century nationalist discourse because "the ‚Äòpast‚Äô is
used to explain the ‚Äòpresent,‚Äô to give it meaning and legitimacy. The
‚Äòpast‚Äô reveals one's identity, and history determines one's role in the
drama of human development and progress" (36). Publications of histories thus
"explained" why the Catalans constituted a nation instead of a Spanish region
or coastal province. At the heart of many of works of the Renaixen√ßa lay a
powerful idea: the Volk. Indeed, the concept of Volk (pl. V√∂lker) played a
vital role in mainstream Catalan Romantic nationalism. It has its origins in
the writings of German Romantics like Friedrich Carl von Savigny, Georg Wilhelm
Friedrich Hegel and, most notably, Johann Gottfried Herder. The concept of Volk
entered Catalan intellectual circles in the 1830s, stemming from the emphasis
on the region's medieval history and philology. It first appeared in the
writings of Joan Cortada, Marti d'Eixal√  and his discipline, Francesc-Xavier
Llorens i Barba, intellectuals who reinvigorated the literature on the Catalan
national character. Inspired by the ideas of Herder, Savigny and the entire
Scottish School of Common Sense, they asked why the Catalans were different
from other Spaniards‚Äîespecially the Castilians (Conversi 1997: 15) For
example, Cortada wanted to determine why, despite its poor natural environment,
Catalonia was so much more successful than other parts of Spain. In a series of
generalizations, he concluded that the "Catalans have succeeded in developing a
strong sense of resolution and constancy over the centuries. Another feature of
their character was the fact that they were hardworking people" (Llobera 1983:
342). D‚ÄôEixal√  and Llorens held a similar understanding of the Catalan
national character. They held that that two characteristics particular to
Catalans were common sense (seny) and industriousness. To them, "the
traditional Catalan seny was a manifestation of the Volksgeist", one which made
Catalans essentially different from Castilians (Llobera 2004: 75). The early
works on the Catalan "Volk" would remain on paper long before they entered
politics. This is because the Catalan bourgeoisie had not yet abandoned the
hope of spearheading the Spanish state (Conversi 1997: 14). Indeed, in the
1830s, the Renaixen√ßa was still embryonic and the industrial class still
thought that it could at least control the Spanish economy. Notions of
Catalonia's uniqueness mattered little to a group that believed it could
integrate and lead the entire country. But this all changed around 1880. After
decades of discrimination from Spanish elites, Catalan industrialists buried
their dream of leading Spain. As Vilar observes: "It is only because, in its
acquisition of the Spanish market, the Catalan industrial bourgeoisie did not
succeed either in securing the state apparatus or identifying its interests
with those of the whole of Spain, in influential opinion, that Catalonia, this
little "fatherland", finally became the 'national' focal point", (1980: 551)
This switch of allegiance was particularly easy because the idea of a Catalan
nation had already matured into a corpus of texts about the region's
"uniqueness" and "Volksgeist". Inspired by these works of Romantic nationalism,
the Catalan economic elite became conscious of "the growing dissimilitude
between the Catalonia's social structure and that of the rest of the nation"
(Vilar 1963: 101). Consequently, Romantic nationalism (and the "Volk") expanded
beyond its philosophical bounds into the political arena. In the last third of
the 19th century, Catalanism was formulating its own doctrinal foundations, not
only among the progressive ranks but also in the conservative, and at the same
time it started to establish the first political programmes (e.g. "Bases de
Manresa", 1892), and to generate a wide cultural and association movement of a
clearly vindicatory character. In 1898, Spain lost its last colonial
possessions in Cuba and the Philippines, a fact that not only involved an
important crisis of confidence, but also gave an impulse to political
Catalanism. The first modern political party in Catalonia and Spain was the
Lliga Regionalista. Founded in 1901, it formed a coalition in 1907 with other
Catalanist forces (from Carlism to Federalists), grouped in the so-called
"Solidaritat Catalana", and won the elections with the regionalist programme
that Enric Prat de la Riba had formulated in his manifesto "La nacionalitat
catalana" (1906). Industrialization and Catalanism. The 18th century Spanish
economy depended mostly on agriculture. The social structure stayed
hierarchical, if not feudal, while the Catholic Church and Bourbon monarchs
wrestled for internal supremacy. Into the 19th century, the Napoleonic invasion
devastated the country and its early attempts for industrialization and led to
political unstability, so Spain remained politically and culturally isolated
from the rest of Europe. Unlike in the rest of Spain, the Industrial Revolution
made some progress in Catalonia, whose pro-industry middle class strived to
mechanize everything, from textiles and crafts to wineries. Industrialization
and trade went hand in hand with the proto-nationalist "Renaixen√ßa" cultural
movement, which, annoyed with the shortcomings of the Royal court in Madrid,
began to fashion an alternative, and that was Catalan identity. As Woolard
notes, the economic interests in Madrid and the budding Catalan industrialists
converged during the 18th century, resulting in cooperation. For the
nationalist literati, this meant that Catalanism could promote a national
identity, but it had to function within Spain. Furthermore, Barcelona's
industrial elite wanted Catalonia to stay part of Spain since Catalonia's
industrial markets relied on consumption from other Spanish regions which,
little by little, started to join some sort of development. In fact, part of
the industrialists‚Äô desire to remain part of Spain was their desire for
protectionism, hegemony in domestic markets and the push to "influence Madrid's
political choices by intervening in central Spanish affairs" (Conversi 1997:
18-20), thus, it made no economic sense to promote any secession from Spain. On
the contrary, Catalonia's prominent industrialists acted as the Spanish leading
economic heads. As Stanley Payne observes: "The modern Catalan √©lite had
played a major role in what there was of economic industrialization in the
nineteenth century, and had tended to view Catalonia not as the antagonist but
to some degree the leader of a freer, more prosperous Spain" (482). Barcelona's
bourgeois industrialists even claimed that protectionism and leadership served
the interests of the "‚Äònational market‚Äô or of ‚Äòdeveloping the national
economy‚Äô (national meaning Spanish here) " (Balcells 19). The inclusion of
Spain was instrumental to Catalonia's success, meaning that industrialists
would not tolerate any secessionist movement. Claiming that independence would
have assured nothing but weak markets, an internal enemy and strengthened
anarchist movements. And hence, though manufacturers funded the
"Renaixen√ßa"‚Äî and Catalan nationalism ‚Äî they demanded that Catalonia
stayed part of Spain to ensure economic stability. This federalist-like
lobbying had not worked at first, nor did it succeed until the late 1880s.
Finally, in 1889, the pro-industrialist "Lliga Regionalista" managed to save
the particular Catalan Civil Code, after a liberal attempt to homogenize the
Spanish legal structures (Conversi 1997: 20). Two years later, they coaxed
Madrid into passing protectionist measures, which reinvigorated pro-Spanish
attitudes among manufacturers. Then, they also took great profits from Spain's
neutrality in World War I, which allowed them to export to both sides, and the
Spanish expansion in Morocco, which Catalan industrialists encouraged, since it
was to become a fast growing market for them. Also, by early 20th century,
Catalan businessmen had managed to gain control of the most profitable commerce
between Spain and its American colonies and ex-colonies, namely Cuba and Puerto
Rico. This nationalist-industrialist accord is a classic example of
inclusionary Catalanism. Nationalists might have hoped for an independent
Catalonia but their patrons needed access to markets and protectionism. As a
result, nationalists could propagate the Catalan identity provided that it
coincided with the industrialists‚Äô pro-Spanish stance. Because the "Lliga
Regionalista de Catalunya" endorsed this compromise, it dominated Catalan
politics after the start of the 20th century. Payne notes: "The main Catalanist
party, the bourgeois Lliga, never sought separatism but rather a more discrete
and distinctive place for a self-governing Catalonia within a more reformist
and progressive Spain. The "Lliga"'s leaders ran their 1916 electoral campaign
under the slogan "‚ÄòPer l'Espanya Gran‚Äô" (For the Great Spain)" (482). The
"Lliga" had tempered the nationalist position to one of inclusionary
nationalism. It allowed Catalanism to flourish, but demanded that it promote
federalism within Spain, and not separation from it. Any deviation from this
delicate balance would have enraged those pro-Catalan and Spanish-identifying
industrialists. Ultimately, this prevented any moves towards separation while
strengthening Catalonia's "federal" rights after the Commonwealth of Catalonia
took power in 1914. Catalanism in the 20th century. During the first part of
the 20th century, the main nationalist party was the right-wing "Lliga
Regionalista", headed by Francesc Camb√≥. For the nationalists, the main
achievement in this period was the Commonwealth of Catalonia a grouping of the
four Catalan provinces, with limited administrative power. This institution was
abolished during the dictatorship of Miguel Primo de Rivera. In 1931, the left-
wing "Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya" party won the elections in Catalonia,
advocating a Catalan Republic federated with Spain. Under pressure from the
Spanish government, the leader of ERC, Francesc Maci√  i Lluss√ , accepted an
autonomous Catalan government instead, which recovered the historical name of
Generalitat de Catalunya. A dramatically short period of restoration of
democratic and cultural normality was interrupted at its outset by the outbreak
of the Spanish Civil War. The autonomous government was abolished in 1939,
after the victory of the Francoist troops. During the last stages of the war,
when the Republican side was on the verge of defeat, Catalan president of the
Generalitat, Llu√≠s Companys, rhetorically declared Catalan independence, even
though it never materialized due to objections within Catalonia and,
eventually, by the defeat of the Second Spanish Republic. Right after the war,
Companys, along with thousands of Spanish Republicans, sought cover in France
exiled but because of the, by that time, mutual sympathy between Franco's
government and Nazi Germany, he was captured after the Fall of France in 1940
and handed to Spanish authorities, who tortured him and which sentenced him to
death for 'military rebellion'. He was executed at Montju√Øc in Barcelona at
6.30 a.m. on October 15, 1940. Refusing to wear a blindfold, he was taken
before a firing squad of Civil Guards and, as they fired, he cried 'Per
Catalunya!'. Several political or cultural Catalan movements operated
underground during the dictatorship of Francisco Franco, which lasted until
1975. A president of the Catalan government was still designated, and operated
symbolically in exile. Companys's successor in exile, Josep Tarradellas i Joan,
kept away from Spain until Franco's death in 1975. When he came back in 1977,
the government of Catalonia -the "Generalitat"- was restored again. Following
the approval of the Spanish constitution in 1978, a Statute of Autonomy was
promulgated and approved in referendum. Catalonia was organized as an
Autonomous Community, and in 1980, Jordi Pujol i Soley, from the conservative
nationalist party "Converg√®ncia Democr√ tica de Catalunya", was elected
president and ruled the autonomous government for 23 consecutive years. In
contrast, there is no significant political autonomy, nor recognition of the
language in the historical Catalan territories belonging to France (Roussillon,
in the French d√©partement of Pyr√©n√©es-Orientales). Currently, the main
political parties which define themselves as being Catalan nationalists are
"Converg√®ncia Democr√ tica de Catalunya", "Uni√≥ Democr√ tica de Catalunya"
and the "Independence Rally". The "Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya", although
deriving from nationalism, refuses the term "nationalism" and prefers to
describe itself as independentist; so does "Soldaritat Catalana". These parties
obtained 50,03% of the votes in the 2010 election. Within these parties, there
is much divergence of opinion. More radical elements are only content with the
establishment of a separate Catalan state. In contrast, more moderate elements
do not necessarily identify with the belief that protection of Catalan identity
is incompatible within Spain. Others vote for these parties simply as a protest
and do not necessarily identify with the overall party platform (for example,
some people may vote for ERC because they are simply tired of CiU, even though
they do not actually desire a leftist Catalan republic). The other way around
also occurs: some voters may vote for non-nationalist parties (especially the
Initiative for Catalonia Greens, ICV, and the Socialists' Party of Catalonia,
PSC) for reasons of policy, ideology or personal preference, although they
share a nationalist viewpoint regarding Catalonia's status within Spain. Some
polls, conducted in 2010, show that more than a third of PSC and more than half
of ICV voters support Catalonia's independence (in the latter case, the
percentage is even higher than among Convergence and Union voters); according
to these polls, even 15% of the pro-Spanish Partido Popular voters in Catalonia
support the region's independence. In 2006, a referendum was held on amending
the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia of 1979 to further expand the authority of
the Catalan government. It was approved by 73.24% of the census, and became
effective as of August 9, 2006. However, the turnout of 48.84% represented an
unprecedented high abstention in Catalonia's democratic history. This has been
cited both as a symptom of having large sectors in the average populace
disengaged or at odds with the politics of identity in Catalonia, and,
alternatively, as a symptom of fatigue among Catalan nationalists who would
like to see bolder steps towards political autonomy or independence. In this
regard, both "Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya" (Catalan independentist left
wing) and "Partido Popular" (Spanish right wing) campaigned against having the
2006 Statute of Autonomy passed: the former considered it too little, the
latter too much.
