Demographics of Europe [[File:EU NUTS 2 population density
2007.svg|thumb|300px|Distribution of population in the EU and EFTA countries,
including candidate countries (2007) Figures for the population of Europe vary
according to which definition of European boundaries is used. The population
within the standard physical geographical boundaries was 731 million in 2005
according to the United Nations. In 2010 the population is 711 million, using
the definition which has been used for centuries, that Europe's boundaries are
on the continental divides of the Caucasus and Ural mountains and the
Bosporous, including the populated parts of countries of Russia, and a portion
of Turkey, with tiny parts of Georgia and Azerbaijan. Population growth is
comparatively slow, and median age comparatively high in relation to the
world's other continents. Since the Renaissance, Europe has had a dominating
influence in culture, economics and social movements in the world. European
demography is important not only historically, but also in understanding
current international relations and population issues. Some current and past
issues in European demography have included religious emigration, ethnic
relations, economic immigration, a declining birth rate and an ageing
population. In some countries, such as Poland, access to abortion is currently
limited and it is entirely illegal in the Mediterranean nation of Malta. In the
past, such restrictions and also restrictions on artificial birth control were
commonplace throughout Europe. Furthermore, some European countries (currently
Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg and Switzerland) have allowed a limited
form of voluntary euthanasia. It remains to be seen how much demographic impact
this may have. Total population. In 2007 the population of Europe was estimated
to be 731 million according to the United Nations, which was slightly more than
11% of world population. The precise figure depends on the exact definition of
the geographic extent of Europe. The population of the EU was 499 million as of
2008. Non-EU countries situated in Europe in their entirety account for another
94 million. Five transcontinental countries have a total of 240 million people,
of which about half reside in Europe proper. A century ago, Europe was home to
25% of the world's population. While the population of the continent has grown,
it hasn't come close to the pace of Asia or Africa. As it stands now, around
12% of the world's people live on this continent, but if demographic trends
keep their pace, Europe's share may fall to around 7% in 2050. Declining birth
rates (particularly in Germany) and a high life expectancy in most European
states means that the aging and declining population will be a problem for many
European economies, political and social institutions. Countries on the edges
of Europe except for Southern Europe have generally stronger growth than
Central European counterparts. Albania (Although in Southern Europe) and
Ireland have strong growth, all hitting 1%. Population by country. According to
different definitions, such as consideration of the concept of Central Europe,
the following territories and regions may be subject to various other
categorisations aside from geographic conventions. Age. Perhaps mirroring its
declining population growth, European countries tend to have older populations
overall. European countries had nine of the top ten highest median ages in
national populations in 2005. Only Japan had an older population. Religion.
Over the last several decades, religious practice has been on the decline in a
process of "Secularization." European countries have experienced a decline in
church attendance, as well as a decline in the number of people professing a
belief in a god. The Eurobarometer Poll 2005 found that, on average, 52% of the
citizens of EU member states state that they believe in a god, 27% believe
there is some sort of spirit or life Force while 18% do not believe there is
any sort of spirit, god or Life Force, and 3% declined to answer. According to
a recent study, 47% of Frenchmen declared themselves as agnostic in 2003. This
situation is often called "Post-Christian Europe". Despite the declining
numbers, Christianity remains the dominant religion in Europe, and a study by
the Pew Research Center's found that 76.2% of the Europe population considering
themselves Christians, A decrease in religiousness and church attendance in
western Europe (especially Belgium, Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany,
United Kingdom, Norway, the Netherlands and Sweden) has been noted. The
Eurobarometer poll must be taken with caution, however, as there are
discrepancies between it and national census results. For example in the United
Kingdom, the 2001 census revealed over 70% of the population regarded
themselves as "Christian" with only 15% professing to have "no religion",
though the wording of the question has been criticized as "leading" by the
British Humanist Association. Ethnic groups. The largest ethnic groups of
Europe are the Russians with 105 million (in European Russia, Ukraine, Belarus,
the Baltic States, and Western Europe), followed by the Germans (80 million),
Turkish (68 million), French (65 million), British (61 million), Italians (60
million), Ukrainians (45 million), Spanish (44 million) and the Poles (40
million). The smallest ethnic group in Europe are the Maltese: Malta has a
population of 419,285 and 95.3% is ethnically Maltese. Non-European immigrant
groups (Middle Eastern, African, Asian, American etc.) account for about 3% to
4% of the European population or 22 to 30 million people. Language. Europe has
"30-40 major languages" depending on definition. This makes German the most
frequently spoken native language and English the most frequently spoken non-
native language overall in the European Union, with German the second-most
common language overall. Foreign language skills. Luxembourg, Romania, the
Netherlands, Denmark, Iceland, Malta, Sweden, Slovenia, Belgium, Lithuania and
Finland are the European countries with the most foreign language skills. This
refers to all foreign languages. English is spoken most frequently in the UK,
Ireland, Malta, Sweden, Iceland, Denmark, and the Netherlands. The largest
countries in Europe have the following percentages of English language skills:
44% Germany, 32% France, 28% Italy, 22% Poland, 18% Spain. The countries with
the least foreign language skills are the UK, Ireland (although it should be
noted Irish is the main second language taught in schools, although this is not
a foreign language), Italy and Spain. Extinct and endangered languages. Many
languages have become extinct in Europe and the process is continuing.
Languages that are already rated as extinct by the UNESCO Red Book include Old
Prussian and Cornish. Nearly extinct and seriously endangered languages include
several Sami, Frisian, Tsakonian and Breton. Genetic origins. "Homo sapiens"
appeared in Europe roughly 40,000 years ago, with the settlement of the Cro-
magnons. Over the prehistoric period there was continual immigration to Europe,
notably by the immediate descendents of the Proto-Indo-Europeans who migrated
west after the advent of the Neolithic revolution. MtDna and Y-Dna. Studies of
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) have suggested substantial genetic homogeneity of
European populations, with only a few geographic or linguistic isolates
appearing to be genetic isolates as well. On the other hand, analyses of the Y
chromosome and of autosomal diversity have shown a general gradient of genetic
similarity running from the southeast to the northwest of the continent. But,
well-known areas with Mt-Dna and Y-Dna differences, discovered by grouping and
tracking prehistorical genotype migrations, are in Iberia, in relation to the
Basques of northern Spain and southwest France; and the Balkans of southeast
Europe. Both were areas of refuge where early modern humans settled over 50,000
years ago, during the last ice age. Population structure. In this study, Fst
(Fixation index) was found to correlate considerably with geographic distances
ranging from ≤0.0010 for neighbouring populations to 0.0230 for Southern
Italy and Finland. For comparisons, pair-wise Fst of non-European samples were
as follows: Europeans – Africans (Yoruba) 0.1530; Europeans – Chinese
0.1100; Africans (Yoruba) – Chinese 0.1900.
