Demographics of Chile This article is about the demographic features of Chile,
including population density, ethnicity, economic status and other aspects of
the population. Chile's 2002 census reported a population of 15,116,435 people.
Its rate of population growth has been decreasing since 1990, due to a
declining birth rate. By 2050 the population is expected to reach approximately
20.2 million people. About 85% of the country's population lives in urban
areas, with 40% living in Greater Santiago. The largest agglomerations
according to the 2002 census are Greater Santiago with 5.6 million people,
Greater ConcepciÃ³n with 861,000 and Greater ValparaÃ­so with 824,000.
Population. According to the 2010 revison of the World Population Prospects the
total population was 17,114,000 in 2010, compared to only 6,082,000 in 1950.
The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 22.1%, 68.6% was
between 15 and 65 years of age, while 9.3% was 65 years or older Ethnic
structure. Chile is a multiethnic society, which means that it is home to
people of many different ethnic backgrounds. As a result, the people there
usually treat their nationality as a citizenship, but not an ethnicity. In
2011, Chile had an estimated population of 17,500,000, of which approximately
9.1 million or 52.7% are of European descent, with mestizos estimated at 44%.
Other studies found a white majority measured at 64% to 90% of the Chilean
population. Chile's various waves of immigrants consisted Spanish, Italians,
Irish, French, Greeks, Germans, English, Scots, Croats, and Palestinian
arrivals. European and, to a lesser extent, Middle Eastern emigration to Chile,
chiefly during the second half of the 19th century and throughout the
twentieth, was the most important in Latin America after emigrations to the
Atlantic Coast of the Southern Cone (that is, to Argentina and southern
Brazil). The Afro-Chilean population has always been tiny, reaching a high of
2,500 people during the colonial period; their current percentage of the
population is less than 0.1%. According to the 2002 Census, 4.6% of the Chilean
population considered themselves indigenous. European immigration. The largest
contingent of people to have arrived in post-independence Chile came from Spain
and the Basque country, a region divided between northern Spain and southern
France. Estimates of the number Chileans who can trace at least some descent
from Basques range from 10% (1,600,000) to as high as 27% (4,500,000). Chile's
various waves of non-Spanish immigrants include Italians, Irish, French,
Greeks, Germans, English, Scots, Croats, and Poles. In 1848 an important and
substantial German immigration took place, laying the foundation for the
German-Chilean community. Sponsored by the Chilean government for the
colonization of the southern region, the Germans (including German-speaking
Swiss, Silesians, Alsatians and Austrians), strongly influenced the cultural
and racial composition of the southern provinces of Chile. It is difficult to
count the number of descendants of Germans in Chile, given the great amount of
time. Because many areas of southern Chile were sparsely populated, the traces
of German immigration that are quite noticeable. But the Consulate of Chile in
Germany estimated that between 500,000 to 600,000 Chileans of German descent.
Other historically significant immigrant groups included Croats, whose
descendants today are estimated at 380,000 persons, or 2.4% of the Chilean
population Some authors claim that close to 4.6% of the Chilean population must
have some Croatian ancestry. Over 700,000 Chileans (4.5% of the Chilean
population) may have British (English, Scottish or Welsh) forebears. Chileans
of Greek descent are estimated to number between 90,000 and 120,000; most live
in or near either Santiago or Antofagasta, and Chile is one of the five
countries in the world most populated with descendants of Greeks. The
descendants of Swiss immigrants add 90,000, and it is estimated that about 5%
of the Chilean population has some French ancestry. Between 600.000 to 800.000
Chileans descend from Italian immigrants. Other groups of Europeans have
followed but are found in smaller numbers, as the descendants of Austrians and
Dutchmen it is currently estimated at about 50,000. Altogether, these
immigrants with their descendants, they have transformed the country
culturally, economically and politically. Indigenous communities. The 1907
census reported 101,118 Indians, or 3.1% of the total country population. Only
those that practiced their native culture or spoke their native language were
considered, irrespective of their "racial purity." According to the 2002
census, only indigenous people that still practiced a native culture or spoke a
native language were surveyed, and 4.6% of the population (692,192 people) fit
that description. Of that 4.6%, 87.3% declared themselves Mapuche. Most of the
indigenous population show varying degrees of mixed ancestry. Chile is one of
the twenty-two countries to have signed and ratified the only binding
international law concerning indigenous peoples, Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
Convention, 1989. It was adopted in 1989 as the International Labour
Organization (ILO) Convention 169. Chile ratified the convention in 2008. In
November 2009, a court decision in Chile, considered to be a landmark ruling in
indigenous rights concerns, made use of the ILO convention 169. The Supreme
Court decision on Aymara water rights upholds rulings by both the Pozo Almonte
tribunal and the Iquique Court of Appeals, and marks the first judicial
application of ILO Convention 169 in Chile. Other ethnic groups. It is
estimated that about 5% of the population (800,000) is descendant of Asian
immigrants, chiefly from the Middle East (i.e. Palestinians, Syrians, Lebanese
and Middle East Armenians, "see" Arab Chileans). (This may include Israelis,
both Jewish and non-Jewish citizens of the nation of Israel.) Chile is also
home to a large population of immigrants, mostly Christian, from the Levant.
Roughly 500,000 Palestinian descendants are believed to reside in Chile. In
recent years, Chile has had a growing East Asian population, mainly from China
(see Chinese Chilean), but also from Japan (see Japanese Chilean) and South
Korea (see Koreans in Chile). The earliest wave of East Asian immigration took
place in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, mainly Chinese and Japanese
contract laborers. Chile administers Easter Island a territory 4,100Â km west
of the mainland. The Rapa Nui people are native to the island and are
Polynesian in origin. About 3,500 live on the island, but around 10,000 came to
the mainland in the 20th century. There is a sizable population of Roma people
in Chile. They are widely and easily recognized, and continue to hold on to
their traditions and language, and many continue to live semi-nomadic
lifestyles traveling from city to city and living in small tented communities.
Recent immigration. Since the reestablishment of democracy in Chile, the former
tendency for emigrants from the country to outnumber immigrants to it has
reversed. Chile now is one of the two countries in Latin American with a
positive migration rate. Today, the principal immigrant groups correspond to
the countries bordering Chile. Argentines constitute the largest group,
followed by Peruvians. One of the main factors contributing to such immigration
has been the growth of the Chilean economy during the past few decades.
Immigration from other Latin American countries has also occurred. According to
the 2002 report of the International Organization for Migration, more than
10,000 people from the United States have emigrated to Chile. Most of these
arrived in Chile initially to work for multinational corporations. Most possess
professional degrees, and most are well situated economically. Languages. The
Spanish spoken in Chile is distinctively accented and quite unlike that of
neighbouring South American countries because final syllables and "s" sounds
are dropped, and some consonants have a soft pronunciation. Accent varies only
very slightly from north to south; more noticeable are the small differences in
accent based on social class or whether one lives in the city or the country.
That the Chilean population was largely formed in a small section at the center
of the country and then migrated in modest numbers to the north and south helps
explain this relative lack of differentiation, which was maintained by the
national reach of radio, and now television, which also helps to diffuse and
homogenize colloquial expressions. There are several indigenous languages
spoken in Chile: Mapudungun, Quechua, Aymara and Rapa Nui. After the Spanish
invasion, Spanish took over as the lingua franca and the indigenous languages
have become minority languages, with some now extinct or close to extinction.
German is spoken to a great extent in southern Chile, either in small
countryside pockets or as a second language among the communities of larger
cities. Through initiatives such as the English Opens Doors program, the
government made English mandatory for students in fifth-grade and above in
public schools. Most private schools in Chile start teaching English from
kindergarten. Common English words have been absorbed and appropriated into
everyday Spanish speech. Since 2010, all students from 3rd grade in secondary
school have been tested on listening and reading comprehension for English
language. The evaluation is compulsory and the instrument is TOIEC Bridge,
developed by Educational Testing Service. Religion. In the most recent census
(2002), 70 percent of the population over age 14 identified as Roman Catholic
and 15.1 percent as evangelical. In the census, the term "evangelical" referred
to all non-Catholic Christian churches with the exception of the Orthodox
Church (Greek, Persian, Serbian, Ukrainian, and Armenian), the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), Seventh-day Adventists, and Jehovah's
Witnesses. Approximately 90 percent of evangelicals are Pentecostal. Wesleyan,
Lutheran, Reformed Evangelical, Presbyterian, Anglican, Episcopalian, Baptist
and Methodist churches are also present. Non-religious people, atheists and
agnostics, account for around 8% of the population. Vital statistics. The
Population Departement of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.
Largest cities. This list includes conurbations and cities with over 150,000
inhabitants. Information is from the 2002 census. (Note: The population given
is limited to the city area and is not the population in the whole commune.)
