Digital Millennium Copyright Act The Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) is
a United States copyright law that implements two 1996 treaties of the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). It criminalizes production and
dissemination of technology, devices, or services intended to circumvent
measures (commonly known as digital rights management or DRM) that control
access to copyrighted works. It also criminalizes the act of circumventing an
access control, whether or not there is actual infringement of copyright
itself. In addition, the DMCA heightens the penalties for copyright
infringement on the Internet. Passed on October 12, 1998, by a unanimous vote
in the United States Senate and signed into law by President Bill Clinton on
October 28, 1998, the DMCA amended Title 17 of the United States Code to extend
the reach of copyright, while limiting the liability of the providers of on-
line services for copyright infringement by their users. The DMCA's principal
innovation in the field of copyright, the exemption from direct and indirect
liability of internet service providers and other intermediaries, was adopted
by the European Union in the Electronic Commerce Directive 2000. The Copyright
Directive 2001 implemented the 1996 WIPO Copyright Treaty in the EU.
Provisions. Title I: WIPO Copyright and Performances and Phonograms Treaties
Implementation Act. DMCA Title I, the WIPO Copyright and Performances and
Phonograms Treaties Implementation Act, amends U.S. copyright law to comply
with the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty,
adopted at the WIPO Diplomatic Conference in December 1996. The treaties have
two major portions. One portion includes works covered by several treaties in
U.S. copy prevention laws and gave the title its name. For further analysis of
this portion of the Act and of cases under it, see WIPO Copyright and
Performances and Phonograms Treaties Implementation Act. The second portion is
often known as the DMCA anti-circumvention provisions. These provisions changed
the remedies for the circumvention of copy-prevention systems (also called
"technical protection measures") and required that all analog video recorders
have support for a specific form of copy prevention created by Macrovision (now
Rovi Corporation) built in, giving Macrovision an effective monopoly on the
analog video-recording copy-prevention market. However, section 1201(c) of the
title clarified that the title does not change the underlying substantive
copyright infringement rights, remedies, or defenses. The title contains other
limitations and exemptions, including for research and reverse engineering in
specified situations. Title II: Online Copyright Infringement Liability
Limitation Act. DMCA Title II, the Online Copyright Infringement Liability
Limitation Act ("OCILLA"), creates a safe harbor for online service providers
(OSPs, including ISPs) against copyright infringement liability, provided they
meet specific requirements. OSPs must adhere to and qualify for certain
prescribed safe harbor guidelines and promptly block access to alleged
infringing material (or remove such material from their systems) when they
receive notification of an infringement claim from a copyright holder or the
copyright holder's agent. OCILLA also includes a counternotification provision
that offers OSPs a safe harbor from liability to their users when users claim
that the material in question is not, in fact, infringing. OCILLA also
facilitates issuing of subpoenas against OSPs to provide their users' identity.
Title III: Computer Maintenance Competition Assurance Act. DMCA Title III
modified section 117 of the copyright title so that those repairing computers
could make certain temporary, limited copies while working on a computer. It
reversed the precedent set in "MAI Systems Corp. v. Peak Computer, Inc.", 991
F.2d 511 (9th Cir. 1993). Title V: Vessel Hull Design Protection Act. DMCA
Title V added sections 1301 through 1332 to add a "sui generis" protection for
boat hull designs. Boat hull designs were not considered covered under
copyright law because they are useful articles whose form cannot be cleanly
separated from their function. Anti-circumvention exemptions. In addition to
the safe harbors and exemptions the statute explicitly provides, 17 U.S.C. 1201
(a)(1) requires that the Librarian of Congress issue exemptions from the
prohibition against circumvention of access-control technology. Exemptions are
granted when it is shown that access-control technology has had a substantial
adverse effect on the ability of people to make non-infringing uses of
copyrighted works. The exemption rules are revised every three years. Exemption
proposals are submitted by the public to the Registrar of Copyrights, and after
a process of hearings and public comments, the final rule is recommended by the
Registrar and issued by the Librarian. Exemptions expire after three years and
must be resubmitted for the next rulemaking cycle. Consequently, the exemptions
issued in the prior rulemakings, in 2000, 2003 and 2006 are no longer valid.
The Copyright Office approved two exemptions in 2000; four in 2003; six in 2006
and 2010. In 2000, the Office exempted (a) "Compilations consisting of lists of
websites blocked by filtering software applications" (renewed in 2003 but not
renewed in 2006); and (b) "Literary works, including computer programs and
databases, protected by access control mechanisms that fail to permit access
because of malfunction, damage, or obsoleteness." (revised and limited in 2003
and again in 2006). In 2003, the 2000 "literary works including computer
programs" exemption was limited to "Computer programs protected by dongles that
prevent access due to malfunction or damage and which are obsolete" and this
exemption was renewed in both 2006 and 2010. The 2003 exemption for text
readers of ebooks was renewed in both 2006 and 2010. The 2003 exemption for
obsolete software and video game formats was renewed in 2006 but was not
renewed in 2010. The 2000 filtering exemption was revised and renewed in 2003,
but was not renewed in 2006. The 2006 exemption for sound recordings allowed
after security flaws were found in a copy protection system on some Sony CDs
was not renewed in 2010. An exemption covering the audiovisual works included
in the educational library of a college or universityâ€™s film or media studies
department was not renewed in 2010. This exemption was replaced with an
exemption on DVDs protected by the Content Scrambling System when circumvention
is for the purpose of criticism or comment using short sections, for
educational, documentary or non-profit use. The 2006 exemption for wireless
handsets connecting to wireless networks was revised in 2010 to specify used
handsets and require authorization from the wireless network operator. Another
exemption for wireless handsets was introduced in 2010 specific to
interoperability software on the phone itself. Linking to infringing content.
The law is currently unsettled with regard to websites that contain links to
infringing material; however, there have been a few lower-court decisions which
have ruled against linking in some narrowly prescribed circumstances. One is
when the owner of a website has already been issued an injunction against
posting infringing material on their website and then links to the same
material in an attempt to circumvent the injunction. Another area involves
linking to software or devices which are designed to circumvent DRM (digital
rights management) devices, or links from websites whose sole purpose is to
circumvent copyright protection by linking to copyrighted material. There has
been only one case in the US where a website owner has been found liable for
linking to copyrighted material outside of the above narrow circumstances.
Notable court cases. Edelman v. N2H2. In July 2002, American Civil Liberties
Union filed a lawsuit on the behalf of Benjamin Edelman, a computer researcher
at Berkman Center for Internet and Society, seeking a Declaratory judgment to
affirm his first amendment rights when reverse engineering the censorware
product of defendant N2H2 in case he intended to publish the finding. N2H2
filed a motion to dismiss, which the court granted. RealNetworks, Inc. v. DVD
Copy Control Association, Inc.. In August 2009, the DVD Copy Control
Association won a lawsuit against RealNetworks for violating copyright law in
selling its RealDVD software, allowing users to copy DVDs and store them on a
harddrive. The DVD Copy Control Association claimed that Real violated the DMCA
by circumventing anti-piracy measures ARccOS Protection and RipGuard, as well
as breaking Real's licensing agreement with the MPAA's Content Scrambling
System. Viacom Inc. v. YouTube, Google Inc.. On March 13, 2007, Viacom filed a
lawsuit against YouTube and its corporate parent Google for copyright
infringement seeking more than $1 billion in damages. The complaint was filed
in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. Viacom claims
the popular video-sharing site was engaging in "massive intentional copyright
infringement" for making available a contended 160,000 unauthorized clips of
Viacom's entertainment programming. Google relied on the 1998 Digital
Millennium Copyright Act's "safe harbor" provision to shield them from
liability. On June 23, 2010, U.S. District Judge Louis Stanton granted summary
judgment in favor of YouTube. The court held that YouTube is protected by the
safe harbor of the DMCA. Viacom has said that it will appeal before the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit as soon as possible. On April 5, 2012,
the federal Second Circuit Court of Appeals vacated Judge Louis Stanton's
ruling, and instead ruled that Viacom had presented enough evidence against
YouTube to warrant a trial, and the case should not have been thrown out in
summary judgement. The court did uphold the ruling that YouTube could not be
held liable based on "general knowledge" that users on its site were infringing
copyright. The case will be sent back to the District Court in New York to be
tried. IO Group, Inc. v. Veoh Networks, Inc.. On June 23, 2006 IO Group, Inc.
filed a complaint against Veoh Networks, Inc. in the U.S. District Court for
California's Northern District. IO Group alleged that Veoh was responsible for
copyright infringement by allowing videos owned by IO Group to be accessed
through Veoh's online service without permission over 40,000 times between the
dates June 1 and June 22. Veoh is a Flash video site relying on user
contributed content. IO Group argued that since Veoh transcoded user uploaded
videos to Flash format it became a direct infringer and the materials were
under their direct control, thereby disqualifying them for DMCA safe harbor
protection. The ruling judge disagreed with the argument, stating that "Veoh
has simply established a system whereby software automatically processes user-
submitted content and recasts it in a format that is readily accessible to its
users. Veoh preselects the software parameters for the process from a range of
default values set by the thirdparty software... But Veoh does not itself
actively participate or supervise the uploading of files. Nor does it preview
or select the files before the upload is completed. Instead, video files are
uploaded through an automated process which is initiated entirely at the
volition of Veoh's users." The Court has granted the Veoh's motion for summary
judgment, on the basis of the DMCA, holding that the defendant's video-sharing
web site complied and was entitled to the protection of the statute's "safe
harbor" provision. Even though Veoh won the court case, it blamed the
litigation as one of the causes of its preparing to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy
and its subsequent sale to Qlipso. Vernor v. Autodesk, Inc.. After numerous
DMCA takedown notices in response to his eBay listings, Timothy S. Vernor sued
Autodesk in August 2007 alleging that Autodesk abused the DMCA and disrupted
his right to sell used software he bought at a garage sale. In May 2008, a
federal district judge in Washington State dismissed Autodesk's argument that
the software's license agreement preempted the seller from his rights under the
first-sale doctrine. In September 2010, the US Court of Appeals for the Ninth
Circuit reversed, holding that "a software user is a licensee rather than an
owner of a copy where the copyright owner (1) specifies that the user is
granted a license; (2) significantly restricts the userâ€™s ability to transfer
the software; and (3) imposes notable use restrictions." Lenz v. Universal
Music Corp.. In 2007, Stephanie Lenz, a writer and editor from Gallitzin,
Pennsylvania made a home video of her 13-month-old son dancing to "Let's Go
Crazy" and posted a 29-second video on the video-sharing site YouTube. Four
months after the video was originally uploaded, Universal Music Group, which
owned the copyrights to the song, ordered YouTube to remove the video enforcing
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Lenz notified YouTube immediately that
her video was within the scope of fair use, and demanded that it be restored.
YouTube complied after six weeksâ€”not two weeks, as required by the Digital
Millennium Copyright Actâ€”to see whether Universal planned to sue Lenz for
infringement. Lenz then sued Universal Music in California for her legal costs,
claiming the music company had acted in bad faith by ordering removal of a
video that represented fair use of the song. In August 2008, U.S. District
Judge Jeremy Fogel of San Jose, California ruled that copyright holders cannot
order a deletion of an online file without determining whether that posting
reflected "fair use" of the copyrighted material. On February 25, 2010, Judge
Fogel issued a ruling rejecting several of Universal's affirmative defenses,
including the defense that Lenz suffered no damages. Flava Works Inc. v.
Gunter. In the case of Flava Works Inc. v. Gunter the court denied the
defendant safe harbour protection under DMCA . The district court found that
the defendant had knowledge of its users' infringing activity and also failed
to prevent future infringing activity. As such the plaintiff's motion for
preliminary injunction was granted. On appeal, however, the Seventh Circuit
vacated the injunction, citing the standard set in eBay Inc. v. MercExchange,
L.L.C., which states that courts should not rely on categorical rules as a
standard for injunction. Ouellette v. Viacom International Inc.. In this case
of Ouellette v. Viacom International Inc., the court denied plaintiff's attempt
to find liability for YouTube and Myspace's takedowns of the plaintiff's
homemade videos. Despite potential fair use claims, the court found it
impossible to use the DMCA takedown provisions as a foundation for liability.
The court found that the safe harbor provision serves "to limit the liability
of internet service providers, not to create liability that could not otherwise
be imposed under existing law independent of the DMCA." Sony v. George Hotz. In
January 2011, Sony Computer Entertainment sued George Hotz over violating the
Section 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act as well as the Federal
Fraud and Abuse Act due to facilitating consumers to jailbreak their
PlayStation 3 consoles. Hotz argued that because he had purchased the product,
he had the right to do with it as he pleased. After three months, Sony and Hotz
decided to settle out of court. This also included an injunction against George
Hotz, barring him from hacking any more Sony products. Criticisms. Takedown
Notice. Google asserted misuse of the DMCA in a filing concerning New Zealand's
copyright act, quoting results from a 2005 study by Californian academics Laura
Quilter and Jennifer Urban based on data from the Chilling Effects
clearinghouse. Takedown notices targeting a competing business made up over
half (57%) of the notices Google has received, the company said, and more than
one-third (37%), "were not valid copyright claims." Effect on Analog Video
Equipment. Analog Copy Protection (ACP), the encryption technology created by
Rovi Corporation (formerly Macrovision), is designed to thwart users' attempts
to reproduce content via analog cables. When a DVD is played through an analog
video cable and recorded using a VCR, Roviâ€™s ACP technology will distort the
copy partially or completely. The technology works by adding additional lines
to the video signal. In the NTSC video standard, blank lines (vertical blanking
intervals) that the user cannot see are used for functions like closed
captioning. Rovi Corporation uses these blank lines to implement its ACP
technology. The implementation of ACP has been ill-regarded by some video
enthusiasts. Many claim that the technology has led to signal issues with VCRs
and analog video equipment. Some VCRs misread the encryption used to prevent
copying, distorting the video image regardless of whether the recording is
original or a copy. The DMCA has been criticized for forcing all producers of
analog video equipment to support the proprietary copy protection technology of
Rovi Corporation, a commercial firm. The producers of video equipment are
forced by law to support and implement the corporation's proprietary
technology. This benefits Rovi Corporation financially, whereas those forced to
implement it receive neither profit nor compensation. Additionally, some
criticize the implementation of ACP as a violation of their fair use rights. A
recently developed TV-streaming product called the Slingbox uses analog signals
to convey video from television to a mobile device. However, the encryption
used by ACP blocks analog transmission, rendering the Slingbox unusable.
Additionally ACP blocks the use of recording for educational purposes. On one
or more accounts, students have not been able to cite and record cable sources
properly due to ACP restrictions. Effect on research. The DMCA has had an
impact on the worldwide cryptography research community, since an argument can
be made that any cryptanalytic research violates, or might violate, the DMCA.
The arrest of Russian programmer Dmitry Sklyarov in 2001, for alleged
infringement of the DMCA, was a highly publicized example of the law's use to
prevent or penalize development of anti-DRM measures. While working for
ElcomSoft in Russia, he developed "The Advanced eBook Processor", a software
application allowing users to strip usage restriction information from
restricted e-books, an activity legal in both Russia and the United States.
Paradoxically, under the DMCA, it is not legal in the United States to provide
such a tool. Sklyarov was arrested in the United States after presenting a
speech at DEF CON and subsequently spent nearly a month in jail. The DMCA has
also been cited as chilling to legitimate users, such as students of
cryptanalysis (including, in a well-known instance, Professor Edward Felten and
students at Princeton), and security consultants such as Niels Ferguson, who
has declined to publish information about vulnerabilities he discovered in an
Intel secure-computing scheme because of his concern about being arrested under
the DMCA when he travels to the US. Effect on innovation and competition. In at
least one court case, the DMCA has been used by Open Source software projects
to defend against conversion of software (i.e., license violations) that
involved removal of copyright notices. This defense can be used even without
timely copyright registration, and can generate attorney fee awards, which
together make it a useful strategy for Open Source organizations. Reform and
opposition. There are efforts in Congress to modify the Act. Rick Boucher, a
Democratic congressman from Virginia, is leading one of these efforts by
introducing the Digital Media Consumers' Rights Act (DMCRA). A prominent bill
related to the DMCA is the Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion
Act (CBDTPA), known in early drafts as the Security Systems and Standards
Certification Act (SSSCA). This bill, if it had passed, would have dealt with
the devices used to access digital content and would have been even more
restrictive than the DMCA.
