Federal Marriage Amendment The Federal Marriage Amendment (FMA) (also referred
to by proponents as the Marriage Protection Amendment) was a proposed amendment
to the United States Constitution which would have limited marriage in the
United States to unions of one man and one woman. The FMA would also have
prevented judicial extension of marriage rights to same-sex or other unmarried
heterosexual couples, as well as preventing polygamy. An amendment to the U.S.
Constitution requires the support of two thirds of each house of Congress, and
ratification by three fourths of the states (currently thirty-eight). The last
Congressional vote to take place on the proposed Amendment occurred in the
United States House of Representatives on July 18, 2006, when the Amendment
failed 236 yea to 187 nay votes, falling short of the 290 yea votes required
for passage in that body. The Senate has only voted on cloture motions with
regard to the proposed Amendment, the last of which was on June 7, 2006 when
the motion failed 49 yea to 48 nay votes, falling short of the 60 yea votes
required to proceed to consideration of the Amendment and the 67 votes which
would be required to pass the amendment. Background and current law. The role
of states. In the United States, civil marriage is governed by state law. Each
state is free to set the conditions for a valid marriage, subject to limits set
by the state's own constitution and the U.S. Constitution. Traditionally, a
marriage was considered valid if the requirements of the marriage law of the
state where the marriage took place were fulfilled. (First Restatement of
Conflicts on Marriage and Legitimacy s.121 (1934)). However, a state can refuse
to recognize a marriage if the marriage violates a strong public policy of the
state, even if the marriage was legal in the state where it was performed.
(Restatement (Second) Of Conflict of Laws ยง 283(2) (1971).) States
historically exercised this "public policy exception" by refusing to recognize
out-of-state polygamous marriages, underage marriages, incestuous marriages,
and interracial marriages. Following these precedents, nearly all courts that
have addressed the issue have held that states with laws against same-sex
marriage can refuse to recognize same-sex marriages that were legally performed
elsewhere. Same-sex marriage is currently legal in the District of Columbia and
in nine U.S. states: New Hampshire, New York, Massachusetts, Vermont, Iowa,
Connecticut, Maine, Maryland, and Washington. In 2003 and 2008 respectively,
the Massachusetts and California Supreme courts ruled in "Goodridge v.
Department of Public Health" and "In Re Marriage Cases" that the states'
constitutions required the state to permit same-sex marriage. The Massachusetts
decision could be reversed by an amendment to the state constitution; to date,
no such amendment has successfully been passed in Massachusetts. On June 2, the
"California Marriage Protection Act" qualified for the 2008 General Election
ballot. Voted on by California Nov 4, 2008, it amended the California
Constitution to provide that "Only marriage between a man and a woman is valid
or recognized in California." Proposition 8 has since been declared
unconstitutional by the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals and is awaiting
consideration by the Supreme Court. Several other states including Vermont,
California, New Jersey, Washington, Illinois, Oregon, Nevada, Hawaii, Colorado,
Delaware, Rhode Island, and Wisconsin allow same-sex couples to enter into
civil unions or domestic partnerships that provide some of the rights and
responsibilities of marriage under state law. Thirty states have passed state
constitutional amendments defining marriage as being between one man and one
woman. Federal statutes regulating marriage. Although individual U.S. states
have the primary regulatory power with regard to marriage, the United States
Congress has occasionally regulated marriage. The 1862 Morrill Anti-Bigamy Act,
which made bigamy a punishable federal offense in U.S. territories, was
followed by a series of federal laws designed to end the practice of polygamy.
In 1996 as a reaction to a state level judicial ruling prohibiting same-sex
couples from marrying that may violate Hawaii's constitutional equal protection
clause (Baehr v. Miike, 80 Hawai`i 341), Congress passed the Defense of
Marriage Act (DOMA), which defines marriage as a legal union of one man and one
woman for the purpose of interpreting federal law. Under DOMA, the federal
government does not recognize same-sex marriages or civil unions, even if those
unions are recognized by state law. For example, members of a same-sex couple
legally married in Massachusetts cannot file joint federal income tax returns
even if they file joint state income tax returns. The United States
Constitution and federal courts. Federal courts have interpreted the U.S.
Constitution to place some limits on states' ability to restrict access to
marriage. In "Loving v. Virginia", the United States Supreme Court overturned
state marriage laws that barred interracial marriages on the basis that
marriage is a "basic civil right..." and that "...the freedom to marry, or not
marry, a person of another race resides with the individual and cannot be
infringed by the State." The Supreme Court struck down a 1992 Colorado
constitutional amendment that barred legislative and judicial remedies to
protect homosexuals from discrimination solely on the basis of their sexual
orientation in "Romer v. Evans". In 1972, the U.S. Supreme Court dismissed,
"for want of a substantial question," an appeal by two men who unsuccessfully
challenged Minnesota's marriage statutes in state court. Because the case,
"Baker v. Nelson," came to the Court through mandatory appellate review (not
"certiorari"), the summary dismissal established "Baker v. Nelson" as a binding
precedent. One federal appellate court has upheld a state constitutional
amendment banning same-sex marriage: the United States Court of Appeals for the
Eighth Circuit in "Citizens for Equal Protection v. Bruning". The Eighth
Circuit, citing "Baker v. Nelson", affirmed the constitutionality under the
14th Amendment's Equal Protection Clause of Nebraska's constitutional amendment
which defines marriage as between a man and a woman, and states that unions of
two people in a same-sex relationship as marriage or similar to marriage shall
not be valid or recognized in Nebraska, and reversing a ruling by Judge Joseph
F. Bataillon of the United States District Court for the District of Nebraska
that a prohibition on same-sex marriage was unconstitutional. In 2010, the
United States District Court for the Northern District of California ruled that
Proposition 8, passed two years earlier by a slim majority of voters, was
unconstitutional. As in Judge Baitaillon's decision about the Nebraska law,
Judge Vaughn Walker stated in his ruling that moral opposition to gay marriage
is not sufficient reason to make a law valid. Judge Walker ruled the law
violated the 14th Amendment's Equal Protection clause, as well as the Due
Process clause. The proponents of Proposition 8 appealed to the United States
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which affirmed the lower court's
decision on February 7, 2012. California's same-sex marriage ban is still in
effect, pending a further appeal to the Supreme Court. Legislative history. The
Federal Marriage Amendment has been introduced in the United States Congress
four times: in 2003, 2004, 2005/2006 and 2008. 2002. The original Federal
Marriage Amendment, written by the Alliance for Marriage, was introduced in the
107th United States Congress in the House of Representatives on May 15, 2002,
by Democratic Representative Ronnie Shows (D-MS) with 22 cosponsors. 2003. The
bill was designated H.J.Res.56 in the House and was immediately referred to the
House Committee on the Judiciary. On June 25, 2003, it was referred to the
Subcommittee on the Constitution, where hearings were held on May 13, 2004. The
bill was introduced in the Senate by Senator Wayne Allard (R-Colo.) on November
25, 2003 and designated S.J.Res.26. It was immediately referred to the Senate
Committee on the Judiciary. 2004. When the 2003 version of the FMA failed to
advance in the Congress, Senator Allard re-introduced the Amendment on May 22,
2004 with a revised second sentence. Rep. Musgrave re-introduced the Amendment
in the House on September 23, 2004 with the same revision. The bill was
designated S.J.Res.30 in the Senate and was immediately referred to the Senate
Committee on the Judiciary. When the bill became stuck in committee, Senator
Allard re-introduced the Amendment in the Senate on July 7, 2004 where it was
designated S.J.Res.40. The bill was subject to a filibuster: on July 9, 12, 13,
and 14, the motion was made to proceed to consideration of the measure. On July
14, 2004, a cloture motion to force a direct vote on the FMA was defeated in
the Senate by a margin of 50 nay votes to 48 yea votes. The 48 votes in support
of the cloture motion were 12 votes short of the 60-vote supermajority (three-
fifths) needed to end debate and force a vote on the Amendment itself. Senators
John Kerry of Massachusetts and John Edwards of North Carolina skipped the
filibuster vote. On July 15, 2004, the motion to proceed to consideration of
the Amendment was withdrawn in the Senate. The bill was designated H.J.Res.106
in the House and was immediately referred to the House Committee on the
Judiciary. On September 28, 2004, rules were recommended by the House Rules
Committee with regards to debate and voting on the proposed Amendment. The
rules were passed on September 30. The resolution was immediately considered.
Passage of the proposed Amendment failed 227 yea votes to 186 nay votes, where
290 yea votes (two-thirds) are required for passage of a proposed
Constitutional amendment. 2005/2006. On January 24, 2005, Senator Allard
introduced the Marriage Protection Amendment, which was the 2004 version of the
Federal Marriage Amendment verbatim, with 21 Republican co-sponsors. In 2006,
Rep. Musgrave introduced the Marriage Protection Amendment in the House. This
version had the same language as the 2004 proposal, except that the word
"solely" in the first sentence was replaced by the word "only". The bill was
designated S.J.Res.1 in the Senate and was immediately referred to the Senate
Committee on the Judiciary. On November 9, 2005, the Subcommittee on
Constitution, Civil Rights and Property Rights approved the bill for
consideration by the full Judiciary Committee. On May 18, 2006, the Judiciary
Committee reported to the Senate and the bill was placed on the legislative
calendar. The motion to proceed to the measure was first made on June 5, 2006.
A cloture motion on the motion to proceed was then presented in Senate. On June
6 and 7, the motion to proceed to the measure was again considered in the
Senate. On June 7, a cloture motion to force a direct vote on the Marriage
Protection Amendment was defeated in the Senate by a margin of 49 nay votes to
48 yea votes, with the vote mostly following party lines with Democrats
opposing and Republicans in favor. The 48 votes in support of the cloture
motion were 12 votes short of the 60-vote supermajority (three-fifths) needed
to end debate and force a vote on the Amendment itself. Eight Republican
Senators opposed or did not vote; four Democratic Senators favored or did not
vote. The only Senators who changed their position from the 2004 vote to the
2006 vote were Senators Judd Gregg and Arlen Specter, both of whom voted Yea in
2004 and Nay in 2006. The bill was designated H.J.Res.88 in the House and was
immediately referred to the House Committee on the Judiciary. On July 17, 2006,
rules were recommended by the House Rules Committee with regards to debate and
voting on the proposed Amendment. The rules were passed on July 18. The
resolution was immediately considered. Passage of the proposed Amendment failed
236 yea votes to 187 nay votes, where 290 yea votes (two-thirds) are required
for passage. The motion to reconsider was immediately laid on the table and
agreed to without objection. Twenty-seven Republican Representatives opposed
the FMA; thirty-four Democrats voted in favor of the FMA and one Independent
voted against the FMA in the vote on July 18, 2006 in the House. 2008. On May
22, 2008, Rep. Paul Broun (R-Ga.) and 91 co-sponsors introduced H.J.Res.89,
which proposed the enactment of FMA. Senator Roger Wicker (R-Miss.) and eight
other senators introduced similar legislation with S.J.Res.43 on June 25.
Political considerations. Bush administration's stance. In 2003, the White
House declined to take a stand on the amendment, although Press Secretary Ari
Fleischer relayed that President George W. Bush believed that marriage was
between a man and a woman. In 2004, President Bush expressed support for this
amendment. Vice President Dick Cheney neither endorsed nor condemned the FMA,
arguing that same-sex marriage is an issue for the states to decide. In 2009,
Cheney stated his support for same-sex marriage on a state-by-state basis. On
January 25, 2005, according to the "New York Times", Bush told a privately
invited group of African-American community and religious leaders that he
remained committed to amending the Constitution to "ban same-sex marriage".
Over the course of the next two days, it was revealed by the "Washington Post"
and "USA Today" that the Bush Administration had paid columnists to promote its
views. The Department of Health and Human Services paid Maggie Gallagher
$21,500, and Mike McManus $49,000, to write syndicated news columns endorsing
the FMA. Additionally, Gallagher also received $20,000 in 2002 and 2003 to
write a report on government initiatives to strengthen marriage. McManus leads
a group called "Marriage Savers" promoting marriage as defined between a man
and a woman. Influence on 2004 presidential election. By the time Americans
went to the polls, John Kerry opposed the Federal Marriage Amendment and
affirmatively supported civil unions, while George W. Bush supported the
Federal Marriage Amendment to ban same sex marriage but was not opposed to
states enacting their own civil union legislation. Previously, on February 24,
2004, Bush called for an amendment which would have outlawed gay marriage, and
which would have disallowed states from recognizing or enforcing gay civil
unions. Bush's statement included a requirement that any amendment "leavthe
state legislatures free to make their own choices in defining legal
arrangements other than marriage." The White House partly clarified Bush's
position in a February 24, 2004 press conference with White House Press
Secretary Scott McClellan, who stated that by calling on the FMA to permit
states the possibility of creating other "legal arrangements," Bush
specifically meant to permit states the possibility of enacting civil unions.
(McClellan also stated, however, that Bush did not personally support civil
unions.) Similarly, at the February 25, 2004 press conference, McClellan stated
that the White House intended to work with Congress to develop language for the
FMA that permitted states to enact civil unions. Although Bush frequently spoke
about FMA on the campaign from February and November 2004, he avoided mention
of the phrase "civil unions" until an ABC News interview of October 26, 2004,
aired one week before the election. The FMA's Republican co-sponsors, Senator
Wayne Allard (R-CO) and Representative Marilyn Musgrave (R-CO), announced new
language for the proposed amendment on March 23, 2004, replacing the second
sentence of the amendment with "Neither this Constitution, nor the constitution
of any State, shall be construed to require that marriage or the legal
incidents thereof be conferred upon any union other than the union of a man and
a woman." Both Allard and Musgrave called the change purely "technical."
Opponents of the FMA claim polling of the public has shown a cautious response,
with many polls indicating opposition, even in states such as Arizona and
Colorado which are normally thought of as socially conservative. They cite Pew
Research Center exit polls from the 2004 elections finding that 25% of polled
voters support same-sex marriage and another 35% support civil unions. On the
other hand, of the 11 states in which same-sex marriage amendments were on the
ballot, all passed handily. Bush won in nine, including Ohio. Interpretation of
some exit polling suggests that the amendments may have brought out one million
additional voters, most of which came out for the first time to cast their
ballots for Bush. Notably, a vast majority of these states have not voted for a
Democrat in many years. The two states that Bush did not win, Michigan and
Oregon, still passed amendments barring same-sex marriage. However, Roberta
Combs, President of the Christian Coalition of America claims, "Christian
evangelicals made the major difference once again this year." In the 2000
Presidential Election, there was some speculation that many evangelicals did
not go to the polls and vote because of the October surprise of George W.
Bush's drunk-driving arrest record. In a dozen swing states that decided the
presidential election, moral values tied with the economy and jobs as the top
issue in the campaign, according to Associated Press exit polls. Arguments
against the Federal Marriage Amendment. The first sentence of H.J. Res. 56
would provide an official definition of legal marriage in the United States.
Proponents claim that this is a reasonable measure, based on established
custom, which defends the family and the institution of marriage. To others, it
is an unfair means of excluding same-sex couples from receiving benefits from
that institution. Civil right activists and supporters of the LGBT (Lesbian,
Gay, Bisexual, Transgender) community feel that the Federal Marriage Amendment
has no place in the United States constitution. Federalism. Opponents of the
FMA argue that it would violate the states' rights to regulate marriage by
federalizing the issue, which they say should be left to the states. Many have
used the federalism argument, including Senator John Kerry, Senator John
McCain, and Representative Ron Paul, who opposes the FMA for several reasons,
one of which that regulating marriage is not a proper role of the federal
government. Constitutionally defining marriage would not only remove the
states' choice, but it would reverse the choices already made in some states
and territories, i.e., Massachusetts, Vermont, Connecticut, New Hampshire, New
York, Iowa, and the District of Columbia. Civil rights. Opponents of the FMA
say that it would be only the second Constitutional amendment to restrict,
rather than expand, the civil rights of individuals in the United States. The
first was the 18th Amendment on prohibition, which was later repealed by the
21st Amendment. At various times in U.S. history, other minorities have been
prevented from marrying: African-Americans, for example. Interracial marriage
was also legally prohibited in various states, until the Supreme Court ruled
such bans unconstitutional in 1967. Marriage is an institution long recognized
by the U.S. government under the right to pursue happiness, and denying that
right to any couple, regardless of gender, is argued as unconstitutional by
many ACLU supporters. Unmarried heterosexual couples. It is argued that the
2002 version of the FMA would have severely affected the ability of
heterosexual unmarried couples to seek some degree of legal protection and/or
provisions. Opponents of the FMA argue that it may complicate efforts to
enforce laws against domestic abuse in heterosexual relationships involving
unmarried couples. They note that two Ohio courts ruled that Ohio's similar
amendment made the state's domestic violence laws unconstitutional as applied
to unmarried couples, because they created a "quasi-marital relationship".
(although the decisions were later reversed). Supporters of the FMA assert that
this argument was an invalid scare tactic from the outset and that the FMA
would not prevent laws against domestic abuse from being applied to unmarried
couples. Even in Ohio, 8 of the 10 Ohio Courts that addressed the effect of the
State Amendment on Domestic Violence Laws found no conflict. Additionally
several Attorneys General of other states issued legal opinions finding that no
such conflict would exist. With the final ruling of the Supreme Court of Ohio,
which held that the DV Statute was not in-conflict, no State faces any
contention between marriage Statutes and Domestic Violence Laws. Separation of
church and state. Some religious groups argue that having the government decide
whether a same-sex marriage should be legally binding on the grounds of the
ideology of other religious groups restricts their religious freedom. They
argue that marriage is a religious term that should not be defined by the
government. Where same-sex marriage is recognized in the United States, no
church or other religious institution is forced to perform same-sex marriages,
but the FMA would deny the opportunity for religions which approve of same-sex
marriage to perform legally binding same-sex marriages. Unnecessary and
ineffective. Opponents of the FMA claim that life for those in a heterosexual
marriage are not materially affected by a constitutional marriage definition or
legalization of same-sex marriage. They state that the FMA is totally
unnecessary because federal and state laws, combined with the present state of
the relevant constitutional doctrines, already make court-ordered nationwide
same-sex marriage unlikely for the foreseeable future. It is claimed therefore,
that such an amendment is a solution in search of a problem. It is claimed that
neither federal nor state courts are likely to order same-sex marriage under
the traditional interpretation of the Constitutionโs Full Faith and Credit
Clause. Nor, for the foreseeable future, are courts likely to mandate same-sex
marriage under substantive federal constitutional doctrines, such as the
Fourteenth Amendmentโs Due Process Clause or the Equal Protection Clause.
They state that even if individual states recognize same-sex marriages, while
other states refuse to recognize them, there is no reason to believe these
discordant approaches will create insurmountable legal or public policy
problems. There is no uniform national family law, just as there is no uniform
national property law or criminal code. Throughout the nationโs history,
states have adopted their own family law policies, including their own
requirements for marriage. These divergent policies have not created
intolerable levels of confusion or conflict among the states. Arguments in
favor of the Federal Marriage Amendment. Restriction of perceived judicial
overreach. Proponents of the FMA argue that if it were not for judicial
overreach, there would be no need for a FMA; states' rights would not be
violated since no state legislatures have recognized same-sex marriage (until
Vermont did so in April 2009). They argue that the federalism proposed by the
opponents of a constitutional amendment is a contrivance for permitting federal
courts to foist same-sex marriage upon the whole nation, no matter what the
people of the individual states desire. In essence they see the FMA largely as
a defensive measure that would not be necessary if the judiciary were not
acting beyond its perceived scope. Proponents support this claim with "Citizens
for Equal Protection v. Bruning", in which a district court struck down
Nebraska's marriage amendment, even though it had been passed by a margin of
seventy percent (although the amendment was later reinstated.) Opponents of the
FMA have argued that this argument is an invalid scare tactic because no
federal court has ever ordered a state to permit same-sex marriage. However, on
February 7, 2012 a federal appeals court in a 2-to-1 decision threw out
California's voter-approved restriction on same-sex marriage (Proposition 8)
saying that it violated the Equal Protection clause of the US Constitution. The
federal appeals court rejected Proposition 8 even though 52 percent of voters
(over seven million people) approved the restriction on same-sex marriage and
it was upheld by the California Supreme Court. Uniform application of Full
Faith and Credit. Under the Full Faith and Credit Clause, with certain
exceptions, a state is obligated to honor the judgments and declarations of
other states. While some assert that a "license" could be construed as a
"judgment", the majority of legal scholars disagree. However, it is pointed out
that a judgment for divorce is required to be honored because judgments are
required to be enforced by out-of-state jurisdictions, regardless of whether
those judgments are against the public policy of the out state forum (see
"Williams v. North Carolina", 317 U.S. 287 (1942) (the case also stated that
there is no "authority which lends support to the view that the full faith and
credit clause compels the courts of one state to subordinate the local policy
of that state, as respects its domiciliaries, to the statutes of any other
state"). Because of the intricacies of family law and the mobility of married
couples, the recognition of marriages in other states varies. For example, a
couple who leaves California for Massachusetts to obtain a valid same-sex
marriage may not be granted an equitable divorce in California should they file
for divorce there. However, if they were granted a valid divorce in
Massachusetts, the state of California would be required to uphold the judgment
of the Massachusetts court. Using this scenario, not only would same-sex
married couples be treated differently depending on the state, they could also
be treated differently in the same state depending upon which state their
divorce is obtained. The need for clarification on state uniformity in this
issue requires a constitutional amendment at the federal level, particularly
considering there will be a floodgate of marriages in out-of-state
jurisdictions for purposes of obtaining a same-sex marriage license. Protection
of conjugal marriage. FMA proponents argue that opposite-sex marriage in the
United States has been given special legal protection. This protection has
historically been granted only to the unique institution of marriage as the
cradle for the family and to legitimize lines of inheritance. Proponents of FMA
argue that same-sex marriage advocates want to disregard federalism and use the
judicial system to make same-sex marriage legal nationwide, which only the
Federal Marriage Amendment can forestall.
