Genocide denial Genocide denial is an attempt to deny or minimize the scale and
severity of an incidence of genocide. The most well-known type is Holocaust
denial. Where there is near universal agreement that a genocide occurred,
genocide denial is usually considered a form of illegitimate historical
revisionism. However, in circumstances where the event in dispute is not seen
to constitute genocide by the facts, the use of the term may be an "ad hominem"
by those who argue that a genocide occurred. The extremely serious nature of
the crime of genocide, along with the terrible reputation it creates, and
potential repercussions that may come against a nation as a result of
committing it, ensures that whenever genocide is charged, there will be parties
that attempt to avoid or divert blame. However as Larissa van den Herik has
pointed out there is a gap in international law that encourages the use of the
charge of genocide when other charges might be more appropriate "The only way
for Bosnia to go to the ICJ was to allege genocide. There is no Crimes against
Humanity Convention providing for jurisdiction for the ICJ" The European
Union's executive commission proposed a European Unionâ€“wide anti-racism law
in 2001, which included an offense of genocide denial, but European Union
states failed to agree on the balance between prohibiting racism and freedom of
expression. After six years of wrangling a watered down compromise was reached
in 2007 giving states freedom to implement the legislation as they saw fit.
Techniques used by illegitimate historical revisionists. The distinction
between respectable academic historians and those of illegitimate historical
revisionists rests on the techniques used to write such histories. Accuracy and
revision are central to historical scholarship. As in any academic discipline,
historians' papers are submitted to peer review. Instead of submitting their
work to the challenges of peer review, illegitimate revisionists rewrite
history to support an agenda, often political, using any number of techniques
and rhetorical fallacies to obtain their results. Writing on genocide denial in
general. George Orwell writes in 'Notes on Nationalism' that Israel Charney,
Executive Director of the Institute on the Holocaust and Genocide in Israel,
describes genocide denial by putting it into the following categories:
