Gun politics Gun politics addresses safety issues and ideologies related to
firearms through criminal and noncriminal use. Gun politics deals with rules,
regulations, and restrictions on the use, ownership, and distribution of
firearms. International. National sovereignty. Most nations hold the power to
protect themselves, others, and police their own territory as a fundamental
power vested by sovereignty. However, this power can be lost under certain
circumstances: some Countries have been forced to disarm by other Countries,
upon losing a war, or by having arms embargos or sanctions placed on them.
Likewise, nations that violate international arms control agreements, even if
claiming to be acting within the scope of their national sovereignty, may find
themselves with a range of penalties or sanctions regarding firearms placed on
them by other nations. Enforcement. National and regional police and security
services enforce their own gun regulations. For example, the U.S. Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) supports the United States'
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) program "to aggressively
enforce this mission and reduce the number of weapons that are illegally
trafficked worldwide from the United States and used to commit acts of
international terrorism, to subvert restrictions imposed by other nations on
their residents, and to organized crime and narcotics-related activities.
Worldwide politics and legislation. There are many areas of debate into what
kinds of firearms should be allowed to be privately owned, if any, and how,
where and when they may be used. Australia. Firearm laws in Australia are
enforced at a Federal and State level. Gun ownership is accessible only for
those persons with 'genuine reasons' who can obtain a Permit to Acquire from
local Police stations. 'Genuine Reasons' focus on primary production, licenced
sport, animal control or employment requirements, and do not include 'personal
protection.' In New South Wales (and similar in other States), firearm
ownership is widely prohibited for convicted offenders. Gun ownership is low in
metropolitan areas whose residents would generally not fulfill 'Genuine
Reasons' requirements. Gun licences must be renewed frequently and expire
automatically. Firearm controls have been in place following the 1996 Port
Arthur massacre. Gun ownership in Australia is not a wide social issue, and
major political parties are generally supportive of pro-control legislation
(Although parties such as the New South Wales Shooters Party, which represent
pro-deregulation, have a small number of seats in State Parliaments). Brazil.
All firearms in Brazil are required to be registered with the state. The
minimum age for ownership is 25 and it is generally illegal to carry a gun
outside a residence. The total number of firearms in Brazil is thought to be
around 17 million with 9 million of those being unregistered. Some 39,000
people died in 2003 due to gun-related injuries nationwide. In 2004, the number
was 36,000. Although Brazil has 100 million fewer citizens than the United
States, and more restrictive gun laws, there are 25 percent more gun deaths;
other sources indicate that homicide rates due to guns are approximately four
times higher than the rate in the United States. Brazil has the second largest
arms industry in the Western Hemisphere. Approximately 80 percent of the
weapons manufactured in Brazil are exported, mostly to neighboring countries;
many of these weapons are then smuggled back into Brazil. Some firearms in
Brazil come from police and military arsenals, having either been "stolen or
sold by corrupt soldiers and officers." In 2005, a referendum was held in
Brazil on the sale of firearms and ammunition to attempt to lower the number of
deaths due to guns. Material focused on gun rights in opposition to the gun ban
was translated from information from the National Rifle Association, much of
which focused on US Constitutional discussions focused around the Second
Amendment to the United States Constitution. Although the Brazilian Government,
the Catholic Church, and the United Nations, among others, fought for the gun
ban, the referendum failed at the polls, with 64% of the voters voting no.
Canada. 1. Non-Restricted: Long guns with an overall length greater than
26Â inches and, if semi-automatic, a barrel which is 18 1/2Â inches or longer.
These can be possessed with an ordinary PAL, and are the only class of firearms
which can be used for hunting, due to the ATT (Authorization to Transport)
requirement for Restricted and Prohibited weapons, as well as provincial
regulations. This class includes most popular sporting rifles and shotguns. 2.
Restricted: This includes handguns with barrel lengths greater than 4Â inches,
and long guns which do not meet the length requirements for non-restricted, and
are not prohibited. These guns require ATTs, and as such can only be shot at
ranges. These arms can be possessed with an RPAL, which is similar to the PAL
course, but covers restricted weapons and the increased storage requirements.
One must pass the CFSC as well as the RCFSC in order to obtain their RPAL.
Examples in this class include all AR-15 variants. 3. Prohibited: These weapons
generally cannot be possessed by civilians. Normally, the only way to possess
these is by being grandfathered in or inheriting a pistol with a barrel length
under 4Â inches, in which case the individual may receive the Class 7
endorsement. This class also includes prohibited devices. Many military arms
fall under this classification, including all AK variants, and the FN-FAL. All
handguns with a barrel length under 4Â inches are prohibited, as well as those
chambered in .25 or .32 caliber cartridges, presumably to prevent the
manufacture of "Saturday Night Specials". Also prohibited are fully automatic
weapons and supressors. Magazines for automatic long guns capable of holding
more than 5 centerfire cartridges or 10 rounds for handguns, are prohibited,
with the exception of the M1 Garand, as well as carbines which use pistol
magazines, such as the Beretta CX4 Storm. Licensing provisions of the Firearms
Act endeavours to ensure proper training and safe storage. Users must possess a
licence, called a "possession and acquisition licence (PAL)". A firearms safety
course must be passed prior to applying for a PAL. A non-resident (i.e., non-
Canadian) can have a "non-resident firearms declaration" confirmed by a customs
officer, which provides for a temporary 60-day authorization to have a firearm
in Canada. There are three categories of firearms for purposes of Canadian law:
non-restricted, restricted, and prohibited. Restricted and prohibited weapons
may actually be owned and used in limited circumstances. China. Gun ownership
in the People's Republic of China is heavily regulated by law. Generally,
private citizens are not allowed to possess guns. Guns can be used by law
enforcement, the military and paramilitary, and security personnel protecting
property of state importance (including the arms industry, financial
institutions, storage of resources, and scientific research institutions).
Civilian ownership of guns is largely restricted to authorised, non-individual
entities, including sporting organisations, authorised hunting reserves and
wild life protection, management and research organizations. The chief
exception to the general ban for individual gun ownership is for the purpose of
hunting. Individuals who hold hunting permits can apply to purchase and hold
firearms for the purpose of hunting. Illegal possession or sale of firearms may
result in a minimum punishment of 3 years in prison, with the maximum being the
death penalty. Gun ownership in Hong Kong and Macau is tightly controlled and
possession are mainly in the hands of law enforcement, military and private
security firms (providing protection for jewelers and banks). Still,
possessing, manufacturing and import/exporting airsoft guns with a muzzle
energy that no more than or above two joules of kinetic energy is legal to
citizens in China's SARs. Firearms control was inherited during British and
Portuguese rule and more or less retained today. Under the Section 13 of Cap
238 Firearms and Ammunition Ordinance of the Hong Kong law, unrestricted
firearms and ammunition requires a license. Those found in possession without a
license could be fined HKD$100,000 and imprisonment for up to 14 years. East
Timor. Under East Timorese law, only the military and police forces may legally
possess, carry and use firearms. However, despite these laws, East Timor has
many problems with illegally armed militias, including widespread violence in
2006 which resulted in over 100,000 people being forced from their homes, as
well as two separate assassination attempts on the Prime Minister and President
in early 2008. However, in late June 2008, the Prime Minister, Xanana GusmÃ£o,
introduced a proposed gun law to Parliament for "urgent debate", pushing back
scheduled budgetary discussions. The new law, which would allow civilians to
own guns, sparked heated scenes in the East Timorese parliament between the
parliamentarians who support the new law and those who oppose it. The United
Nations, which has a peacekeeping force deployed in the nation, also expressed
concern over the new law. European Union. The 1991 Council Directive 91/477/EEC
started the process of creating a new common legal system for gun owners in the
EU, and introduced the European Firearms Pass for owners carrying firearms from
one member state to another. In late 2007 the European Parliament and Council
adopted a legislative report to tighten gun control laws and establish an
extensive firearms database. Passed with overwhelming backing, the tough new
gun control rules were "hoped to prevent Europe from becoming a gun-friendly
culture like the United States," in the words of the International Herald
Tribune. Certain countries such as the United Kingdom are unaffected as they
maintain more stringent gun control laws than those effectively set as a
minimum by the European Union. In 2008 the resulting EU Directive 2008/51/EC
provided the current common basis for national laws affecting hunters, target
shooters and collectors, and member states were to have complied with it by 28
July 2010. Austria. Licenses to own/carry category A weapons are available but
rare, for example pre-ban grandfathered pump action shotguns - these are then
added like normal category B weapons to the Waffenpass/Waffenbesitzkarte. Czech
Republic. Gun ownership in the Czech Republic is regulated by liberal gun laws
compared to the rest of Europe. The last Gun Act was passed in 2001 and
replaced the old law tightening the legislation slightly. Generally, handguns
in the Czech Republic are available to anybody above 21 years of age (15, 16 or
18 years under special conditions) with a clean criminal history who passes
tests about gun law and weapon knowledge and a medical inspection (which may
optionally include psychological test). Gun ownership is also acceptable for
self-defense purposes. Unlike most European countries the Czech gun law allow
its citizens to carry a concealed weapon without having any specific reason.
Sport shooting is the third most widespread sport in the country (after
football (soccer) and ice hockey). Finland. The ownership and use of firearms
in Finland is regulated by the country's Firearms Act of 1998. Weapons are
individually licensed by local police forces, however there is no limit on the
number of licenses an individual may hold. Licenses are granted for
recreational uses, exhibition or (under certain circumstances) professional
use. Outside of law enforcement, only specially trained security guards may
carry loaded weapons in public. There is almost no regulation of air rifles or
crossbows, except that it is illegal to carry or fire them in public. Guns are
divided into 13 firearms categories and four action categories; some of which
are limited. Automatic weapons, rockets and cannons (so called "destructive"
weapons), for example, are generally not permitted. The most recent update to
gun law in Finland occurred in November 2007 when the government pre-empted a
new EU directive prohibiting the carrying of firearms by under-18's by removing
the ability of 15- to 18-year-olds to carry hunting rifles under parental
guidance. In 2010, after controversial high school shootings in 2008 prompted
government review, a constitutional law committee concluded that people over
the age of 20 can receive a permit for semiautomatic handguns. Though
individuals have to show a continuous activity in a handguns sporting for last
two years before they can have a license for their own gun. France. In France,
to buy a weapon, a hunting licence or a shooting sport licence is necessary.
France also sets limits on the number of cartridges that can be purchased per
year, depending on the purpose of the gun. The total number of firearms owned
by an individual is also subject to limits. Germany. Gun ownership in Germany
is currently regulated by "Federal Weapons Act" (German: Waffengesetz), 1972;
it extends previous gun legislation. In 1945 the Allies commanded full
disarmament of the country, private ownership of firearms was not allowed until
after 1956 when restrictions effectively returned to 1928 policy. In 1972 the
"Federal Weapons Act" revised much of the regulations. Under this act Germany
maintains a two-tier policy to firearm ownership. A "firearms ownership
license" allows for the purchasing of weapons by those over the age of 18 who
meet various competency/trustworthiness guidelines. Convicted felons, those
with a mental disability or those deemed unreliable are denied licenses. The
second tier is a "firearms carry permit" which allows concealed or open carry
in public. The permits are usually only issued to individuals with a particular
need; such as persons at risk, money couriers, etc. The laws apply to any
weapons with a fire energy exceeding 7.5 Joule. Ireland. Irish firearms law is
based on several Firearms Acts, each of which amends those Acts which were
issued previously. The initial Firearms (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1924 which
was introduced as emergency legislation following the founding of the state,
was replaced by the Firearms Act, 1925, which laid the foundations of the
system of licencing that has continued unaltered until quite recently.
Relatively small modifications were introduced in the Firearms Act, 1964, the
Firearms (Proofing) Act, 1968, the Firearms Act, 1971, the Firearms and
Offensive Weapons Act, 1990, the Firearms (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1998 and
the Firearms (Firearm Certificates For Non-Residents) Act, 2000. By 2006, such
was the confusion from these multiple Acts, each amending the others (and not
all of which were ever actually commenced and thus were in the public record
but not enforced as actual legislation); and the amendments of Irish firearms
legislation by other Acts ranging from the Wildlife Acts (mostly relating to
hunting law) to the Road Traffic Acts (relating to how and where firearms could
be transported) and others; the large amount of secondary legislation
(Statutory Instruments, which set out regulations, the design of application
forms for licences and so forth, as well as the details of when various parts
of the Acts came into force); as well as the introduction of EU firearms law
into the canon of Irish legislation; led the Irish Law Reform Commission to
recommend that all the extant legislation be "restated" a legal process by
which all the existing primary and secondary legislation would be read as one
and a single document produced as the new Firearms Act (and all prior Acts
would be repealed). 2006, however, saw the introduction instead of the Criminal
Justice Act 2006, which controversially contained an enormous rewrite of the
Firearms Act, virtually rewriting 80% of the Act completely. It was quickly
followed by the Criminal Justice Act 2007 and the Criminal Justice
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 2009, each of which amended all the preceding
Firearms Acts. As of today, the Law Reform Commission recommendation still
stands and has not as yet been acted upon; the Firearms Act consists of the
initial 1925 Act amended by approximately eighteen separate Acts and is well
understood by only a handful of those directly involved in its drafting,
amendment or usage. Extensive complaints have arisen over the application of
the legislation, with over 180 judicial review cases currently in the High
Court and over seventy already successfully prosecuted in the High Court by
firearms owners. Three of the 180 cases are currently been taken as "test
cases" by the Department of Justice and policy with regard to firearms licences
will be determined based on the outcome of these cases, according to the
Ministerial Briefing document for the newly elected Minister for Justice, Alan
Shatter. 1972 Temporary Custody Order and Pistols in Irish firearms law. One of
the most controversial events in the history of the Firearms Acts occurred in
1972. The "Troubles" in Northern Ireland (1970â1998) were becoming a security
concern for the Irish Government at the time, and in 1972 a Temporary Custody
Order (S.I. No. 187/1972 â Firearms (Temporary Custody) Order, 1972) was
issued for all privately-held pistols and all rifles over .22 calibre to be
surrendered to local Garda (police) stations by 5 August 1972, for a period of
one month. This order was complied with, but when firearms owners returned to
reclaim their firearms, they were informed that their licences had expired
while their firearms were in custody (Irish firearms licences until 2008 were
issued for a period of one year, and all licences were usually dealt with at
the same time, usually at the start of August, though the date has changed over
the years). Since the firearms were no longer licenced, they could not be
returned until a new licence was issued; upon seeking a renewal of their
licences, applicants were informed that a new Garda policy was in place that
would refuse licence applications for all pistols and all firearms over .22 in
calibre. As such, the firearms in Garda custody remained in Garda custody. This
situation continued until the late 1990s, when fullbore rifles of calibres up
to .270 Winchester were permitted to be licenced for the purposes of deer
hunting on humane grounds (prior to this, only the .22â250 cartridge was
available for deer hunting and it was felt to be only barely capable of this
task). All other firearms held in custody remained there however, until the
repeal of the Garda policy following a high court case taken by an Irish
shooter (Frank Brophy) to obtain a licence for an Olympic target shooting
pistol succeeded and the licence was granted. Following this, firearms held in
storage by the Gardai were reclaimed by those owners still alive or their
descendants. As these pistols were never formally confiscated (and some were
sold off by their owners and removed from Garda custody in that manner), no
compensation was claimable by the owners. Following the Brophy case, some 300
pistols were licenced in Ireland, ranging from new Olympic air pistols (which
are firearms under Irish law) to reclaimed pre-1972 pistols to new centerfire
pistols. While welcomed by the target shooting community, in 2008 opposition
deputies Jim Deasy and Olivia Mitchell campaigned to ban these pistols on the
grounds that they could be used in crime. Despite multiple parliamentary
questions from as early as 2005, where it was stated that there was no proof
that this was happening, Minister Ahern announced a ban on all handguns in
November 2008. This ban was fought by the various governing bodies of shooting
sports in Ireland, with the end result as of 2011 that air and smallbore
pistols may still be licenced in Ireland, but all centerfire pistols not
licenced prior to 17 November 2008 cannot be licenced. The Firearms
Consultation Panel. Following the introduction of the Criminal Justice Act 2006
and its extensive and complex rewriting of the Firearms Act, the Minister for
Justice at the time (Micheal McDowell) instituted the Firearms Consultation
Panel, a panel chaired by the Minster through the Principal Officer of the
Department of Justice's Firearms Section, which comprised representatives from
the Gardai, Department of Sport, firearms dealers, all the national governing
bodies of the shooting sports, and other stakeholders in the Firearms Act (such
as insurance providers). This panel met from 2006 through 2011 to attempt to
implement the changes in the 2006 Act(and later the 2007 and 2009 Acts) where
possible, and to attempt to alter the Acts where they were unworkable by
providing expert advice to the Department in the drafting of new legislation
amendments. With the election of a new Minister, the FCP is in the process of
being wound down, despite campaigning to extend its terms of reference to make
it a permanent advisory panel. The Irish Firearms Licence. Firearms in Ireland
are licenced on a per-firearms basis (i.e. one licence per firearm rather than
one licence per shooter), with each licence lasting for three years from the
date the licence is issued. The licence fee for each firearm is â¬80.
Applications for a firearms licence require the user to permit the Gardai to
access their medical records, provide two character references, be a member of
an approved target shooting club if the licence is for target shooting, install
secure storage for the firearm (to the standard specified in the Regulations
2009) and allow that storage to be inspected by the Gardai. Italy. The Italian
Constitution does not recognize the right to keep and bear arms, however
different types of gun licenses can be obtained from the national police
authorities. Gun usage is restricted to people 18 years old and up. There are 3
licenses that allow individuals to carry guns in public: Hunting license;
Shooting Sports license and Concealed Carry license. A hunting license allows
the licensee to carry his/her weapon from home to the shooting range and back
only. If caught with a gun anywhere else severe penalties are in force,
including arrest. The same applies for hunting licenses, while to obtain a
concealed carry license, a person has to prove that there exists a real "threat
to life". This can be for example having been shot already. The number of guns
an individual may own and retain in its home is restricted by a classification:
three common handguns, six sporting handguns/long guns, and an unlimited number
of hunting long guns. Purchase of any gun and ammunition is allowed only to
individuals issued with a carry license. Poland. Gun ownership in Poland is
regulated by the Weapons and Munitions Act. A licence is required to keep and
purchase firearms. As a result of very stringent controls, gun ownership in
Poland is the lowest in the European Union, at one firearm per 100 citizens. In
order to get a gun license, one must: The psychological evaluation must be
repeated every 5 years. Some other weapons, such as crossbows, require the same
license as is required for firearms. Romania. Gun ownership in Romania is
regulated by Law 39/2004. Romania has one of the toughest gun ownership in the
world. In order for citizens to obtain a non-lethal weapon, they must obtain a
permit from the police, and must register their weapon once they purchased it.
Civilians cannot purchase a lethal firearm. The only categories of people who
are legally entitled to carry a weapon are magistrates, MPs military forces and
certain categories of diplomats. A psychological evaluation is required
beforehand in all cases. Furthermore, knives with a blade longer than 15Â cm
are considered weapons and have a similar regime to those of firearms. In order
for a hunter to obtain a hunting/gun ownership license, he must spend a certain
"practice time" with a professional hunter. Minors (15 and older) may also use
a weapon, provided that they are under the supervision of someone who has a gun
license. However, they cannot own or carry one until the age of 18. The use of
guns for self-defense is only allowed if the gun is a last resort option.
Slovakia. Gun ownership in Slovakia is regulated principally by law 190/2003. A
gun license is neccesary to purchase most firearms. Air guns with muzzle energy
up to 15 J, gas pistols and non-repeating muzzle-loaded guns are available to
anybody above 18 without permission. There is a restriction in muzzle energy
output - handguns up to 1000 J, rifles up to 6000 J. Fully automatic guns,
silencers and hollow-point bullets (when used for self-defense) are forbidden.
A gun licence can be issued for 6 categories of possession (A - carrying for
defense, B - possesion at home for defense, C - gun-holding for work purposes,
D - long guns for hunting, E - gun holding for sport shooting , F - guns
collecting). Generally one must be at least 21 years old, free of a criminal
history, and of sound health of mind and body to apply for a gun license, which
is then issued after passing an oral exam covering aspects of gun law, safe
handling, first-aid, etc. The license allowing carrying for self-defense is
only issued if the police deem a sufficient justification exists-- examples of
such justifications include being a business owner (including those self-
employed), handling money in connection with business, etc. 2% of the adult
Slovak population holds a license allowing for concealed carry. Slovenia. In
Slovenia gun ownership is regulated under the "Weapons Law" (Zakon o oroÅ¾ju).
The ownership and purchase of firearms requires a specific reason: if one wants
to have a gun for hunting or target shooting, a person must obtain a proof of
their membership in a shooting sports organization. If one needs a weapon for
self-defense one must "prove that his personal safety at risk to such an extent
that in order to ensure the needed a weapon for security". Regardless of the
reason, before applying for a gun permit one must receive a medical exam and a
test on the knowledge of weapons. When keeping weapons at home the gun must be
stored in a locked cabinet with ammunition stored in a separate location
Sweden. Gun ownership requires license and is regulated by the weapon law
(Vapenlagen 1996:67) further regulations are found in in weapon decree
(VapenfÃ¶rordningen 1996:70). The law doesn't ban any specific firearms or
weapons, it merely states the requirements to own one. Everything from
pepperspray to full-automatic machine guns are technically legal, and license
to civilians can be given in 'special' cases. Like the other Nordic countries
Sweden has a high rate of gun ownership, due to the popularity of hunting. The
weapons law doesn't apply to air guns and similar with a projectile energy less
than 10 joules at the end of barrel. These require no license and may be bought
by any person over 18 years. Breech-loading rifles manufactured before 1890 are
exempt as well. The gun license is obtained from the Police, and one must be in
good standing and at least 18 years old, but exceptions regarding age can be
made. To apply one must either be a member in an approved shooting club for at
least six months or pass a hunting examination (jÃ¤garexamen). The former is
mostly used to legally acquire pistols for sport shooting and the latter for
hunting rifles. A hunting examination must be passed to actually use a firearm
for hunting. One can for instance acquire a shotgun license through a skeet
shooting club but may only use it for clay pigeon shooting until an actual
hunting examination has been passed. The minimum age for taking an hunting exam
is 15 years. A person under 18 years may not own a firearm him- or herself,
unless an exception have been made. A person with a gun license may legally
under supervision lend his or her gun to a person at least 15 years and older.
A person may be granted license to own up to six hunting rifles, ten pistols or
a mix of eight rifles and pistols. Owning more firearms than this requires a
valid reason. Firearms must be stored in an approved gun safe. Carry-permits
are usually only given to armed guards, for civilians it's illegal to carry a
firearm around unless between the home and shooting range. Self-defence-needs
can in special circumstances permit a person to acquire a license. Another
reason for gun ownership is collecting. A collector must have a clearly stated
demarcation of the interest of the collection. To be a valid interest of
collection it must be possible to obtain a complete collection, for example -
British handheld weapons from before second world war-. A collector may start a
second (or more) collection if he or she has collected for several years and
shown a great interest in gun history. If the collection holds guns of criminal
interest, such as pistols or sub machine-guns the police may demand a very high
safety level on the keeping of the guns (such as security windows and vault
doors). Collectors may also require a time limited permit in order to be
allowed to fire their collectables. Guns can also be owned for affection value
or as decoration. If ammunition for the guns are easy available they have to be
made useless for shooting. Owning firearms is seen more of a privilege than a
right. United Kingdom. Gun ownership rates vary throughout the United Kingdom.
Northern Ireland has a very high rate of gun ownership, one of the highest in
the world. In contrast England and Wales have considerably lower rates and
Scotland has the lowest in the United Kingdom. Private ownership of firearms is
common in many rural areas of Britain. Crime involving firearms has
historically been very low in the UK. The gun crime rate rose between 1997 and
2004 but has since slightly receded, while the number of murders from gun crime
has largely remained static over the past decade. Over the course of the 20th
century, the UK gradually implemented tighter regulation of the civilian
ownership of firearms through the enactment of the 1968, 1988, 1994 and 1997
Firearms (Amendment) Acts leading to the current outright ban on the ownership
of all automatic, and most self-loading, firearms in the UK. The ownership of
breech-loading handguns is, in particular, also very tightly controlled and
effectively limited (other than in Northern Ireland) to those persons who may
require such a handgun for the non routine humane killing of injured or
dangerous animals. Ownership of most types of firearm in the UK requires either
a Shotgun Certificate (SGC) or a Firearms Certificate (FAC). Both of these are
issued by local police after the applicant has met the required criteria. For a
Shotgun Certificate the applicant need demonstrate that they can securely store
the firearms (usually a gun safe bolted to a solid wall), have no criminal
convictions, no history of any medical condition or disability including
alcohol and drug related conditions, no history of treatment for depression or
any other kind of mental or nervous disorder, or epilepsy. Once a SGC is
granted the person is free to purchase single shot, multi-barrelled and
repeating shotguns of lever action, pump action or semi-automatic with non
detachable magazine that hold no more than 2 rounds of ammunition, plus one in
the breech. There is no restriction on the number of shotguns that can be held
on a SGC nor are there any restrictions on the amount of ammunition one can
possess. The shotguns can be used wherever one has permission. The criteria
required for the grant of a Firearms certificate is far more stringent.
Alongside safe storage requirements and checks on previous convictions and
medical records, the applicant must also demonstrated a Good reason for each
firearm they wish to hold (Good reason may include hunting, pest control,
collecting or target shooting). Police may restrict the type and amount of
ammunition held, and where and how the firearms are used. Historically, most
certificates approved for handguns listed "self-defence" as a reason. Since
1968 in mainland Britain, self-defence is not considered an acceptable "good
reason" for firearm ownership (however use of a licensed firearm in self-
defence is often justified provided that the victim can prove they used
necessary and reasonable force). Only in Northern Ireland is self-defence still
accepted as a reason. The police should not amend, revoke (even partially) or
refuse an FAC without stating a valid reason. (Section 29(1) of the 1968 Act
gives the chief officer power to vary, by a notice in writing, any such
condition not prescribed by the rules made by the Secretary of State. The
notice may require the holder to deliver the certificate to the chief officer
within twenty one days for the purpose of amending the conditions. The
certificate may be revoked if the holder fails to comply with such a
requirement.) Air rifles under and air pistols under can be purchased legally
by anyone over the age of 18, and do not require a licence. Honduras. Gun laws
in Honduras took official form under the Act on the Control of Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Material of 2000, which sets
limitations on what firearms and calibers are permitted and which are
prohibited for civilian use. In April 2002, the National Arms Registry was
formed, requiring all citizens to register their firearms with the Ministry of
Defense. In 2003, a ban on certain assault rifles was passed restricting
citizens from possessing military-style rifles such as the AK-47 and the M-16,
among other assault rifles. In 2007, an additional decree suspended the right
to openly carry a firearm in public as well as limiting the amount of firearms
allowed per person. India. Gun ownership in India is a privilege under the Arms
Act of 1959. The Arms Act of 1959 and the Arms Rules of 1962 were derived from
the text of the Indian Arms Act of 1876 created by the British Rulers in view
of the 1857 rebellion against the East India company. To obtain a license to
own a firearm, a person has to prove that there exists "threat to life." Once a
license is obtained, there are several restrictions on caliber (9mm, .303
British .45 ACP are prohibited along with several other calibers) and types of
firearms (semiautomatic rifles, short barrel shotguns, and automatic weapons
are not allowed for civilians). A license is limited to three firearms under
section 3 of the Arms Act 1959. Under the wake of terror the government is
considering making the rules even more stringent. In response to increased
governmental regulations, Indians on the online forum "Indians for Guns"
organized to form the "National Association for Gun Rights India" (NAGRI) to
protect and increase their ability to obtain and use firearms for self-defense
against street crime and terrorism. Israel. It is forbidden in Israel to own
any kind of firearm, including air pistols and rifles, without a firearms
license. Israel Defense Forces officers honorably discharged with the rank of
non-commissioned officer, reservists honorably discharged with the rank of
regimental commander, ex-special forces enlisted men, retired police officers
with the rank of sergeant, retired prison guards with the rank of squadron
commander, licensed public transportation drivers transporting a minimum of
five people, and full-time dealers of jewellery or large sums of cash or
valuables, Civil Guard volunteers, and residents of militarily strategic buffer
zones considered essential to state security are eligible for licenses allowing
them to possess one handgun. Reservists honorably discharged with the rank of
regimental commander are also eligible for licences allowing them to possess
one rifle. Licensed hunters may possess one shotgun, and licensed animal-
control officers are allowed to possess two rifles. Civil Guard snipers may
possess one rifle. To legally own a gun as a souvenir, prize, inheritance, or
award of appreciation from the military, an individual must first present
proper documentation that they are about to receive it. Permits for gun
collectors are extremely rare, and typically only given to ex-high-ranking
officers. To obtain a gun license, an applicant must be a resident of Israel
for at least three consecutive years, have no criminal record, be in good
health, have no history of mental illness, pass a weapons-training course, and
be over a certain age (20 for women who completed military service or civil
service equivalent, 21 for men who completed military service or civil service
equivalent, 27 for those who did not complete military service or civil service
equivalent, 45 for residents of East Jerusalem). Gun licenses must be renewed
every three years. Firearms permits are given only for personal use, not for
business in the firearms sale. Permit holders for self-defense purposes may own
only one handgun, and may purchase a maximum of fifty rounds a year, except for
those shot at firing ranges. Residents of Israeli settlements in the West Bank
are issued assault rifles and ammunition by the army, and are given civil
defense training. However, the rifles and munitions are property of the army,
and may be confiscated at any time. Members of officially recognized shooting
clubs (practical shooting, Olympic shooting) are eligible for personal licenses
allowing them to possess additional firearms (small bore rifles, handguns, air
rifles and air pistols) after demonstrating a need and fulfilling minimum
membership time and activity requirements. Unlicensed individuals are allowed
supervised use of pistols at firing ranges. Following a number of cases of
firearm-related suicides at firing ranges, private individuals who do not own
firearms are required to present a certificate of good conduct and a
physician's health declaration in order to shoot at commercial firing ranges.
Self-defense firearms may be carried in public, concealed or openly. Israel is
notable for being a country with few places where firearms are off limits to
licensed individuals (private premises, some government offices and
institutions, courts). In addition to private licenses of firearms,
organizations can issue carry licenses to their members for activity related to
that organization (e.g. security companies, shooting clubs, other workplaces).
Soldiers are allowed to carry their personal weapons and ammunition while on
furlough during active service, uniformed or in civilian clothing. There are
about 200,000 private citizens and 154,000 security guards licensed to carry
firearms. Another 34,000 Israelis who were previously licensed own guns
illegally due to their failure to renew their gun license. The regulation for
gun ownership became stricter following the assassination of Prime Minister
Yitzhak Rabin in 1995. Gun ownership in Israel is considered a privilege and
not a right. Japan. During the Tokugawa period in Japan, starting in the 17th
century, the government imposed very restrictive controls on the small number
of gunsmiths in the nation, thereby ensuring the almost total prohibition of
firearms. Japan, in the postwar period, has had gun regulation which is strict
in principle. Gun licensing is required, and is heavily regulated by the
National Police Agency of Japan. The weapons law begins by stating "No-one
shall possess a fire-arm or fire-arms or a sword or swords", and very few
exceptions are allowed. The only types of firearms which a Japanese citizen may
acquire are rifles or shotguns. Sportsmen are permitted to possess rifles or
shotguns for hunting and for skeet and trap shooting, but only after submitting
to a lengthy licensing procedure. Without a license, a Japanese citizen may not
even hold a gun in his or her hands. The former ruling Liberal Democratic
Party, in response to violent crimes by minors and gangsters, has called for
rewriting the constitution to include even further stringent firearms control
measures. In January 2008 Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda in a policy speech called
for tighter regulations on firearms. Kenya. It is illegal in Kenya to own any
type of firearm without a valid gun ownership license as spelled out under the
Firearms Act (Cap. 114) Laws of Kenya. Anyone who is 12 years or older can
apply to privately own a gun. However, such persons must provide in writing to
the Chief Licensing Officer (CLO) stating genuine reason(s) for their need to
privately own and carry a firearm. It remains at the discretion of the CLO to
make a decision to award, deny or revoke a gun ownership license based on the
reason(s) given. However, most importantly, anyone seeking to hold a gun
license must pass the most stringent of background checks that probes into
their past and present criminal, mental health and well as domestic violence
records. Failure to pass one of these checks automatically bars one from being
permitted to own a firearm. These checks are regularly repeated and must be
continually passed for anyone to continue holding the gun license. Failure to
pass any of these checks at any stage, means an automatic and immediate
revocation of the issued license. Once licensed to own a gun, no permit is
required in order to carry around a concealed firearm. Mexico. Mexico has
strict gun laws. Mexican citizens and legal residents may purchase new non-
military firearms for self-protection or hunting only after receiving approval
of a petition to the Defense Ministry, which performs extensive background
checks. The allowed weapons are restricted to relatively low-caliber and can be
purchased from the Defense Ministry only. "Military" firearms, including
pistols with bores exceeding .38 caliber, and bb guns (but not pellet guns)
require federal licenses and are regulated in a manner similar to that dictated
by the U.S. National Firearms Act (NFA). The private sale of "non-military"
firearms, however, is unregulated, and while these firearms are supposed to be
registered with the government, in practice this is widely ignored. Laws
dealing with the possession of "non-military" firearms are left to the states.
Generally, "non-military" firearms may be kept in the home, but a license is
required to carry them outside the home. President Felipe CalderÃ³n has
recently called attention to the alleged problem of the smuggling of guns from
the United States into Mexico, guns which are easily available both legally and
illegally in the United States, and has called for increased cooperation from
the United States to stop this illegal weapons trafficking. In the five years
prior to 2012, over two-thirds of illegal firearms seized in Mexico that could
be traced to a source, were traced back to the United States of America.
However, traceable firearms constitute only a small portion of the total
seized, and the origin of the majority cannot be positively identified. New
Zealand. New Zealand's gun laws are notably more liberal than other countries
in the Pacific, focusing mainly on vetting firearm owners, rather than
registering firearms or banning certain types of firearms. Firearms legislation
is provided for in the "Arms Act" and its associated regulations, though
stricter unofficial police and government policies also apply. Registration is
not required for "A Category" firearms, but firearms in any other category
require both registration and a "permit to procure" before they are
transferred. Except under supervision of a licence holder, owning or using
firearms requires a firearms licence from the police. The licence is normally
issued, under the conditions that the applicant has secure storage for
firearms, attends a safety lecture and passes a written test. The police will
also interview the applicant and two references (one must be a close relative
and the other not related) to determine whether the applicant is "fit and
proper" to have a firearm. The applicants residence is also visited to check
that they have appropriate storage for firearms and ammunition. Having criminal
associations or a history of domestic violence almost always lead to a licence
being declined. A standard firearms licence allows the use of "A Category"
firearms. To possess firearms of another category they are required to get an
endorsement to their licence. There are different endorsements for different
classes of firearm but they all require a higher level of storage security,
stricter vetting requirements and the applicant must have a 'special reason'
for wanting the endorsement. Air guns can be purchased by anybody over 16 (with
a license) and unlicensed and unrestricted to persons over 18. Firearms are not
allowed to be carried outside of private property unless one is a hunter, a
farmer, or a member of the military or police. Even officers of the New Zealand
Police force rarely carry a pistol on their person. Instead, firearms, usually
one or two pistols and a shotgun, are carried in squad cars, and in a highly
secure mount. When firearms are discharged in public, the police often come
under intense scrutiny from both media and public but are seldom dealt with,
whereas an ordinary citizen excising their right to use 'reasonable force' (see
Crimes Act 1961) to stop a home invasion are usually prosecuted. Norway.
Firearms in Norway are regulated by the Firearm Weapons Act, with a new
secondary law in effect 1 July 2009 providing more detailed regulation.
Pakistan. Pakistan has relatively liberal firearm laws compared to the rest of
South Asia. In a comparison of the number of privately owned guns in 178
countries, Pakistan ranks in 6th place. Gun culture is strong among Pakistanis
and traditionally important part of rural and urban life. Russia. According to
Russia's gun laws, Russian citizens can buy smoothbore shotguns, such as, for
example Saiga 12, gas pistols, or revolvers shooting rubber bullets. Safe use
of one of the above weapons for five years allows purchase of a rifle or
carbine. In Moscow alone, some 400,000 people legally keep 470,000 weapons.
Serbia. Serbia has relatively liberal weapon laws compared to the rest of
Europe. Serbia ranks in 2nd place on the List of countries by gun ownership.
Gun culture is strong among Serbs and traditionally important part of rural
life. Weapons are regulated by "Weapons and Ammunition Law" (Zakon o oruÅ¾ju i
municiji). Rifles, shotguns and handguns are all allowed to civilians. Handgun
ownership is allowed, but the licensing is strict. Concealed carry permit is
available to approved handgun owners, but extremely hard to obtain - one has to
prove to the police that his or her life is in imminent danger, and even then,
license is far from guaranteed. In essence, people over 18 are allowed to own
guns, but must be issued a permit. People with criminal history, mental
disorders, history of alcohol and illegal substance abuse, cannot be issued a
permit. There is thorough background check prior to license approval. Police
has the last word on the matter, and there is no court appeal possible. When at
home, the guns must be kept in a "safe place", and owner irresponsibility could
lead to gun confiscation by police. Fully automatic weapons and non-lethal
self-defense devices are prohibited. Number of guns in private ownership is not
limited. Every gun transaction is recorded by police. There is no rifle caliber
restriction (it has to be smaller than .50bmg, though). Rifle and handgun
ammunition is severely restricted, there is a 60 round limit per rifle, per
year. Shotgun ammo is unrestricted and shell reloading is allowed, but rifle
and handgun ammo reloading is not. There is growing pressure, especially from
sport shooters associations, to change the law in this regard. Serbia has its
own civilian gun and ammunition industry. Zastava Arms, Prvi Partizan and
KruÅ¡ik are world renowned facilities. Switzerland. Switzerland practices
universal conscription, which requires that all able-bodied male citizens keep
fully automatic firearms at home in case of a call-up. Every male between the
ages of 20 and 34 is considered a candidate for conscription into the military,
and following a brief period of active duty will commonly be enrolled in the
militia until age or an inability to serve ends his service obligation. During
their enrollment in the armed forces, these men are required to keep their
government-issued selective fire combat rifles and semi-automatic handguns in
their homes. Up until September 2007, soldiers also received 50 rounds of
government-issued ammunition in a sealed box for storage at home. In addition
to these official weapons, Swiss citizens are allowed to purchase surplus-to-
inventory combat rifles, and shooting is a popular sport in all the Swiss
cantons. These facts aside, some Swiss gun laws are more restrictive than those
in the US. Unlicensed persons are not permitted to carry weapons except under
special certain circumstances such as travel to military training. Owners are
legally responsible for third party access and usage of their weapons.
Licensure is similar to other Germanic countries. In a referendum in February
2011 voters rejected a citizens' initiative which would have obliged armed
services members' to store their rifles and pistols on military compounds
(rather than keep them at home). United States. The issue of firearms has, at
times, taken a high-profile position in United States culture and politics.
Michael Bouchard, Assistant Director/Field Operations of ATF, estimates that
5,000 gun shows take place each year in the United States. Incidents of gun
violence in 'gun-free' school zones have ignited debate involving gun politics
in the United States. Support for gun control in America has been steadily
dropping. Currently, the American public strongly opposes attempts to ban gun
ownership, and is divided on attempts to limit gun ownership. A 2011 Gallup
poll revealed that 26% of the population supported a total ban on handguns â
the lowest level since the poll was first taken in 1959 (when support for a
total ban was 60% of the population). This same poll revealed that 43% of
Americans in 2011 preferred more restrictive gun laws, compared to 78% when the
question was first asked in the 1990 version of the poll. A 2009 CNN poll found
even lower levels of support for gun laws: in this poll, only 39% favored more
restrictive laws. The poll indicates that the drop in support (compared to 2001
polls) came from self-identified Independents, with levels of opposition among
Democrats and Republicans remaining consistent. There is a sharp divide between
gun-rights proponents and gun-control proponents. This leads to intense
political debate over the effectiveness of firearm regulation. On the whole,
Democrats are far more likely to support "stricter" gun control than are
Republicans. According to a 2010 Harris Interactive survey, a 70% to 7%
majority of Democrats favors "stricter" rather than "less strict" gun control,
whereas Republicans are split 22% "stricter" to 42% "less strict" with 27% of
Republicans and 14% of Democrats opting for "neither". The division of beliefs
may be attributable to the fact that Republicans are more likely to own guns,
according to General Social Surveys conducted during the last 35 years. The
graphs, below, show that gun ownership has generally declined; however,
RepublicansÂ â especially menÂ â are far more likely to own guns. Incidents
of gun violence and self-defense have routinely ignited bitter debate. 12,632
murders were committed using firearms and 613 persons were killed
unintentionally in 2007. Surveys have suggested that guns are used in crime
deterrence or prevention around 2.5 million times a year in the United States.
The "American Journal of Public Health" conducted a study that concluded "the
United States has higher rates of firearm ownership than do other developed
nations, and higher rates of homicide. Of the 233,251 people who were homicide
victims in the United States between 1988 and 1997, 68% were killed with guns,
of which the large majority were handguns." The ATF estimated in 1995 that the
number of firearms available in the US was 223 million. Some perceive that
firearms registrationâ by making it easier for Federal agents to target gun
owners for harassment and confiscationâ constitutes an easily exploited
encroachment upon individual personal privacy and property rights. Fully
automatic firearms are legal in most states, but have requirements for
registration and restriction under federal law. The National Firearms Act of
1934 required approval of the local police chief, federally registered
fingerprints, federal background check and the payment of a $200 tax for
initial registration and for each transfer. The Gun Control Act of 1968
prohibited imports of all nonsporting firearms and created several new
categories of restricted firearms. A provision of the Firearm Owners Protection
Act of 1986 prohibited further registry of machine guns manufactured after it
took effect. The result has been a massive rise in the price of machine-guns
available for private ownership, as an increased demand chases the fixed, pre-
1986 supply. For example, the Heckler & Koch MP5 submachine-gun, which may be
sold to law enforcement for about $1,000, costs a private citizen about
$20,000. This price difference dwarfs the $200 tax stamp. Political scientist
Earl R. Kruschke states, regarding the fully automatic firearms owned by
private citizens in the United States, that "approximately 175,000 automatic
firearms have been licensed by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms
(the federal agency responsible for administration of the law) and evidence
suggests that none of these weapons has ever been used to commit a violent
crime. With the exception of two, which were used by law enforcement officers."
"District of Columbia v Heller". On 26 June 2008, the U.S. Supreme Court held
that American citizens have an individual right to own guns, as defined by the
Second Amendment of the Constitution. In District of Columbia v. Heller, the
Court stated that an absolute firearm ban was unconstitutional. The Court
further determined that its decision in "Heller" does not impinge upon all
existing statutes and regulations, such as those that prohibit felons and the
mentally ill from owning or possessing firearms. Vietnam. Gun laws in Vietnam
are generally referred to as restrictive. Citizens of Vietnam are restricted to
owning a shotgun only, and this is only after a license has been issued. The
individual applying for the license must provide valid reasoning for wanting
the shotgun such as hunting, and must be at least 18 years of age. Handguns and
automatic weapons are prohibited. Arguments. Several studies have examined the
correlations between rates of gun ownership and gun-related as well as overall
homicide and suicide rates within various jurisdictions around the world.
Martin Killias, in a 1993 study covering 21 countries, found that there were
substantial correlations between gun ownership and gun-related suicide and
homicide rates. There was also a substantial though lesser correlation between
gun ownership and total homicide rates. A later 2001 Killias study however,
reported that while there was a strong correlation between gun-related homicide
of women and gun-related assaults against women; however, this was not the case
for similar crimes against men and that " Interestingly, no significant
correlations with total suicide or homicide rates were found, leaving open the
question of possible substitution effects." This study indicates correlation,
but no causality. That is to say it could mean that the easier access to guns
lead to more violence, or it could mean that larger amounts of violence lead to
a higher level of gun ownership for self-defense, or any other independent
cause. A study by Rich et al. on suicide rates in Toronto and Ontario and
psychiatric patients from San Diego reached the conclusion that increased gun
restrictions, while reducing suicide-by-gun, resulted in no net decline in
suicides, because of substitution of another methodÂ â namely leaping.
Killias argues against the theory of complete substitution, citing a number of
studies that have indicated, in his view "rather convincingly", that suicidal
candidates far from always turn to another means of suicide if their preferred
means is not at hand. Gun ownership as a means of resisting tyranny. Some
researchers recount that past totalitarian regimes passed gun control
legislation, which was later followed by confiscation, with Fascist Italy and
Nazi Germany during World War II, as well as some communist states being cited
as examples. Location and capture of firearms registration records has also
long been a standard doctrine taught to military intelligence officers, and was
widely practiced by German and Soviet troops during World War II in the
countries they invaded. The Battles of Lexington and Concord, sometimes known
as the Shot heard 'round the world, in 1775, were started in part because
General Gage sought to carry out an order by the British government to disarm
the populace. Some researchers cite the example of the Nazi regime, claiming
that once the Nazis had taken and consolidated their power, they proceeded to
implement gun control laws to disarm the population and wipe out the
opposition, and the genocide of disarmed Jews, gypsies, and other
"undesirables" followed. The preceding democratic Weimar Republic had
restrictive gun laws. According to the Weimar Republic 1928 "Law on Firearms &
Ammunition", firearms acquisition or carrying permits were âonly to be
granted to persons of undoubted reliability, and â in the case of a firearms
carry permitÂ â only if a demonstration of need is set forth.â The Nazis
replaced this law with the "Weapons Law" of 18 March 1938, which was very
similar in structure and wording, but relaxed gun control requirements for the
general population. This relaxation included the exemption from regulation of
all weapons and ammunition except handguns, the extension of the range of
persons exempt from the permit requirement, and the lowering of the age for
acquisition of firearms from 20 to 18. It did, however, prohibit manufacturing
of firearms and ammunition by Jews. Shortly thereafter, in the additional
"Regulations Against Jews' Possession of Weapons" of 11 November 1938, Jews
were forbidden from possession of any weapons at all. Widespread gun ownership
in Iraq was a cause of concern to American military planners prior to the
invasion of the country. Self-defense. In an extensive series of studies of
large, nationally representative samples of crime incidents, criminologist Gary
Kleck found that crime victims who defend themselves with guns are less likely
to be injured or lose property than victims who either did not resist, or
resisted without guns. This was so, even though the victims using guns
typically faced more dangerous circumstances than other victims. The findings
applied to both robberies and assaults. Other research on rape indicated that
although victims rarely resisted with guns, those using other weapons were less
likely to be raped, and no more likely to suffer other injuries besides rape
itself, than victims who did not resist, or resisted without weapons. There is
no evidence that victim use of a gun for self-protection provokes offenders
into attacking the defending victim or results in the offender taking the gun
away and using it against the victim. Kleck has claimed, in his own national
survey, and in other surveys with smaller sample sizes, that the numbers of
defensive uses of guns by crime victims each year are substantially larger than
the largest estimates of the number of crimes committed of offenders using
guns. However, surveys that ask both about defensive gun use and criminal gun
use find that more people report being victims of gun crimes than having used a
gun in self-defense. In a largely approving review of Kleck's book "Point
Blank" (1991) in the journal "Political Psychology", Joseph F. Sheley argues
that Kleck sidesteps the larger political problem of the role of gun culture in
contributing to the spread and effect of violence in the United States. The
economist John Lott, in his book More Guns, Less Crime, states that laws which
make it easier for law-abiding citizens to get a permit to carry a gun in
public places, cause reductions in crime. Lott's results suggest that allowing
law-abiding citizens to carry concealed firearms deters crime because potential
criminals do not know who may or may not be carrying a firearm. Lott's data
came from the FBI's crime statistics from all 3,054 US counties. Lott's
conclusions have been challenged by other researchers. A University of
Pennsylvania study, for example, found that people who carry guns are 4.5 times
likely to get shot than unarmed people. The efficacy of gun control legislation
at reducing the availability of guns has been challenged by, among others, the
testimony of criminals that they do not obey gun control laws, and by the lack
of evidence of any efficacy of such laws in reducing violent crime. The most
thorough analysis of the impact of gun control laws, by Kleck, covered 18 major
types of gun control and every major type of violent crime or violence
(including suicide), and found that gun laws generally had no significant
effect on violent crime rates or suicide rates. In his paper, "Understanding
Why Crime Fell in the 1990s: Four Factors that Explain the Decline and Six that
Do not", A study by Arthur Kellermann found that keeping a gun in the home was
associated with an increased risk of suicide. It is well known that suicide is
more common in rural areas of the United States where gun ownership is more
common. In other countries, other methods of suicide are used at even higher
rates than the U.S., so gun availability may affect the method used but not
overall suicide rates. However, the higher suicide rates in countries such as
Japan may be explained by cultural factors irrelevant to the issue of the
relationship between guns and suicide in the US. University of Chicago
economist Steven Levitt argues that available data indicate that neither
stricter gun control laws nor more liberal concealed carry laws have had any
significant effect on the decline in crime in the 1990s. While the debate
remains hotly disputed, it is therefore not surprising that a comprehensive
review of published studies of gun control, released in November 2004 by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, was unable to determine any
reliable statistically significant effect resulting from such laws, although
the authors suggest that further study may provide more conclusive information.
Forty U.S. states have passed "shall issue" concealed carry legislation of one
form or another. In these states, law-abiding citizens (usually after giving
evidence of completing a training course) may carry handguns on their person
for self-protection. Some states, like Florida and Texas, only allow concealed
carry, and only after obtaining a permit. Other states, like West Virginia,
Virginia, and Pennsylvania, allow open carry without a permit as long as an
individual satisfies the legal requirements to own a gun. However, to carry
concealed in these states requires a permit. Other states and some cities such
as New York may issue permits. Only Illinois and the District of Columbia have
explicit legislation forbidding personal carry. Vermont, Wyoming, Arizona, and
Alaska do not require permits to carry concealed weapons, although Alaska
retains a shall-issue permit process for reciprocity purposes with other
states. Similarly, Arizona retains a shall-issue permit process, both for
reciprocity purposes and because permit holders are allowed to carry concealed
handguns in a few places (such as bars and restaurants that serve alcohol) that
non-permit holders are not. Some people consider self-defense to be a
fundamental and inalienable human right and believe that firearms are an
important tool in the exercise of this right. They consider the prohibition of
an effective means of self-defense to be unethical. For instance, in Thomas
Jeffersonâs "Commonplace Book," a quote from Cesare Beccaria reads, "laws
that forbid the carrying of arms ... disarm only those who are neither inclined
nor determined to commit crimes ... Such laws make things worse for the
assaulted and better for the assailants; they serve rather to encourage than to
prevent homicides, for an unarmed man may be attacked with greater confidence
than an armed man." Domestic violence. Gun control advocates argue that the
strongest evidence linking availability of guns to injury and mortality rates
comes in studies of domestic violence, most often referring to the series of
studies by Arthur Kellermann. In response to public suggestions by some
advocates of firearms for home defense, that homeowners were at high risk of
injury from home invasions and would be wise to acquire a firearm for purposes
of protection, Kellermann investigated the circumstances surrounding all in-
home homicides in three cities of about half a million population each over
five years, and found that the risk of a homicide was in fact slightly higher
in homes where a handgun was present, rather than lower. From the details of
the homicides he concluded that the risk of a crime of passion or other
domestic dispute ending in a fatal injury was much higher when a gun was
readily available (essentially all the increased risk being in homes where a
handgun was kept loaded and unlocked), compared to a lower rate of fatality in
domestic violence not involving a firearm. This increase in mortality, he
postulated, was large enough to overwhelm any protective effect the presence of
a gun might have by deterring or defending against burglaries or home
invasions, which occurred much less frequently. The increased risk averaged
over all homes containing guns was similar in size to that correlated with an
individual with a criminal record living in the home, but substantially less
than that associated with demographic factors known to be risks for violence,
such as renting a home versus ownership, or living alone versus with others.
Critics of Kellermann's work and its use by advocates of gun control point out
that since it deliberately ignores crimes of violence occurring outside the
home (Kellermann states at the outset that the characteristics of such
homicides are much more complex and ambiguous, and would be virtually
impossible to classify rigorously enough), it is more directly a study of
domestic violence than of gun ownership. Kellermann does in fact include in the
conclusion of his 1993 paper several paragraphs referring to the need for
further study of domestic violence and its causes and prevention. Researchers
John Lott, Gary Kleck and many others dispute Kellermann's work. Kleck showed
that no more than a handful of the homicides that Kellermann studied were
committed with guns belonging to the victim or members of his or her household,
and thus it was implausible that victim household gun ownership contributed to
their homicide. Instead, the association that Kellermann found between gun
ownership and victimization merely reflected the widely accepted notion that
people who live in more dangerous circumstances are more likely to be murdered,
but also were more likely to have acquired guns for self-protection prior to
their death Kleck and others argue that guns being used to protect property,
save lives, and deter crime without killing the criminal accounts for the large
majority of defensive gun uses. Armed forces' reserves and reservist training.
In several countries, such as in Finland, firearm politics and gun control are
directly linked on the armed forces' reserves and reservist training. This is
especially true in countries which base their armies on conscription; since
every able-bodied citizen is basically a soldier, they are expected to be able
to handle the gun reasonably, and be able to practice for the time of need.
Switzerland is a noted example of a country in which, due to the country's
conscription and militia traditions, firearm possession is widespread. Owing to
Switzerland's history, all able-bodied male Swiss citizens aged between 21 and
50 (55 for officers) are issued assault rifles and ammunition in order to
perform their annual military obligations. Because of this, Switzerland is one
of the few nations in the world with a higher rate of firearm possession than
the United States. Also, Switzerland has a relatively low rate of gun crime.
The comparatively low level of violent crime, despite the liberal gun laws, is
demonstrated by the fact that Swiss politicians rarely have the same level of
police protection as their counterparts in the United States and other
countries, as was noted following the fatal shooting of several government
officials in the Swiss canton of Zug in September 2001. Some authors argue that
Switzerland's militia tradition of "every man a soldier" contributed to the
preservation of its neutrality during the Second World War, when it was not
invaded by Nazi Germany because the military cost to the Nazis would have been
too high. However, this claim has been disputed by historians who cite the
existence of detailed invasion plans, which rated the overall Swiss defense
capacity as low. Civil rights. Jeff Snyder is a spokesman for the view that gun
possession is a civil right, and that therefore arguments about whether gun
restrictions reduce or increase violent crime are beside the point: "I am not
here engaged in...recommending...policy prescriptions on the basis of the
promised or probable results crime...Thus these essays are not fundamentally
about guns at all. They are, foremost, about...the kind of people we intend to
be...and the ethical and political consequences of decisions control firearms."
He terms the main principle behind gun control "the instrumental theory of
salvation:" that, lacking the ability to change the violent intent in
criminals, we often shift focus to the instrument in an attempt to "limit our
ability to hurt ourselves, and one another." His work discusses the
consequences that flow from conditioning the liberties of all citizens upon the
behavior of criminals. Some of the earliest gun-control legislation at the
state level were the "black codes" that replaced the "slave codes" after the
Civil War, attempting to prevent blacks' having access to the full rights of
citizens, including the right to keep and bear arms. Laws of this type later
used racially neutral language to survive legal challenge, but were expected to
be enforced against blacks rather than whites. The Dalai Lama said "If someone
has a gun and is trying to kill you, it would be reasonable to shoot back with
your own gun." (15 May 2001, The Seattle Times) speaking at the "Educating
Heart Summit" in Portland, Oregon, when asked by a girl how to react when a
shooter takes aim at a classmate. Civic duty. Some proponents of private gun
ownership argue that an armed citizens' militia can help deter crime and
tyranny, as police are primarily a reactive force whose main loyalty is to the
government which pays their wages. The Militia Information Service (MIS)
contends that gun ownership is a civic duty in the context of membership in the
militia, much like voting, neither of which they believe should be restricted
to government officials in a true democracy. MIS also states that the people
need to maintain the power of the sword so they can fulfil their duty, implicit
in the social contract, to protect the rights and liberties of their fellow
citizens, much as individual citizens have a legal and ethical duty to protect
dependents under their care, such as a child, elderly parent, or disabled
spouse. Statistics. Private ownership of guns. According to statistics
available from the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention, of nearly 31,000
firearm-related deaths in 2005, suicides account for 55 percent of deaths in
the United States whereas homicides account for 40 percent of deaths, accidents
account for three percent, and the remaining two percent were legal killings.
While many shootings occur in the course of a mutual argument of passion,
others occur where a partner or family member of a "romantic" or familial
relationship, who is an ongoing victim of domestic physical abuse or sexual
abuse, uses the force of a firearm in self-defense action against a perpetrator
who also happens to be known to or related to the victim. As a corollary, in
such policy advertising campaigns, the comparison of "domestic" gun casualties
is usually not accompanied by murder and assault prosecution numbers stemming
from the shootings occurring in that context. In many of the latter cases, the
victim firing in self-defense is frequently a woman or youth victim of a more
physically powerful abuser. In those situations gun rights advocates argue that
the firearm becomes an equalizer against the lethal and disabling force
frequently exercised by the abusers. Many gun control opponents point to
statistics in advertising campaigns purporting that "approximately 9 or so
children are killed by people discharging firearms every day across the US" and
argue that this statistic is seldom accompanied by a differentiation of those
children killed by individuals from unintentional discharges and stray bullets,
and of those "children," under the age of majorityâwhich is 18-21 in the
U.S.âwho are killed while acting as aggressors in street gang related mutual
combat or while committing crimes, many of which are seen as arising from the
War on Drugs. There is further controversy regarding courts, trials, and the
resulting sentences of these mostly "young men" as adults despite them not
having reached the age of consent. A significant number of gun related deaths
occur through suicide. Gun safety. The importance of gun safety education has a
mitigating effect on the occurrence of accidental discharges involving
children. So much importance is not placed upon the vicarious liability case
law assigning strict liability to the gun owner for firearms casualties
occurring when a careless gun owner loses proper custody and control of a
firearm.
