Hate crime In crime and law, hate crimes (also known as bias-motivated crimes)
occur when a perpetrator targets a victim because of his or her perceived
membership in a certain social group, usually defined by racial group,
religion, sexual orientation, disability, class, ethnicity, nationality, age,
sex, or gender identity. A hate crime is a category used to describe bias-
motivated violence: "assault, injury, and murder on the basis of certain
personal characteristics: different appearance, different color, different
nationality, different language, different religion." "Hate crime" generally
refers to criminal acts that are seen to have been motivated by bias against
one or more of the types above, or of their derivatives. Incidents may involve
physical assault, damage to property, bullying, harassment, verbal abuse or
insults, or offensive graffiti or letters (hate mail). A hate crime law is a
law intended to prevent bias-motivated violence. Hate crime laws are distinct
from laws against hate speech in that hate crime laws enhance the penalties
associated with conduct that is already criminal under other laws, while hate
speech laws criminalize a category of speech. History. Nazi pogroms started out
as locally-sanctioned anti-Jewish activity in the early years of Nazi
occupations and eventually reaching its apex in the Final Solution for the
Jews. More recently, ethnic conflicts in Bosnia and Herzegovina and genocide in
Rwanda have been described as mass-based hate crimes, but the term "hate crime"
did not really begin to be used until after World War II and the end of most
major government-sanctioned racial cleansing projects that had been linked with
official fascism. The term "hate crime" is now used more often than in the past
mainly because the groups that used to have official endorsement under with
intergovernmental and/or armed forces involvement. Concern about hate crimes
has become increasingly prominent among policymakers in many nations and at all
levels of government in recent years. There have been many examples throughout
modern-day Europe by groups who harass and threaten many different racial
groups. In the United States, racial and religious biases have inspired most
hate crimes. Hate crimes have a history longer than the US itself. The verb
"lynching" is derived from Charles Lynch, an 18th-century Virginia planter
known for leading vigilante actions against Tories including tarring and
feathering and hanging. "Lynching" now thus means execution outside of
"ordinary justice" and is associated with weak or nonexistent police authority,
like in the Old West, and racism. As Europeans began to colonize the New World
in the 16th and 17th centuries, Native Americans increasingly became the
targets of bias-motivated intimidation and violence. During the past two
centuries, some of the more typical examples of hate crimes in the U.S. include
lynchings of African Americans, cross burnings to drive black families from
predominantly white neighborhoods, assaults on white people traveling in
predominantly black neighborhoods, assaults on lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender people, the painting of swastikas on Jewish synagogues and
xenophobic responses to a variety of minority ethnic groups. Examples like the
murder of Channon Christian and Christopher Newsom and the Wichita Massacre
tend not to be classified as "hate crimes" by U.S. investigative officials, but
they have meanwhile been described as "hate crimes against whites by blacks" by
Conservative commentators such as David Horowitz (a conservative author and
academic) and Michelle Malkin (a commentator for the Fox News channel and a
prolific conservative author). The district attorneys in both these cases have
specifically stated that while these incidents were indeed horrible, and had
tremendous impacts on the communities affected by them, neither displayed
evidence of being black-on-white racism, either upon initial or more in-depth
review. Hate crime victims. In the United States, racist anti-black bias is the
most frequently reported hate crime motivation. Of the 8,208 hate crimes
reported to the FBI in 2010, 48.2% were race related - with 70.0% of those
having an anti-black bias. Other frequently reported bias motivations were
anti-Hispanic, anti-Jewish, anti-Islamic, anti-white, and against a person's
sexual orientation. Hate crimes due to hatred of a sexual orientation can and
have resulted in murder, as in the case of Sean W. Kennedy and Matthew Shepard.
Kennedy was mentioned by Senator Gordon Smith in a speech on the floor of the
US Senate advocating for hate crimes legislation. The Matthew Shepard and James
E. Byrd Jr. Hate crime Prevention Act was signed into law on October 28, 2009
by President Obama. It included sexual orientation, gender identity and
expression, the disabled and military personnel and their family members. This
is the first all-inclusive bill ever passed in the United States, taking 45
years to complete. Psychological effects. Being the victim of a hate crime can
also cause depression. Hate crime laws. Eurasia. European Union. Since 2002,
with an amendment to the Convention on Cybercrime, the European Union mandates
individual states to punish as a crime hate speech done through the internet.
Andorra. Discriminatory acts constituting harassment or infringement of a
person's dignity on the basis of origin, citizenship, race, religion, or sex
(Penal Code Article 313). Courts have cited bias-based motivation in delivering
sentences, but there is no explicit penalty enhancement provision in the
Criminal Code. The government does not track hate crime statistics, although
they are relatively rare. Armenia. Armenia has a penalty-enhancement statute
for crimes with ethnic, racial, or religious motives (Criminal Code Article
63). Austria. Austria has a penalty-enhancement statute for crimes with racist
or xenophobic motivation (Penal Code section 33(5)). Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan has
a penalty-enhancement statute for crimes motivated by racial, national, or
religious hatred (Criminal Code Article 61). Murder and infliction of serious
bodily injury motivated by racial, religious, national, or ethnic intolerance
are distinct crimes (Article 111). Belarus. Belarus has a penalty-enhancement
statute for crimes motivated by racial, national, and religious hatred and
discord. Belgium. Belgium's Act of 25 February 2003 ("aimed at combating
discrimination and modifying the Act of 15 February 1993 which establishes the
Centre for Equal Opportunities and the Fight against Racism") establishes a
penalty-enhancement for crimes involving discrimination on the basis of sex,
supposed race, color, descent, national or ethnic origin, sexual orientation,
civil status, birth, fortune, age, religious or philosophical beliefs, current
or future state of health and handicap or physical features. The Act also
"provides for a civil remedy to address discrimination." The Act, along with
the Act of 20 January 2003 ("on strengthening legislation against racism"),
requires the Centre to collect and publish statistical data on racism and
discriminatory crimes. Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Criminal Code of Bosnia and
Herzegovina (enacted 2003) "contains provisions prohibiting discrimination by
public officials on grounds, inter alia, of race, skin colour, national or
ethnic background, religion and language and prohibiting the restriction by
public officials of the language rights of the citizens in their relations with
the authorities (Article 145/1 and 145/2)." Bulgaria. Bulgarian criminal law
prohibits certain crimes motivated by racism and xenophobia, but a 1999 report
by the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance found that it does
not appear that those provisions "have ever resulted in convictions before the
courts in Bulgaria." Croatia. Croatian Penal code explicitly defines hate crime
in article 89 as "any crime committed out of hatred for someones race, skin
color, sex, sexual orientation, language, religion, political or other belief,
national or social background, asset, birth, education, social condition, age,
health condition or other attribute". On 1 January 2013 new Penal code will be
introduced with the recognition of a hate crime based on a "race, skin color,
religion, national or ethnic background, sexual orientation or gender
identity". Czech Republic. The Czech legislation finds its constitutional basis
in the principles of equality and non-discrimination contained in the Charter
of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms. From there, we can trace two basic
lines of protection against hate-motivated incidents: one passes through
criminal law, the other through civil law. • a circumstance determining
whether an act is a crime – hate motivation is included in the basic
constituent elements. If hate motivation is not proven, conviction for a hate
crime is not possible. • a circumstance determining the imposition of a
higher penalty – a hate motivation is included in the qualified constituent
elements for some types of crimes (murder, bodily harm). If hate motivation is
not proven, the penalty is imposed according to the scale specified for the
basic constituent elements of the crime. • general aggravating circumstance
– the court is obligated to take the hate motivation into account as a
general aggravating circumstance and determines the amount of penalty to
impose. Nevertheless, it is not possible to possible to add together a general
aggravating circumstance and a circumstance determining the imposition of a
higher penalty. (see Annex for details) Current criminal legislation does not
provide for special penalties for acts that target another by reason of his
sexual orientation, age or health status. Only the constituent elements of the
criminal offense of Incitement to hatred towards a group of persons or to the
curtailment of their rights and freedoms, and general aggravating circumstances
include attacking a so-called different group of people. Such a group of people
can then, of course, be also one defined by sexual orientation, age or health
status. A certain disparity has thus been created between, on the one hand,
those groups of people who are victimized by reason of their skin color, faith,
nationality, ethnicity or political persuasion and enjoy increased protection,
and, on the other hand, those groups that are victimized by reason of their
sexual orientation, age or health status and are not granted increased
protection. This gap in protection against attacks motivated by the victim's
sexual orientation, age or health status cannot be successfully bridged by
interpretation. Interpretation by analogy is inadmissible in criminal law,
sanctionable motivations being exhaustively enumerated. Denmark. Although
Danish law does not include explicit hate crime provisions, "section 80(1) of
the Criminal Code instructs courts to take into account the gravity of the
offence and the offender's motive when meting out penalty, and therefore to
attach importance to the racist motive of crimes in determining sentence." In
recent years judges have used this provision to increase sentences on the basis
of racist motives. Since 1992, the Danish Civil Security Service (PET) has
released statistics on crimes with apparent racist motivation. Finland. Finnish
Criminal Code 515/2003 (enacted January 31, 2003) makes "committing a crime
against a person, because of his national, racial, ethnical or equivalent
group" an aggravating circumstance in sentencing. In addition, ethnic agitation
() is criminalized and carries a fine or a prison sentence of not more than two
years. The prosecution need not prove that an actual danger to an ethnic group
is caused but only that malicious message is conveyed. A more aggravated hate
crime, warmongering (), carries a prison sentence of one to ten years. However,
in case of warmongering, the prosecution must prove an overt act that evidently
increases the risk that Finland is involved in a war or becomes a target for a
military operation. The act in question may consist of France. In 2003, France
enacted penalty-enhancement hate crime laws for crimes motivated by bias
against the victim's actual or perceived ethnicity, nation, race, religion, or
sexual orientation. The penalties for murder were raised from 30 years (for
non-hate crimes) to life imprisonment (for hate crimes), and the penalties for
violent attacks leading to permanent disability were raised from 10 years (for
non-hate crimes) to 15 years (for hate crimes). Georgia. "There is no general
provision in Georgian law for racist motivation to be considered an aggravating
circumstance in prosecutions of ordinary offenses. Certain crimes involving
racist motivation are, however, defined as specific offenses in the Georgian
Criminal Code of 1999, including murder motivated by racial, religious,
national or ethnic intolerance (article 109); infliction of serious injuries
motivated by racial, religious, national or ethnic intolerance (article 117);
and torture motivated by racial, religious, national or ethnic intolerance
(article 126). ECRI reported no knowledge of cases in which this law has been
enforced. There is no systematic monitoring or data collection on
discrimination in Georgia." Germany. The German Criminal Code does not have
hate crime legislation, but instead criminalizes hate speech under a number of
different laws, including Volksverhetzung. In the German legal framework
motivation is not taken into account while identifying the element of the
offence. However, within the sentencing procedure the judge can define certain
principles for determining punishment. In section 46 of the German Criminal
Code it is stated that "the motives and aims of the perpetrator; the state of
mind reflected in the act and the wilfulness involved in its commission." can
be taken into consideration when determining the punishment; under this
statute, hate and bias have been taken into consideration in sentencing in past
cases. Hate crimes are not specifically tracked by German police, but have been
studied separately: a recently published EU "Report on Racism" finds that
racially motivated attacks are frequent in Germany, identifying 18142
incidences for 2006, of which 17597 were motivated by right wing ideologies,
both about a 14% year-by-year increase. Relative to the size of the population,
this represents an eightfold higher rate of hate crimes than reported in the US
during the same period. Awareness of hate crimes and right-wing extremism in
Germany remains low. Greece. Article Law 927/1979 "Section 1,1 penalises
incitement to discrimination, hatred or violence towards individuals or groups
because of their racial, national or religious origin, through public written
or oral expressions; Section 1,2 prohibits the establishment of, and membership
in, organisations which organise propaganda and activities aimed at racial
discrimination; Section 2 punishes public expression of offensive ideas;
Section 3 penalises the act of refusing, in the exercise of one’s occupation,
to sell a commodity or to supply a service on racial grounds." Public
prosecutors may press charges even if the victim does not file a complaint.
However, as of 2003, no convictions had been attained under the law. Hungary.
Violent action, cruelty, and coercion by threat made on the basis of the
victim's actual or perceived national, ethnic, religious status or membership
in a particular social group are punishable under article 174/B of the
Hungarian Criminal Code. This article was added to the Code in 1996. Iceland.
Section 233a of the Icelandic Penal Code states "Anyone who in a ridiculing,
slanderous, insulting, threatening or any other manner publicly abuses a person
or a group of people on the basis of their nationality, skin colour, race,
religion or sexual orientation, shall be fined or jailed for up to two years."
Iran. The Iranian constitution, article 14 states: "In accordance with the
sacred verse 'God does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who
have not fought against you because of your religion and who have not expelled
you from your homes' [60:8], the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
all Muslims are duty-bound to treat non-Muslims in conformity with ethical
norms and the principles of Islamic justice and equity, and to respect their
human rights. This principle applies to all who refrain from engaging in
conspiracy or activity against Islam and the Islamic Republic of Iran."
Ireland. "The Prohibition of Incitement to Hatred Act 1989" makes it an offense
to incite hatred against any group of persons on account of their race, color,
nationality, religion, sexual orientation, ethnic or national origins, or
membership of the Traveller community, an indigenous minority group." Ireland
does not systematically collect hate crime data. Italy. Italian criminal law,
at Section 3 of Law No. 205/1993, the so-called "Legge Mancino" (Mancino law),
contains a penalty-enhancement provision for all crimes motived by racial,
ethnic, national, or religious bias. Kazakhstan. In Kazakhstan, there are
constitutional provisions prohibiting propaganda promoting racial or ethnic
superiority. Kyrgyzstan. In Kyrgyzstan, "the Constitution of the State party
prohibits any kind of discrimination on grounds of origin, sex, race,
nationality, language, faith, political or religious convictions or any other
personal or social trait or circumstance, and that the prohibition against
racial discrimination is also included in other legislation, such as the Civil,
Penal and Labour Codes." Article 299 of the Criminal Code defines incitement to
national, racist, or religious hatred as a specific offense. This article has
been used in political trials of suspected members of the banned organization
Hizb-ut-Tahrir. Spain. Article 22(4) of the Spanish Penal Code includes a
penalty-enhancement provision for crimes motivated by bias against the victim's
ideology, beliefs, religion, ethnicity, race, nationality, gender, sexual
orientation, illness, or disability. Sweden. Article 29 of the Swedish Penal
Code includes a penalty-enhancement provision for crimes motivated by bias
against the victim's race, color, nationality, ethnicity, sexual orientation,
religion, or "other similar circumstance" of the victim. United Kingdom. For
England, Wales, and Scotland, the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 makes hateful
behaviour towards a victim based on the victim’s membership (or presumed
membership) in a racial group or a religious group an aggravation in sentencing
for specified crimes. For Northern Ireland, Public Order (Northern Ireland)
Order 1987 (S.I. 1987/463 (N.I. 7)) serves the same purpose. A “racial
group” is a group of persons defined by reference to race, colour,
nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origins. A
“religious group” is a group of persons defined by reference to religious
belief or lack of religious belief. The specified crimes are assault, criminal
damage, offences under the Public Order Act 1986, and offences under the
Protection from Harassment Act 1997. Scotland. In Scottish Common law the
courts can take any aggravating factor into account when sentencing someone
found guilty of an offence. There is specific legislation dealing with the
offences of incitement of racial hatred, racially-aggravated harassment and
offences aggravated by religious prejudice. A Scottish Executive working group
examined the issue of hate crime and ways of combating crime motivated by
social prejudice, reporting in 2004. having been prepared with support from the
Scottish Government, and was passed unanimously by the parliament on 3 June
2009. Eurasian countries with no hate crime laws. Albania, Cyprus, Estonia, San
Marino, Slovenia and Turkey have no hate crime laws. North America. Canada.
“In Canada the legal definition of hate crime can be found in sections 318
and 319 of the Criminal Code”. "(a) a sentence should be increased or reduced
to account for any relevant aggravating or mitigating circumstances relating to
the offence or the offender, and, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing," "(i) evidence that the offence was motivated by bias, prejudice or
hate based on race, national or ethnic origin, language, colour, religion, sex,
age, mental or physical disability, sexual orientation, or any other similar
factor, . . . shall be deemed to be aggravating circumstances."" A vast
majority (84 per cent) of Hate crime perpetrators were “male, with an average
age of just under 30. Less than 10 of those accused had criminal records, and
less than 5 per cent had previous hate crime involvement (ibid O’Grady 2010
page 163.).” “Only 4 percent of hate crimes were linked to an organized or
extremist group (Silver et al., 2004).” As of 2004, Jewish people were the
largest ethnic group targeted by hate crimes, followed by blacks, Muslims,
South Asians, and gays and lesbians (Silver et al., 2004). Historically, hate
crime has been around for a long time, yet it was most noticed when the
lynching of African Americans by white racists took place, an example of what
today we call hate crime. Hate related violence also has a historical root in
Canada. In the 1920s and 1930s, anti-Semitism was a major deal in Canada, due
to the rise of the Nazi government in Germany. For example, on August 16, 1933
there was a baseball game in Toronto and one team was made up of mostly Jewish
players. At the end of the game, a group of Nazi sympathizers unfolded a
Swastika flag and shouted ‘Heil Hitler’. That event erupted into a brawl
that had Jews and Italians against Anglo Canadians and the brawl went on for
hours. The first time someone was charged with hate crime over the internet
occurred on 27 March 1996. “A Winnipeg teenager was arrested by the police
for sending an email to a local political activist that contained the message
‘Death to homosexuals’ it’s prescribed in the Bible! Better watch out
next Gay Pride Week.’ (Nairne, 1996).” Pg.162 Robert suggests that
“Canada lags behind other nations in collecting comprehensive statistics on
hate crime.” United States. Hate crime laws have a long history in the United
States. The first hate crime laws were passed after the American Civil War,
beginning with the Civil Rights Act of 1871, to combat the growing number of
racially motivated crimes being committed by the Reconstruction era Ku Klux
Klan. The modern era of hate-crime legislation was begun in 1968 with the
passage of federal statute, 18 U.S. 245, part of the Civil Rights Act which
made it illegal to "by force or by threat of force, injure, intimidate, or
interfere with anyone who is engaged in six specified protected activities, by
reason of their race, color, religion, or national origin." However, "The
prosecution of such crimes must be certified by the U.S. attorney general.".
The first state hate-crime statute, California's Section 190.2, was passed in
1978 and provided for penalty enhancement in cases where murder was motivated
by prejudice against four "protected status" categories: race, religion, color,
and national origin. Washington included ancestry in a statute passed in 1981.
Alaska included creed and sex in 1982 and later disability, sexual orientation,
and ethnicity. In the 1990s some state laws began to include age, marital
status, membership in the armed forces, and membership in civil rights
organizations. Criminal acts which could be considered hate crimes in various
states included aggravated assault, assault and battery, vandalism, rape,
threats and intimidation, arson, trespassing, stalking, and various "lesser"
acts until in 1987 California state legislation included all crimes as possible
hate crimes. Defined in the 1999 National Crime Victim Survey, "A hate crime is
a criminal offense. In the United States, federal prosecution is possible for
hate crimes committed on the basis of a person's race, religion, or nation
origin when engaging in a federally protected activity." In 2009, the Matthew
Shepard Act added actual or perceived gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, and disability to the federal definition, and dropped the
prerequisite that the victim be engaging in a federally-protected activity.
Forty-five states and the District of Columbia have statutes criminalizing
various types of hate crimes. Thirty-one states and the District of Columbia
have statutes creating a civil cause of action in addition to the criminal
penalty for similar acts. Twenty-seven states and the District of Columbia have
statutes requiring the state to collect hate crime statistics. According to the
FBI Hate Crime Statistics report for 2006, hate crimes increased nearly 8%
nationwide, with a total of 7,722 incidents and 9,080 offenses reported by
participating law enforcement agencies. Of the 5,449 crimes against persons,
46% were classified as intimidation and 31.9% as simple assaults. 81% of the
3,593 crimes against property were acts of vandalism or destruction. However,
according to the FBI Hate Crime Statistics for 2007, the number of hate crimes
decreased to 7,624 incidents reported by participating law enforcement
agencies. These incidents included 9 murders and 2 rapes(out of the almost
17,000 murders and 90,000 forcible rapes committed in the U.S. in 2007).
Attorney General Eric Holder said in June 2009 that recent killings show the
need for a tougher U.S. hate crimes law to stop "violence masquerading as
political activism". South America. Brazil. In Brazil, hate crime laws focus on
racism, racial injury, and other special bias-motivated crimes such as, for
example, murder by death squads and genocide on the grounds of nationality,
ethnicity, race or religion. Murder by death squads and genocide are legally
classified as "hideous crimes" ("crimes hediondos" in Portuguese). The crimes
of racism and racial injury, although similar, are enforced slightly
differently. Article 140, 3rd paragraph, of the Penal Code establishes a
harsher penalty, from a minimum of 1 year to a maximum of 3 years, for injuries
motivated by "elements referring to race, color, ethnicity, religion, origin,
or the condition of being an aged or disabled person". On the other side, Law
7716/1989 covers "crimes resulting from discrimination or prejudice on the
grounds of race, color, ethnicity, religion, or national origin". In addition,
the Brazilian Constitution defines as a "fundamental goal of the Republic"
(Article 3rd, clause IV) "to promote the wealth of all, with no prejudice as to
origin, race, sex, color, age, and any other forms of discrimination". Chile.
The Chilean Congress began a discussion on a piece of anti-discrimination in
2005, which was eventually passed in November, 2011. This legislation included
an article that spoke expressly against discrimination based on sexual
orientation and gender identity. However, on January 4, 2012, the
Constitutional Tribunal (composed of senators from Chile's Independent
Democratic Union) repealed the 2nd Article of the legislation (which applied
primarily to sexual diversity). On April 5, 2012, Chile's Congress passed most
of an anti-discrimination law that would make it a crime to discriminate on the
basis of race, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, gender, appearance or
handicap. Support and opposition to hate crime laws. Support for hate crime
laws. Justifications for harsher punishments for hate crimes focus on the
notion that hate crimes cause greater individual and societal harm. It is said
that, when the core of a person’s identity is attacked, the degradation and
dehumanization is especially severe, and additional emotional and physiological
problems are likely to result. Society then, in turn, can suffer from the
disempowerment of a group of people. Furthermore, it is asserted that the
chances for retaliatory crimes are greater when a hate crime has been
committed. The riots in Los Angeles, California that followed the beating of
Rodney King, a Black motorist, by a group of White police officers are cited as
support for this argument. The beating of white truck driver Reginald Denny by
black rioters during the same riot is also an example that would support this
argument. In Wisconsin v. Mitchell the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously found
that "penalty-enhancement" hate crime statutes do not conflict with free speech
rights, because they do not punish an individual for exercising freedom of
expression; rather, they allow courts to consider motive when sentencing a
criminal for conduct which is not protected by the First Amendment. Opposition
to hate crime laws. The U.S. Supreme Court unanimously found the St. Paul Bias-
Motivated Crime Ordinance amounted to viewpoint-based discrimination is in
conflict with rights of free speech, because it selectively criminalized bias-
motivated speech or symbolic speech for disfavored topics while permitting such
speech for other topics. Many critics further assert that it conflicts with an
even more fundamental right: free thought. The claim is that hate-crime
legislation effectively makes certain ideas or beliefs, including religious
ones, illegal, in other words, thought crimes. In their book "Hate Crimes:
Criminal Law and Identity Politics", James B. Jacobs and Kimberly Potter
criticize hate crime legislation for exacerbating conflicts between groups.
They assert that by defining crimes as being committed by one group against
another, rather than as being committed by individuals against their society,
the labeling of crimes as “hate crimes” causes groups to feel persecuted by
one another, and that this impression of persecution can incite a backlash and
thus lead to an actual increase in crime. Some have argued hate crime laws
bring the law into disrepute and further divide society, as groups apply to
have their critics silenced. Some have argued that if it is true that all
violent crimes are the result of the perpetrator's contempt for the victim,
then all crimes are hate crimes. Thus, if there is no alternate rationale for
prosecuting some people more harshly for the same crime based on who the victim
is, then different defendants are treated unequally under the law, which
violates the United States Constitution.
