Health care reform in the United States Health care reform in the United States
has a long history. This article covers two federal statutes enacted in 2010:
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), signed March 23, 2010,
and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (), which amended
the PPACA and became law on March 30, 2010. History of national reform efforts.
Here is a summary of reform achievements at the national level in the United
States. For failed efforts, State based efforts, native tribes services and
more details generally, see the main article History of health care reform in
the United States. The 2010 Federal Reform Legislation. In March 2010,
President Obama gave a speech at a rally in Pennsylvania explaining the
necessity of health insurance reform and calling on Congress to hold a final up
or down vote on reform. , the legislation remains controversial, with some
states challenging it in federal court and opposition from some voters. In June
2012, in a 5â€“4 decision, the U.S. Supreme Court found the law to be
constitutional. Expanding Medicaid and subsidizing insurance. The law includes
health-related provisions that take effect over several years, including
expanding Medicaid eligibility for people making up to 133% of the federal
poverty level (FPL), subsidizing insurance premiums for people making up to
400% of the FPL ($88,000 for family of 4 in 2010) so their maximum "out-of-
pocket" payment for annual premiums will be on sliding scale from 2% to 9.5% of
income, providing incentives for businesses to provide health care benefits,
prohibiting denial of coverage and denial of claims based on pre-existing
conditions, establishing health insurance exchanges, prohibiting insurers from
establishing annual coverage caps, and support for medical research. Guaranteed
issue, community rating, individual mandate. Starting in 2014, the law will
prohibit insurers from denying coverage (see guaranteed issue) to sicker
applicants, or imposing special conditions such as higher premiums or payments
(see community rating). Health care expenditures are highly concentrated with
the most expensive 5% of the population accounting for half of aggregate health
care spending, whereas the bottom 50% of spenders account for only 3%, which
means that insurers' gains to be had from avoiding the sick greatly outweigh
any possible gains from managing their care. As a consequence, insurers devoted
resources to such avoidance at a direct cost to effective care management which
is against the interests of the insured. Also starting in 2014, the law will
generally require uninsured individuals to buy government-approved health
insurance â€” the individual mandate. Government-run exchanges may present
information to facilitate comparison among competing plans, if available, but
previous attempts at creating similar exchanges "produced only mixed results."
This requirement is expected to reduce the number of the uninsured from 19% of
all residents in 2010 to 8% by 2016. Some analysts believe that the 8% figure
of uninsured are expected to be mostly illegal immigrants (5%), with the rest
paying the fine unless exempted. Whether or not this is true remains unclear
based on presently available data. Some analysts have argued that the insurance
premium structure may shift more costs onto younger and healthier people.
Approximately $43Â billion was spent in 2008 providing unreimbursed emergency
services for the uninsured Other studies claim the opposite: "The argument for
reduced ER visits has been shown to be largely a canard...insuring the
uninsured will lead to, very approximately, a doubling of health expenditures
for the currently uninsured." The studies suggest that making insurance
mandatory rather than voluntary will tend to bring younger, healthier people
into the insurance pool, shifting the cost of the Act's increased spending onto
them. Efficacy of health insurance. The 2010 Acts require insurers to cover
more costs, requiring that at least 80% of premiums must be spent on medical
care or "quality improvement" (see loss ratio) and requiring full coverage for
screenings and immunizations, and by prohibiting lifetime and annual caps. Some
insurance schemes had been considered inadequate. Some argue that expanding
insurance coverage may lead to better health, while other studies claim the
opposite. A 2009 Harvard study published in the "American Journal of Public
Health" found more than 44,800 excess deaths annually in the United States
associated with lack of insurance. Other studies found less correlation. More
broadly, a 1997 analysis estimated the number of people in the United
Statesâ€”insured and uninsuredâ€”who die per year because of lack of medical
care was nearly 100,000. Recent reports have found that expanding coverage for
psychiatric drugs has worsened the health of many children, who incur costly
and lifelong side effects such as diabetes. However, many of these studies fail
to disclose that such examples of "expanded coverage" focus on narrow, non-
representative subpopulations and do not, for example, reflect the likely large
net benefit for the much larger subpopulations that have diabetes,
hypertension, and resulting chronic kidney disease, all of whom would likely
benefit from expanded coverage. Some opponents to the Act have claimed that
"80,000 people a year are killed just by "nosocomial infections"â€”infections
that arise as a result of medical treatment." These claims however are tenuous
at best since the incidence of nosocomical infections is not causally linked to
expanded insurance coverage, especially when preventative measures are a key
component of the new proposed regime, includiing numerous measures aimed to
reduce the rate of hospitalization and re-hospitalization and improve primary
prevention efforts in the outpatient setting. Opponents to the Act also point
to a randomized study of almost 4,000 subjects done by Rand and concluded in
1982, which purportedly found that increasing the generosity of people's health
insurance caused them to use more health care, but made almost no difference in
their health status." The actual summary of the Rand study by Rand itself is
quite different: "The poorest and sickest 6 percent of the sample at the start
of the experiment had better outcomes under the free plan for 4 of the 30
conditions measured. Specifically, â€¢Free care improved the control of
hypertension. The poorest patients in the free care group who entered the
experiment with hypertension saw greater reductions in blood pressure than did
their counterparts with cost sharing. The projected effect was about a 10
percent reduction in mortality for those with hypertension. â€¢Free care
marginally improved vision for the poorest patients. â€¢Free care also
increased the likelihood among the poorest patients of receiving needed dental
care.â€¢Serious symptoms were less prevalent for poorer people on the free
plan. â€¢Cost sharing also had some beneficial effects. Participants in cost
sharing plans worried less about their health and had fewer restricted-activity
days (including time spent in seeking medical care)." Reduce the deficit.
Reducing the deficit was another driver in health care reform. The reform
legislation that passed was estimated by the Congressional Budget Office to
reduce the deficit by $138Â billion over 10 years. However, the CBO numbers are
the subject of some debate. Eliminate overpayment in Medicare Advantage.
Medicare Advantage plans are offered by private insurers and provide benefits
over and above coverage in Medicare Parts A and B and receive funding from the
Medicare fund for taking on Part A and B coverage. However, under a revised
contract made during the previous Bush presidency, Medicare was overpaying the
private insurers. MedPAC estimated the overpayment as being approximately
$12Â billion a year. This meant that the average person in traditional Medicare
was paying $90 a year as a subsidy to private insurers for which they received
zero benefit and eliminating this overpayment would save $177Â billion over ten
years. Political positions of the main parties. Democratic Party. The
Democratic Party supports the amended 2010 legislation. The Act aims to ensure
health insurance is available to all citizens; to make more employers
responsible for their workers' health insurance; to extend subsidies to middle
income persons who have no employer insurance; and extend Medicaid to more
people than had been the case previously. The Act directs federal spending to
community health centers and to computerize health care records to encourage
accurate sharing of data between health providers and reduce errors. The Act
taxes expensive insurance plans and adjusts the split of Medicare funding
between traditional Medicare and Medicare Advantage plans. The Act reforms
payment systems and Medicare, which may reduce the perverse incentive system
that pays hospitals with poor recovery records more than hospitals with better
recovery records. The Act increases Medicare prescription drug coverage.
President Obama said he had heard from Americans with pre-existing conditions
whose lives depend on getting insurance coverage; stories of patients being
denied coverage, and of families "with insurance" who are just one illness away
from financial ruin. He said that the Act would protect people from the worst
practices of the insurance industry. He said it would give small businesses and
uninsured Americans a chance to choose an affordable health care plan in a
competitive market. He claimed that if they did nothing, millions of Americans
would lose their health care and the deficit would grow. He said that premiums
would increase and patients would be denied the care they need, and that small
business owners would continue to drop coverage altogether. He said he would
not walk away from those Americans, and he urged others in Congress not to do
so either. He highlighted that the American Medical Association considers the
Act an improvement over the status quo. He challenged anyone, from either
party, with a better plan that would bring down premiums, bring down the
deficit, cover the uninsured, strengthen Medicare for seniors, and stop
insurance company abuses, to let him know. Republican Party. The GOP's official
current position as represented by the House majority is that the Affordable
Care Act should simply be repealed, leaving the law as it was previously. The
House of Representatives voted for this in January 2011, though it is unlikely
that the Senate would pass it and some expect that the President would veto any
attempt at repeal. The Republicans' previous proposal for health care reform in
2009 would have placed people with pre-existing conditions who are unable to
get affordable coverage into high risk insurance pools and would have continued
the previous practice of allowing insurers to discriminate against them in
terms of coverage and premiums. Republicans opposed the Affordable Care Act
during passage. Not a single representative in the House or Senate voted in
favor of the bill. This opposition was broadly based on objections to rises in
taxation, especially of the so-called "Cadillac insurance plans" and the
corollary increase in government spending on affordability subsidies. The GOP
also objected to a new Health Insurance Rate Authority that would determine
whether rate increases were "unreasonable" and to enforced rebates or premium
reductions, and to any proposal that might have allowed government funds to
subsidize abortion. The opposition declared the law to be a "government
takeover of health care". One version of an original draft prepared in the
House of Representatives did call for a "public option" (a public insurer as
one extra choice for consumers, competing against private insurers). Some
Republicans have contested the constitutionality of the individual health
insurance mandate (a requirement to have medical insurance or else pay a fine).
Both the government and the insurance industry have argued that this is a
necessary prerequisite to achieve universality and equity for other insurance
payers and to prevent people buying insurance only in time of need. The
government argues that its constitutionality is covered under the Commerce
Clause, whereas detractors argue that this is wrong. , this matter is still
before the courts and so far three out of five federal court decisions have
ruled in favor of it being constitutional and two against. Mitt Romney has said
that the new law does not resemble the Massachusetts health care plan and did
not support it. Some Republicans (for example Charles Grassley) as well as the
conservative think tank Heritage Foundation previously supported an individual
mandate, but no longer do. The same is true of the concept of the insurance
exchanges which the bill sets up, which some Republicans and the Heritage
Foundation once supported. Despite these once Republican-backed ideas, the ACA
passed on a nearly party-line vote in both the House and the Senate. Inter-
party controversy. Betsy McCaughey, a health care analyst who came to political
prominence after she helped defeat the Clinton health care plan of 1993, "got
the ball rolling" in July and August 2009 when she called the bill "a vicious
assault on elderly people" that will "cut your life short". McCaughey was
joined in spreading the idea by other pundits and conservative media that had
had helped defeat the Clinton era legislation, including "The Washington Times"
and "The American Spectator". According to "The New York Times", McCaughey also
falsely claimed that presidential advisor Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel thought that the
disabled should not be entitled to medical care, which helped inspire Palin's
warnings about "death panels". Both McCaughey and Palin's remarks about what
Palin called an alleged 'death panel' were based on opinions about Ezekiel
Emanuel and previous page 425 legislation. Emanuel is an opponent of
legalization of doctor-assisted suicide or euthanasia. FactCheck.org said, "We
agree that Emanuel's meaning is being twisted. In one article, he was talking
about a philosophical trend, and in another, he was writing about how to make
the most ethical choices when forced to choose which patients get organ
transplants or vaccines when supplies are limited." An article on Time.com said
that Emanuel "was only addressing extreme cases like organ donation, where
there is an absolute scarcity of resources ... 'My quotes were just being taken
out of context.'" Regarding page 425 of a health care bill, Congressman Earl
Blumenauer (who sponsored the legislation) said the measure would block funds
for counseling that presents suicide or assisted suicide as an option, and
called references to death panels or euthanasia "mind-numbing". Page 425 of
this legislation is similar to end-of-life counseling that became law when
George W. Bush was president. A lot of the political debate centered on the
prevention of the Federal funding of abortion with some groups claiming that
abortion would become easier or would be financed by the government. In the
legislation that was finally passed the existing law preserved the principle of
no federal funding for abortion (except in cases of rape, incest, or to
preserve the life of the mother). The law requires people to pay for that
element of coverage with a separate check to create a specific fund which is
not subsidized and which is used to fund these services. State insurance
commissioners are charged with policing this "segregation of funds". Whether
insurers in the exchanges can offer abortion coverage at all was left as a
matter for individual States to decide. The default is that insurers will be
allowed to offer abortion coverage as they do now unless a State passes
legislation to the contrary. Lobbying. According to President Obama, America's
health insurance industry has spent hundreds of millions of dollars to block
the introduction of public medical insurance and stall other proposed
legislation. There are six registered health care lobbyists for every member of
Congress. The campaign against health care reform has been waged in part
through substantial donations to key politicians. The single largest recipient
of health industry political donations and chairman of the Senate Committee on
Finance that drafted Senate health care legislation is Senator Max Baucus (D-
MT). A single health insurance company, Aetna, has contributed more than
$110,000 to one legislator, Senator Joe Lieberman (ID-CT), in 2009. America's
Health Insurance Plans, a lobby group funded by American private health
insurance companies published its plans for health care reform in December
2008. The key elements called for co-ordinated national strategy for health
care with insurance regulation set in a national framework but enforced by the
states. It also called for a personal health care mandate requiring every
American to have health insurance or face penalties. This, it said, was a
necessary pre-requisite for guaranteed issue policies to prevent insurers from
having to pre-screen applicants and set limits on coverage for pre-existing
conditions, otherwise healthy people would put off buying insurance until they
get sick. It also called for the establishment of body to reform the payment
system (including a shift from fee-for-service to fee-for-quality-outcomes),
and a body to undertake Comparative effectiveness research because it admitted
that the current system was not effective at providing value for money or even
best practice and computerization and standardization of health care records
and claims processing. Most of the issues which AHIP called for in its plans
have been implemented by the Obama administration and Congress in the reform
process with the exception of a completely national framework for health care
insurance regulation. Though the bill does place certain national rules for
insurance to qualify as being "coverage" acceptable within the meaning of the
individual mandate, states have retained the power under the reforms to
regulate the industry and this was not put in a national framework. Possible
future reforms. The Patient Protection and Affordable Health Care Act 2010
contained provisions which allows the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) to undertake pilot projects which, if they are successful could
be implemented in future. Single-payer health care. The single-payer proposal
pending in Congress is called the United States National Health Care Act (H.R.
676, formerly the "Medicare for All Act.") The Congressional Budget Office and
related government agencies scored the cost of a universal health care system
several times since 1991, and have uniformly predicted cost savings, probably
because of the 40% cost savings associated with universal preventative care and
elimination of insurance company overhead costs. Balancing doctor supply and
demand. The Medicare Graduate Medical Education program regulates the supply of
medical doctors in the U.S. By adjusting the reimbursement rates to establish
more income equality among the medical professions, the effective cost of
medical care can be lowered. Bundled payments. A key project is one that could
radically change the way the medical profession is paid for services under
Medicare and Medicaid. The current system, which is also the prime system used
by medical insurers is known as fee-for-service because the medical
practitioner is paid only for the performance of medical procedures which, it
is argued means that doctors have a financial incentive to do more tests (which
generates more income) which may not be in the patients' best long term
interest. The current system encourages medical interventions such as surgeries
and prescribed medicines (all of which carry some risk for the patient but
increase revenues for the medical care industry) and does not reward other
activities such as encouraging behavioral changes such as modifying dietary
habits and quitting smoking, or follow-ups regarding prescribed regimes which
could have better outcomes for the patient at a lower cost. The current fee-
for-service system also rewards bad hospitals for bad service. Some have noted
that the best hospitals have fewer re-admission rates than others, which
benefits patients, but some of the worst hospitals have high re-admission rates
which is bad for patients but is perversely rewarded under the fee-for-service
system. Projects at CMS are examining the possibility of rewarding health care
providers through a process known as "bundled payments" by which local doctors
and hospitals in an area would be paid not on a fee for service basis but on a
capitation system linked to outcomes. The areas with the best outcomes would
get more. This system, it is argued, makes medical practitioners much more
concerned to focus on activities that deliver real health benefits at a lower
cost to the system by removing the perversities inherent in the fee-for-service
system. Though aimed as a model for health care funded by CMS, if the project
is successful it is thought that the model could be followed by the commercial
health insurance industry also.
