History of Israel On May 14, 1948, the Jewish People's Council declared the
establishment of the State of Israel, following a prolonged campaign beginning
in the late 19th century, when the Zionist movement began working towards
creating a homeland for the Jewish people. About 42% of the world's Jews live
in Israel today. The area of modern Israel is small, about the size of Wales or
half the size of Costa Rica, and is located roughly on the site of the ancient
kingdoms of Israel and Judah. It is the birthplace of the Hebrew language
spoken in Israel and of monotheism, first as Judaism and later of Christianity.
It contains sites sacred to Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Druze and Bahai.
Although coming under the sway of various empires and home to a variety of
ethnicities, it was predominantly Jewish until the Jewish–Roman wars after
which Jews became a minority in most regions, except Galilee. The region became
increasingly Christian after the 3rd century and then largely Moslem after the
7th Century Arab conquest. The area became a focal point of conflict between
Christianity and Islam between 1096 and 1291 and from the end of the Crusades
until the British conquest in 1917 was part of the Syrian province of first the
Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt and then (from 1517) the Ottoman Empire. In the mid-
19th century, persecution of Jews in Europe led to the creation of the Zionist
movement, which was able to win international support for a Jewish-majority
state on the site of the ancient kingdoms. Following the British conquest of
Syria in the First World War and the formation of the Mandatory state of
Palestine, Jewish-Arab tensions gradually evolved into the Arab-Israeli
conflict—a collision of the Arab and Jewish nationalist movements. Israeli
independence in 1948 was marked by massive migrations of Jews from both Europe
and the Islamic world to Israel, and of Arabs from Israel leading to extensive
conflict with the Arab League. Since about 1970, the United States has become
the principal ally of Israel, positioning it as a part of the Western World. In
1979 an uneasy peace was established with Egypt, based on the Camp David
Accords and in 1993 peace treaties were signed with the PLO and in 1994 with
Jordan. However, conflict with the Arab states and the Palestinians, many of
whom live in the territory occupied by Israel after the 1967 war, continues to
play a major role in Israeli (and international) political, social and economic
life. The Israeli economy was initially primarily socialist and the country
dominated by social democratic parties until the 1970s. Since then the Israeli
economy has gradually moved to capitalism and a free market economy, partially
retaining the social welfare system. Ancient times. Pre-historic Levant.
Between 2.6 and 0.9 million years ago, at least four episodes of hominine
dispersal from Africa to the Levant are known, each culturally distinct. The
flint tool artifacts of these early humans have been discovered on the
territory of the current state of Israel. All had settled on lakes or river
banks. The oldest is Yiron in the northern portion of the Israeli Rift, with
flint artifacts in a fluviatile deposit below a basalt layer dated at 2.4
million years old, the oldest stone tools found anywhere outside Africa.
Ubeidiya stone tools were found in the central Rift and are 1.4 million years
old, with a Lower Acheulean industry. Somewhat later, the Bizat Ruhama group
had settled 1 million years ago in the eastern coastal plain, with a small,
microlith-size industry. Around 800,000 years ago, newcomers had settled at
Gesher Bnot Yaakov in the northern Rift, introducing the cleaver tradition. As
part of a 1929–1934 campaign, between 1930 and 1932, Dorothy Garrod excavated
four caves, and a number of rock shelters, in the Carmel mountain range at el-
Wad, el-Tabun, and Es Skhul. Garrod discovered Neanderthal and early modern
human remains, including the skeleton of a Neanderthal female, named Tabun I,
which is regarded as one of the most important human fossils ever found. The
excavation at el-Tabun produced the longest stratigraphic record in the region,
spanning 600,000 or more years of human activity, from the Lower Paleolithic to
the present day, representing roughly a million years of human evolution. There
are also several well-preserved burials of Neanderthals and "Homo sapiens" and
passage from nomadic hunter-gatherer groups to complex, sedentary agricultural
societies is extensively documented at the site. Taken together, these
emphasize the paramount significance of the Mount Carmel caves for the study of
human cultural and biological evolution within the framework of palaeo-
ecological changes. Early Israelites (1200–930 BCE). The first record of the
name Israel (as "") occurs in the Merneptah stele, erected for Egyptian Pharaoh
Merneptah c. 1209 BCE, "Israel is laid waste and his seed is not." William
Dever sees this "Israel" in the central highlands as a cultural and probably
political entity, but an ethnic group rather than an organized state. Ancestors
of the Israelites may have included Semites who occupied Canaan and the Sea
Peoples. McNutt says, "It is probably safe to assume that sometime during Iron
Age I a population began to identify itself as 'Israelite'", differentiating
itself from the Canaanites through such markers as the prohibition of
intermarriage, an emphasis on family history and genealogy, and religion.
Written evidence of the use of Classical Hebrew exists from about 1000 BCE. It
was written using the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet. Villages had populations of up to
300 or 400, which lived by farming and herding and were largely self-
sufficient; economic interchange was prevalent. Writing was known and available
for recording, even in small sites. The archaeological evidence indicates a
society of village-like centres, but with more limited resources and a small
population. Israel and Judah (c. 930 – 576 BCE). The Hebrew Bible describes
constant warfare between the Jews and other tribes, including the Philistines,
whose capital was Gaza. Around 930 BCE, the kingdom split into a southern
Kingdom of Judah and a northern Kingdom of Israel. An alliance between Ahab of
Israel and Ben Hadad II of Damascus managed to repulse the incursions of the
Assyrians, with a victory at the Battle of Qarqar (854 BCE). However, the
Kingdom of Israel was eventually destroyed by Assyrian king Tiglath-Pileser III
around 750 BCE. The Philistine kingdom was also destroyed. The Assyrians sent
most of the northern Israelite kingdom into exile, thus creating the "Lost
Tribes of Israel". The Samaritans claim to be descended from survivors of the
Assyrian conquest. An Israelite revolt (724–722 BCE) was crushed after the
siege and capture of Samaria by Sargon II. Assyrian King, Sennacherib, tried
and failed to conquer Judah. Assyrian records claim he punished Judah and then
left (Herodotus also described the invasion). Babylonian rule. The Assyrian
Empire was overthrown by the Medes and the Chaldean, or New Babylonian, Empire
in 612 BCE. In 586 BCE King Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon conquered Judah.
According to the Hebrew Bible, he destroyed Solomon's Temple and exiled the
Jews to Babylon. The real population transfer figures are somewhat contested by
historians, though the general perception is that significant portion of local
population had remained, while the exile was largely of the nobility class.
Classical era. Persian and Hellenistic rule (538 BCE – 2nd century BCE). In
538 BCE, Cyrus the Great of Persia conquered Babylon and took over its empire.
Cyrus issued a proclamation granting subjugated nations (including the people
of Judah) religious freedom. According to the Hebrew Bible 50,000 Judeans, led
by Zerubabel returned to Judah and rebuilt the temple. A second group of 5,000,
led by Ezra and Nehemiah, returned to Judah in 456 BCE although non-Jews wrote
to Cyrus to try to prevent their return. It is believed that the final Hebrew
versions of the Torah and Books of Kings date from this period and that the
returning Israelites adopted an Aramaic script which they brought back from
Babylon. In 333 BCE, Macedonian ruler Alexander the Great defeated Persia and
conquered the region. Sometime thereafter, the first translation of the Hebrew
Bible, (the Septuagint), was begun in Alexandria. After Alexander's death, his
generals fought over the territory he had conquered. Judah became the frontier
between the Seleucid Empire and Ptolemaic Egypt, eventually becoming part of
the Seleucid Empire. In the 2nd century BCE, Antiochus IV Epiphanes (ruler of
the Seleucid Empire) tried to eradicate Judaism in favour of Hellenistic
religion. This provoked the 174–135 BCE Maccabean Revolt led by Judas
Maccabeus (whose victory is celebrated in the Jewish festival of Hanukkah). The
Books of the Maccabees describe the uprising and the end of Greek rule. A
Jewish party called the Hasideans opposed both Hellenism "and" the revolt but
eventually gave their support to the Maccabees. Modern interpretations see this
period as a civil war between Hellenized and orthodox forms of Judaism.
Hasmonean kingdom (2nd century BCE – 37 BCE). The Hasmonean dynasty of
priest-kings ruled Judea with the Pharisees, Saducees and Essenes as the
principal social movements. As part of their struggle against Hellenistic
civilization, the Pharisees established what may have been the world's first
national male (religious) education and literacy program, based around meeting
houses. This led to Rabbinical Judaism. Justice was administered by the
Sanhedrin, whose leader was known as the Nasi. The Nasi's religious authority
gradually superseded that of the Temple's high priest (under the Hasmoneans
this was the king). In 125 BCE the Hasmonean King John Hyrcanus subjugated Edom
and forcibly converted the population to Judaism. This is the only known case
of forced conversion to Judaism. In 64 BCE the Roman general Pompey conquered
Syria and intervened in the Hasmonean civil war in Jerusalem. In 47 BCE the
lives of Julius Caesar and his protege Cleopatra were saved by 3,000 crack
Jewish troops sent by King Hyrcanus II and commanded by Antipater, whose
descendants Caesar made kings of Judea. Herodian dynasty (37 BCE – 6 CE).
From 37 BCE to 6 CE, the Herodian dynasty, Jewish-Roman client kings, descended
from Antipater, ruled Judea. Herod the Great considerably enlarged the temple
(see Herod's Temple), making it one of the largest religious structures in the
world. Despite its fame, it was in this period that Rabbinical Judaism, led by
Hillel the Elder, began to assume popular prominence over the Temple
priesthood. The Jewish Temple in Jerusalem was granted special permission not
to display an effigy of the emperor, becoming the only religious structure in
the Roman Empire that did not do so. Special dispensation was granted for
Jewish citizens of the Roman Empire to pay a tax to the temple. Roman Imperial
rule (6–390 CE). Judea was made a Roman province in 6 CE, following the
transition of Judean tetrarchy into a Roman realm. Following the next decades,
though prosperous, the society suffered increasing tensions between Greco-Roman
and Judean populations. In 66 CE, the Jews of Judea rose in revolt against
Rome, naming their new state as "Israel". The events were described by the
Jewish leader/historian Josephus, including the desperate defence of Jotapata,
the siege of Jerusalem (69–70 CE) and heroic last stand at Masada under
Eleazar ben Yair (72–73 CE). Much of Jerusalem and the Temple lay in ruins.
During the Jewish revolt, most Christians, at this time a sub-sect of Judaism,
removed themselves from Judea. The rabbinical/Pharisee movement led by Yochanan
ben Zakai, who opposed the Sadducee temple priesthood, made peace with Rome and
survived. After the war Jews continued to be taxed in the Fiscus Judaicus,
which was used to fund a temple to Jupiter. From 115 to 117, Jews in Libya,
Egypt, Cyprus, Mesopotamia and Lod rose in revolt against Rome. This conflict
was accompanied by large-scale massacres of both Romans and Jews. Cyprus was
severely depopulated and Jews banned from living there. In 131, the Emperor
Hadrian renamed Jerusalem "Aelia Capitolina" and constructed a Temple of
Jupiter on the site of the former Jewish temple. Jews were banned from living
in Jerusalem itself (a ban that persisted until the Arab conquest) and the
Roman province, until then known as Iudaea Province, was renamed Palaestina, no
other revolt led to a province being renamed. The names "Palestine" (in
English) and "Filistin" (in Arabic) are derived from this. From 132 to 136, the
Jewish leader Simon Bar Kokhba led another major revolt against the Romans,
again renaming the country "Israel" (see Bar Kochba Revolt coinage). The Bar-
Kochba revolt probably caused more trouble for the Romans than the more famous
(and better documented) revolt of 70. The Christians refused to participate in
the revolt and from this point the Jews regarded Christianity as a separate
religion. The revolt was eventually crushed by Emperor Hadrian himself.
Although uncertain, it is widely thought that during the Bar Kokhba revolt,
when a rabbinical assembly decided which books could be regarded as part of the
Hebrew Bible, the Jewish apocrypha were left out. After suppressing the Bar
Kochba revolt, the Romans permitted a hereditary Rabbinical Patriarch (from the
House of Hillel) to represent the Jews in dealings with the Romans. The most
famous of these was Judah haNasi. Jewish seminaries continued to produce
scholars and the best of these became members of the Sanhedrin. The Mishnah, a
major Jewish religious text, was completed in this period. Before the Bar-
Kochba uprising, an estimated 2/3 of the population of Gallilee and 1/3 of the
coastal region were Jewish. However, persecution and the economic crisis that
affected the Roman empire in the 3rd century led to further Jewish migration
from Palestine to the more tolerant Persian Sassanid Empire, where a prosperous
Jewish community existed in the area of Babylon. Early in the 4th century,
Constantinople became the capital of the East Roman Empire and Christianity was
adopted as the official religion. The name Jerusalem was restored to Aelia
Capitolina and it became a Christian city. Jews were still banned from living
in Jerusalem, but were allowed to visit, and it is in this period that the
surviving Western Wall of the temple became sacred. In 351–2, another Jewish
revolt in the Galilee erupted against a corrupt Roman governor. In 362, the
last pagan Roman Emperor, Julian the Apostate, announced plans to rebuild the
Jewish Temple. He died while fighting the Persians in 363 and the project was
discontinued. Byzantine rule (390–636). The Roman Empire was finally split in
390 CE and the region became part of the East Roman Empire, known as the
Byzantine Empire. Under the Byzantines, Christianity was dominated by the
(Greek) Orthodox Church. In the 5th century, The Western Roman Empire collapsed
leading to Christian migration into Palastina and development of a Christian
majority. Jews numbered 10–15% of the population, concentrated largely in the
Galilee. Judaism was the only non-Christian religion tolerated, but there were
bans on Jews building new places of worship, holding public office or owning
slaves. Several Samaritan Revolts erupted in this period, resulting in the
decrease of Samaritan community from about a million to a near extinction.
Sacred Jewish texts written in the Holyland at this time are the Gemara (400),
the Jerusalem Talmud (500) and the Passover Haggadah. In 611, Sassanid Persia
invaded the Byzantine Empire and, after a long siege, Chosroes II captured
Jerusalem in 614, with Jewish help, including possibly the Jewish Himyarite
Kingdom in Yemen. Jews were left to govern Jerusalem when the Persians took
over, though the short living Jewish commonwealth lasted until about 617, when
the Persians capitulated. The Byzantine Emperor, Heraclius, promised to restore
Jewish rights and received Jewish help in defeating the Persians, but he soon
reneged on the agreement after reconquering Palestine by issuing an edict
banning Judaism from the Byzantine Empire. (Egyptian) Coptic Christians took
responsibility for this broken pledge and still fast in penance. Jews fleeing
Byzantium settled in the Baltic area, where the Khazar nobility and some of the
population subsequently converted to Judaism. Middle Ages. Arab rule
(636–1096). According to Muslim tradition, in 620 Muhammed was taken on
spiritual journey from Mecca to the "farthest mosque", whose location is
considered to be the Temple Mount, returning the same night. In 634–636 the
Arabs conquered Palestine, ending the Byzantine ban on Jews living in
Jerusalem. Over the next few centuries, Islam replaced Christianity as the
dominant religion of the region. From 636 until the beginning of the Crusades,
Palestine was ruled first by Medinah-based Rashidun Caliphs, then by the
Damascus-based Umayyad Caliphate and after that the Baghdad-based Abbasid
Caliphs. In 691, Umayyad Caliph Abd al-Malik (685–705) constructed the Dome
of the Rock shrine on the Temple Mount. Jews consider it to contain the
Foundation Stone (see also Holy of Holies), which is the holiest site in
Judaism. A second building, the Al-Aqsa Mosque, was also erected on the Temple
Mount in 705. Between the 7th and 11th centuries, Jewish scribes, called the
Masoretes and located in Galilee and Jerusalem, established the Masoretic Text,
the final text of the Hebrew Bible. Crusader and Ayubid rule (1099 – 13th
century). During the Crusades, both Muslims and Jews in Palestine were
indiscriminately massacred or sold into slavery. The murder of Jews began
during the Crusaders' travels across Europe and continued in the Holy Land.
Ashkenazi orthodox Jews still recite a prayer in memory of the death and
destruction caused by the Crusades. In 1187, the Ayyubid Sultan, Saladin,
defeated the Crusaders in the Battle of Hattin (above Tiberias), taking
Jerusalem and most of Palestine. A Crusader state centred round Acre survived
in weakened form for another century. From 1260 to 1291 the area became the
frontier between Mongol invaders (occasional Crusader allies) and the Mamluks
of Egypt. The conflict impoverished the country and severely reduced the
population. Sultan Qutuz of Egypt eventually defeated the Mongols in the Battle
of Ain Jalut (near Ein Harod) and his successor (and assassin), Baibars,
eliminated the last Crusader Kingdom of Acre in 1291, thereby ending the
Crusades. Mamluk rule (13th century – 1517). Egyptian Mamluk Sultan, Baibars
(1260–1277) conquered Palestine and the Mamluks ruled it until 1517,
regarding it as part of Syria. In Hebron, Baibars banned Jews from worshiping
at the Cave of the Patriarchs (the second holiest site in Judaism), the ban
remained in place until its conquest by Israel 700 years later. The collapse of
the Crusades was followed by increased persecution and expulsions of Jews in
Europe. Expulsions began in England (1290) and were followed by France (1306).
In Spain persecution of the highly integrated and successful Jewish community
began, including massacres and forced conversions. During the Black Death, many
Jews were murdered after being accused of poisoning wells. The completion of
the Christian reconquest of Spain led to expulsion of the Jews of Spain in 1492
and Portugal in 1497. These were the wealthiest and most integrated Jewish
communities in Europe. Many Jews converted to Christianity, however, prejudice
against Jewish converts persisted and led many of these former Jews to move to
the New World (see History of the Jews in Latin America). Most of the expelled
Spanish Jews moved to North Africa, Poland, to the Ottoman Empire and to
Israel. In Italy, Jews were required to live in ghettos. Ottoman rule
(1516–1917). The Mamluk province of Bilad a-Sham (Syria) was conquered by
Turkish Sultan Selim II in 1516–17, becoming a part of the province of
Ottoman Syria for the next four centuries, first as the Damascus Eyalet and
later as the Syria Vilayet (following the Tanzimat reorganization of 1864).
16th–19th centuries. During the 16th century the Jewish community in Galilee
prospered, with Safed reaching a size of 15,000 residents, mostly Jews. However
economic decline and conflict between the Druze and the Ottomans led to the
community's gradual decline by the mid-17th century. In 1660, a Druze revolt
led to the destruction of the major Old Yishuv cities of Safed and Tiberias. In
the late 18th century a local Bedouin Sheikh Daher el-Omar created a de facto
independent Emirate in the Galilee. Ottoman attempts to subdue the Sheikh
failed, but after Daher's death the Ottomans restored their rule in the area.
In 1799 Napoleon briefly occupied the country and is believed to have planned a
proclamation inviting Jews to create a state. In 1831, Muhammad Ali of Egypt
conquered Ottoman Syria and decided to revive and resettle much of its regions.
His conscription policies led to a popular Arab revolt in 1834, resulting in
major casualties for the local Arab peasants and massacres of Christian and
Jewish communities by the rebels. Following the revolt, Muhammad Pasha, the son
of Muhammad Ali, expelled nearly 10,000 of the local peasants to Egypt, while
bringing loyal Arab peasants from Egypt and discharged soldiers to settle the
coastline of Palestine, northern Jordan Valley was settled by his Sudanese
troops. In 1838 there was another revolt by the Druze and in 1840 the Egyptians
withdrew, returning the area to Ottoman governorship. In 1844, Jews constituted
the largest population group in Jerusalem and by 1890 an absolute majority in
the city, but as a whole the Jewish population made up far less than 10% of the
country. In 1868, the Ottomans banished the Bahá'u'lláh, one of the founders
of the Bahai religion, to Acre where he is buried, and the movement
subsequently established its global administrative centre in nearby Haifa.
Tanzimat period. In 1874, the area of Jerusalem gained a special status of the
Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem. Birth of Zionism. Following widespread pogroms and
antisemitism, millions of Jews began leaving Eastern Europe in the late 19th
century, mainly for the United States, with a small percentage heading for
Israel. At that time some Jews began to consider the possibility of re-
establishing themselves as an independent nation. The movement began as a
religious movement in Russia and Yemen, evolving into a secular movement that
became popular among Jews around the world, especially in Europe. In 1870, an
agricultural school, the Mikveh Israel, was founded near Jaffa by the Alliance
Israelite Universelle. The first modern Jewish settlement in Palestine, Petah
Tikva, was founded in 1878, followed by Rishon LeZion (1882). Other settlements
were established by members of the Bilu and Hovevei Zion ("Love of Zion")
movements. This was accompanied by a revival of the Hebrew language. Zionism
attracted Jews of all kinds; religious, secular, nationalists and left-wing
socialists. Socialists aimed to reclaim the land by becoming labourers and
forming collectives. In Zionist history, the different waves of Jewish
settlement are known as "aliyah". During the First Aliyah, between 1882 and
1903, approximately 35,000 Jews moved to Palestine. By 1890, Palestine was
populated mainly by Muslim (settled and nomad Bedouins) and Christian Arabs, as
well as Jews, Greeks, Druze and other minorities. The Jewish population was
still mostly concentrated in the Four Holy Cities. In 1896 Theodor Herzl
published "Der Judenstaat" ("The Jewish State"), in which he asserted that the
solution to growing antisemitism in Europe (the so-called "Jewish Question")
was to establish a Jewish state. In 1897, the Zionist Organisation was founded
and the First Zionist Congress proclaimed its aim "to establish a home for the
Jewish people in Palestine secured under public law." However, Zionism was
regarded with suspicion by the Ottoman rulers and was unable to make major
progress. Between 1904 and 1914, around 40,000 Jews settled in Southern Syria
(the Second Aliyah). In 1908 the Zionist Organisation set up the Palestine
Bureau (also known as the "Eretz Israel Office") in Jaffa and began to adopt a
systematic Jewish settlement policy in Palestine. Migrants were mainly from
Russia (which then included Poland), escaping persecution. The first kibbutz,
Degania, was founded by Russian socialists in 1909. The first entirely Hebrew-
speaking city, Ahuzat Bayit was established in 1909 (later renamed Tel Aviv).
Hebrew newspapers and books were published, schools were established, and
Jewish political parties and workers organizations were established. During
World War I. During World War I, most Jews supported the Germans because they
were fighting the Russians who were regarded as the Jews' main enemy. In
Britain, the government sought Jewish support for the war effort for a variety
of reasons including an erroneous antisemitic perception of "Jewish power" over
the Ottoman Empire's Young Turks movement, and a desire to secure American
Jewish support for US intervention on Britain's behalf. There was already
sympathy for the aims of Zionism in the British government, including the
Prime-Minister Lloyd-George. In late 1917, the British Army drove the Turks out
of Southern Syria. and the British foreign minister, Lord Balfour sent a letter
to Lord Rothschild. The letter subsequently became known as the Balfour
Declaration of 1917. It stated that the British Government "view with favour
the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people". A
Jewish Legion composed largely of Zionist volunteers organized by Jabotinsky
and Trumpeldor participated in the British invasion of Palestine. It previously
had participated in the failed Gallipoli Campaign. A Jewish spy network
provided the British with details of Ottoman troops. In 1918 Chaim Weizmann,
president of the British Zionist Federation, formed a Zionist Commission, which
went to Palestine to promote Zionist objectives there. British Mandate of
Palestine (1920–48). First years. The British Mandate (in effect, British
rule) of Palestine, including the Balfour Declaration, was confirmed by the
League of Nations in 1922 and came into effect in 1923. The boundaries of
Palestine were drawn by the British and first included modern Jordan, which was
removed from the territory by Churchill a few years later. Britain signed an
additional treaty with the United States (which did not join the League of
Nations) in which the United States endorsed the terms of the Mandate. In 1921,
the Zionist Commission was granted official status as the Jewish Agency for
Palestine in Article 4 of the Mandate. An offer to create a similar Arab Agency
was rejected by Arab leaders of Palestine. The Mandate permitted the Jewish
Agency to oversee Jewish immigration into Palestine and land purchases from the
local Arabs. The Jewish Agency soon operated as an arm of the Zionist
leadership. It ran schools and hospitals, and later formed a militia, the
Haganah. Chaim Weizmann was the leader of both the Zionist Organisation and the
Jewish Agency until 1929. The Jewish Agency distributed entry permits to new
immigrants (the number was fixed by the British) and funds donated by Jews
abroad. From 1920, the Va'ad Leumi (or Jewish National Council, or JNC) was the
main institution of the Jewish community ("Yishuv") within the British Mandate
of Palestine. It was democratically elected and included non-Zionist Jews. This
body functioned as a virtual government for the Jews in Palestine. The
Political Department of the JNC was responsible for relations with the Arabs,
ties with the Jewish Agency and negotiations with the British. As the Yishuv
grew, the JNC adopted more functions, such as education, health care and
welfare services, internal defence and security matters. Most of the revenue
raised by the Mandate came from the Jewish minority but was spent on funding
the British administration. Therefore, with British permission, the Va'ad
raised its own taxes and ran independent services for the Jewish population.
Education and health care for Jews in Palestine were in the hands of the major
Zionist political parties: the General Zionists, the Mizrahi and the Socialist
Zionists, with each operating independent services and (except for Mizrahi)
sports organizations funded by local taxes, donations and fees. The Zionist
movement also established the Hebrew University in Jerusalem and the Technion
(technological university) in Haifa (both 1925). During the whole interwar
period, the British, appealing to the terms of the Mandate, rejected the
principle of majority rule or any other measure that would give the Arab
majority control over the government of Palestine. Between 1919 and 1923,
40,000 Jews arrived in Palestine, mainly escaping the post-revolutionary chaos
of Russia (Third Aliyah - over 100,000 Jews were massacred in this period in
the Ukraine alone). Many of these immigrants became known as "pioneers" (),
experienced or trained in agriculture and capable of establishing self-
sustaining economies. The Jezreel Valley and the Hefer Plain marshes were
drained and converted to agricultural use. The emergence of Palestinian
Nationalism and anti-Jewish sentiments, fed by the collapse of the Arab kingdom
of Syria and increased Jewish immigration led to Arab rioting in 1920 and 1921.
In response, the British authorities enacted a system of immigration quotas
upon Jews. Exceptions were made for Jews with over 1,000 pounds in cash
(roughly 100,000 pounds at year 2000 rates) or Jewish professionals with over
500 pounds. Arab attacks on isolated Jewish settlements and the British failure
to protect them led to the creation of the Haganah ("Defense"), a mainly
socialist underground Jewish militia dedicated to defending Jewish settlements.
By 1923 the number of Jews in Palestine had reached 90,000. Between 1924 and
1929, 82,000 more Jews arrived (Fourth Aliyah), fleeing antisemitism in Poland
and Hungary and because the United States Immigration Act of 1924 now kept Jews
out. The new arrivals included many middle-class families who moved into towns
and established small businesses and workshops—although lack of economic
opportunities meant that approximately a quarter later left Palestine. The 1929
Palestine riots (see also the Hebron Massacre), led Ze'ev Jabotinsky to create
a right-wing militia group called the Irgun Tzvai Leumi (National Military
Organization, known in Hebrew by its acronym "Etzel"). Jewish migration in the
1930s. In 1933, the Nazis negotiated the Ha'avara Agreement, under which 50,000
Jews and $100 million of their assets would be moved to Palestine. In
Palestine, Jewish immigration helped the economy to flourish. With the
completion of the port at Haifa and its oil refineries, significant industry
was added to the predominantly agricultural Palestinian economy. The Labour
Zionist leader who negotiated the agreement, Haim Arlosoroff, was assassinated
in Tel Aviv in 1933. Between 1929 and 1939, 250,000 Jews arrived in Palestine
(Fifth Aliyah). The majority of these, 174,000, arrived between 1933 and 1936,
after which the British increasingly restricted immigration. Migration was
mostly from Europe and included professionals, doctors, lawyers and professors
from Germany. Persecution of Jews massively increased as Fascist regimes
emerged across Europe and Jews reverted to being non-citizens, deprived of all
civil and economic rights and subject to arbitrary persecution. Significantly
antisemitic governments came to power in Hungary, Romania and the Nazi created
states of Croatia and Slovakia while Germany annexed Austria and the Czech
territories. In 1938, the US called an international conference to address the
question of the vast numbers of Jews trying to flee Europe. Britain made its
attendance contingent on Palestine being kept out of the discussion. No Jewish
representatives were invited. The Nazis proposed their own solution: That the
Jews of Europe be shipped to Madagascar (the Madagascar Plan). Faced with an
avalanche of Jewish migrants and with every country in the world closed to
Jewish migration, the British enforced tight quotas. As the situation in Europe
became increasingly desperate, Jews resorted to illegal immigration, (Aliyah
Bet or "Ha'apalah"), often organized by the Mossad Le'aliyah Bet, and the
Irgun. Jewish refugees arrived in secret by sea, or, to a lesser extent,
overland through Syria. Very few Jews managed to escape Europe between 1939 and
1945. Those caught by the British were mostly sent to Mauritius. In response to
the growing emigration and encouraged by antisemitic propaganda, a series of
violent Arab riots broke out in 1933. Arab Revolt (1936–1939). Increased
Jewish immigration contributed to the large-scale Arab Revolt in Palestine
(1936–1939), a largely nationalist uprising directed at ending British rule.
The British responded with the Peel Commission (1936–37), which recommended
that an exclusively Jewish territory be created in the Galilee and along much
of the western coast (requiring the expulsion of 200,000 Arabs) the rest
becoming an exclusively Arab area. Jewish opinion was divided as to the merits
of this scheme, but it was rejected outright by the Palestinian Arabs and, in
the absence of strong Jewish support, eventually abandoned by the British as
unworkable. The Woodhead Commission (1938) reported that the Peel Commission
was unworkable and recommended setting up smaller Arab and Jewish zones, but
this plan was rejected by both Arabs and Jews. 20 years later, the Jewish
Agency leader, David Ben-Gurion wrote: "Had partition to the Peel Commission
partition plan been carried out, the history of our people would have been
different and six million Jews in Europe would not have been killed—most of
them would be in Israel." Ben-Gurion responded to the Arab Revolt with a policy
of "Havlagah"—self-restraint and a refusal to be provoked by Arab attacks in
order to prevent polarization. The Etzel group broke off from the Haganah in
opposition to this policy. With war in Europe increasingly likely, the British
tried to placate the Arab population of Palestine. The White Paper of 1939,
stated that with over 450,000 Jews having now arrived in Palestine, the Balfour
Declaration aim of "a national home for the Jewish people" had been achieved.
The White Paper recommended an independent Palestine, governed jointly by Arabs
and Jews, be established within 10 years. The White Paper agreed to allow
75,000 Jewish immigrants into Palestine over the period 1940–44, after which
migration would require (unlikely) Arab approval. Both the Arab and Jewish
leadership rejected the White Paper. In March 1940 the British High
Commissioner for Palestine issued an edict banning Jews from purchasing land in
95% of Palestine. The Second World War and the Holocaust (1939–45). During
the 2nd World War, the Jewish Agency worked to establish a Jewish army that
would fight alongside the British forces. Churchill supported the plan but
British Military and government opposition led to its rejection. The British
demanded that the number of Jewish recruits match the number of Palestinian
Arab recruits but very few Arabs were willing to fight for Britain. The refusal
to provide arms to the Jews, even when Rommel's forces were advancing through
Egypt in June 1942 (intent on occupying Palestine) and the 1939 White Paper,
led to the emergence of a Zionist leadership in Palestine that believed
conflict with Britain was inevitable. In the meantime the Jewish Agency called
on Palestine's Jewish youth to volunteer for the British Army (both men and
women). In June 1944 the British agreed to create a Jewish Brigade, that would
fight in Europe. Over a million Jews served in every branch of the allied
armies, mainly in the Soviet and U.S. armies. 200,000 Jews died serving in the
Soviet army alone. A small group (with about 200 activists), dedicated to
Jewish resistance to the British administration in Palestine, broke away from
the Etzel (which advocated support for Britain during the war) and formed the
"Lehi" (Stern Gang), led by Avraham Stern. In 1943 the USSR released the
Revisionist Zionist leader, Menachem Begin from the Gulag and he went to
Palestine, taking command of the Etzel organization with a policy of increased
conflict against the British. At about the same time Yitzhak Shamir escaped
from the camp in Eritrea where the British were holding Lehi activists without
trial, taking command of the Lehi (Stern Gang). Jews in the Middle East were
also affected by the war. Most of North Africa came under Nazi control and many
Jews were used as slaves. The 1941 pro-Axis coup in Iraq was accompanied by
massacres of Jews. The Jewish Agency put together plans for a last stand in the
event of Rommel invading Palestine (the Nazis planned to exterminate
Palestine's Jews). Between 1939 and 1945, approximately 6 million Jews in Nazi-
occupied Europe were murdered. Almost a quarter of those killed were children.
The Holocaust had an overwhelmingly decisive impact on the Jewish world (and
beyond). The Polish and German Jewish communities, which had played such an
important role in defining the pre-1945 Jewish world, now virtually ceased to
exist. In the United States and Palestine, Jews of European origin became
disconnected from their families and roots. Sephardi Jews, who had been a
minority, became a much more significant factor in the Jewish world. The Second
World War left the surviving remnant of Jews in central Europe as displaced
persons (refugees); an Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry, established to
examine the Palestine issue, surveyed their ambitions and found that 97% wanted
to migrate to Palestine. In the Zionist movement the moderate Pro-British (and
British citizen) Weizmann, whose son died flying in the RAF, was undermined by
Britain's anti-Zionist policies. Leadership of the movement passed to the
Jewish Agency in Palestine, now led by the anti-British Socialist-Zionist party
(Mapai) and led by David Ben-Gurion. In the diaspora, U.S. Jews now dominated
the Zionist movement. The Post-War Years (1945–47). The British Empire was
severely weakened by the war. In the Middle East, the war had made Britain
conscious of its dependence on Arab oil and it attached more importance to
cordial relations with the Arabs than to helping the Jewish people establish a
homeland. Shortly after VE Day, the Labour Party won the general election in
Britain. Although Labour Party conferences had for years called for the
establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine, the Labour government now decided
to maintain the 1939 White Paper restrictions. Illegal migration (Aliyah Bet)
became the main form of Jewish entry into Palestine. Across Europe Bricha
("flight"), an organization of former partisans and ghetto fighters, smuggled
Jewish holocaust survivors from Eastern Europe to Italy, where small boats
tried to breach the British blockade of Palestine. Meanwhile, Jews from Arab
countries began moving into Palestine overland. Despite British efforts to curb
immigration, during the 14 years of the Aliyah Bet, over 110,000 Jews secretly
entered Palestine. In an effort to win independence, Zionists now waged a
bitter guerrilla war against the British. The underground Jewish militias, the
Haganah, formed an alliance called the Jewish Resistance Movement with the
Etzel and Stern Gang to fight the British. In June 1946, following instances of
Jewish sabotage, the British launched Operation Agatha, arresting 2700 Jews,
including the leadership of the Jewish Agency, whose headquarters were raided.
Those arrested were held without trial. In Poland, the Kielce Pogrom (July
1946) led to a wave of Holocaust survivors escaping Europe towards Palestine.
Between 1945 and 1948, 100,000–120,000 Jews left Poland. Their departure was
largely organized by the Zionist activists in Poland such as Adolf Berman and
Icchak Cukierman under the umbrella of the semi-clandestine organization
"Berihah" ("Flight"). "Berihah" was also responsible for the organized
emigration of Jews from Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia
totaling 250,000 (including Poland) Holocaust survivors. The British responded
by imprisoning the growing numbers of Jews trying to illegally enter Palestine
by sea in Cyprus internment camps. Those held were mainly Holocaust survivors,
including large numbers of children and orphans. In response to Cypriot fears
that the Jews would never leave (since they lacked a state or documentation)
the British later allowed the refugees to enter Palestine at a rate of 750 per
month. The unified Jewish resistance movement broke up in July 1946, after
Etzel bombed the British Military Headquarters in the King David Hotel killing
92 people. In the days following the bombing, Tel Aviv was placed under curfew
and over 120,000 Jews, nearly 20% of the Jewish population of Palestine, were
questioned by the police. In the U.S., Congress criticized British handling of
the situation and delayed loans that were vital to British post-war recovery.
By 1947 the Labour Government was ready to refer the Palestine problem to the
United Nations. Partition plan. On May 15, 1947, the General Assembly of the
newly formed United Nations resolved (Resolution 106) that a committee, United
Nations Special Committee on Palestine (UNSCOP), be created "to prepare for
consideration at the next regular session of the Assembly a report on the
question of Palestine". This was done in response to a United Kingdom
government request that the General Assembly "make recommendations under
article 10 of the Charter, concerning the future government of Palestine". In
July 1947 the UNSCOP visited Palestine and met with Jewish and Zionist
delegations. The Arab Higher Committee boycotted the meetings. At this time,
there was further controversy when the British Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin
ordered an illegal immigrant ship, the Exodus 1947, to be sent back to Europe.
The migrants on the ship were forcibly removed by British troops at Hamburg
after a long period in prison ships. The principal non-Zionist Orthodox Jewish
(or Haredi) party, Agudat Israel, recommended to UNSCOP that a Jewish state be
set up after reaching a religious status quo agreement with Ben-Gurion
regarding the future Jewish state. The agreement would grant exemption to a
quota of yeshiva (religious seminary) students and to all orthodox women from
military service, would make the Sabbath the national weekend, promised Kosher
food in government institutions and would allow them to maintain a separate
education system. In the Report of the Committee dated September 3, 1947 to the
UN General Assembly, the majority of the Committee in Chapter VI proposed a
plan to replace the British Mandate with "an independent Arab State, an
independent Jewish State, and the City of Jerusalem" ..., the last to be under
"an International Trusteeship System". On November 29, 1947, the General
Assembly adopted a resolution recommending the adoption and implementation of a
"Plan of Partition with Economic Union" as Resolution 181 (II). The Plan
attached to the resolution was essentially that proposed by the majority of the
Committee in the Report of September 3, 1947. The plan was to replace the
British Mandate with "Independent Arab and Jewish States" and a "Special
International Regime for the City of Jerusalem administered by the United
Nations". The Plan of Partition in Part 1 A. Clause 2 provided that Britain
"should use its best endeavours to ensure than an area situated in the
territory of the Jewish State, including a seaport and hinterland adequate to
provide facilities for a substantial immigration, shall be evacuated at the
earliest possible date and in any event not later than 1 February 1948". Clause
3. provided that "Independent Arab and Jewish States and the Special
International Regime for the City of Jerusalem ... shall come into existence in
Palestine two months after the evacuation of the armed forces of the mandatory
Power has been completed but in any case not later than 1 October 1948."
Neither Britain nor the UN Security Council acted to implement the resolution
and Britain continued detaining Jews attempting to enter Palestine. Concerned
that partition would severely damage Anglo-Arab relations, Britain refused to
cooperate with the UN, denying the UN access to Palestine during the period
between the adoption of Resolution 181(II) and the termination of the British
Mandate. The British withdrawal was finally completed in May 1948. However,
Britain continued to hold Jews of "fighting age" and their families on Cyprus
until March 1949. Civil War in Palestine 1948. In the immediate aftermath of
the General Assembly's vote on the Partition plan, the explosions of joy among
the Jewish community were counterbalanced by the expression of discontent among
the Arab community. Soon after, violence broke out and became more and more
prevalent. Murders, reprisals, and counter-reprisals came fast on each other's
heels, resulting in dozens of victims killed on both sides in the process. The
impasse persisted as no force intervened to put a stop to the escalating cycles
of violence. By the end of March, there was a total of 2,000 dead and 4,000
wounded. These figures correspond to an average of more than 100 deaths and 200
casualties per week in a population of 2,000,000. From January onwards,
operations became increasingly militarized, with the intervention of a number
of Arab Liberation Army regiments inside Palestine, each active in a variety of
distinct sectors around the different coastal towns. They consolidated their
presence in Galilee and Samaria. Abd al-Qadir al-Husayni came from Egypt with
several hundred men of the Army of the Holy War. Having recruited a few
thousand volunteers, he organized the blockade of the 100,000 Jewish residents
of Jerusalem. To counter this, the Yishuv authorities tried to supply the city
with convoys of up to 100 armoured vehicles, but the operation became more and
more impractical as the number of casualties in the relief convoys surged. By
March, Al-Hussayni's tactic had paid off. Almost all of Haganah's armoured
vehicles had been destroyed, the blockade was in full operation, and hundreds
of Haganah members who had tried to bring supplies into the city were killed.
While the Jewish population had received strict orders requiring them to hold
their ground everywhere at all costs, the Arab population was more affected by
the general conditions of insecurity to which the country was exposed. Up to
100,000 Arabs, from the urban upper and middle classes in Haifa, Jaffa and
Jerusalem, or Jewish-dominated areas, evacuated abroad or to Arab centres
eastwards. This situation caused the US to withdraw their support for the
Partition plan, thus encouraging the Arab League to believe that the
Palestinian Arabs, reinforced by the Arab Liberation Army, could put an end to
the plan for partition. The British, on the other hand, decided on February 7,
1948, to support the annexation of the Arab part of Palestine by Transjordan.
Although a certain level of doubt took hold among Yishuv supporters, their
apparent defeats were due more to their wait-and-see policy than to weakness.
David Ben-Gurion reorganized Haganah and made conscription obligatory. Every
Jewish man and woman in the country had to receive military training. Thanks to
funds raised by Golda Meir from sympathisers in the United States, and Stalin's
decision to support the Zionist cause, the Jewish representatives of Palestine
were able to sign very important armament contracts in the East. Other Haganah
agents recuperated stockpiles from the Second World War, which helped improve
the army's equipment and logistics. Operation Balak allowed arms and other
equipment to be transported for the first time by the end of March. Ben-Gurion
invested Yigael Yadin with the responsibility to come up with a plan in
preparation for the announced intervention of the Arab states. The result of
his analysis was Plan Dalet, which was put in place from the start of April
onwards. The adoption of Plan Dalet marked the second stage of the war, in
which Haganah passed from the defensive to the offensive. Within the framework
of the establishment of Jewish territorial continuity foreseen by Plan Dalet,
the forces of Haganah, Palmach and Irgun intended to conquer mixed zones.
Palestinian Arab society was shaken. Tiberias, Haifa, Safed, Beisan, Jaffa and
Acre fell, resulting in the flight of more than 250,000 Palestinian Arabs. The
British had, at that time, essentially withdrawn their troops. The situation
pushed the leaders of the neighbouring Arab states to intervene, but their
preparation was not finalized, and they could not assemble sufficient forces to
turn the tide of the war. Most Palestinian Arab hopes lay with the Arab Legion
of Transjordan's monarch, King Abdullah I, but he had no intention of creating
a Palestinian Arab-run state since he hoped to annex as much of the territory
of the British Mandate for Palestine as he could. He was playing a double game
and was just as much in contact with the Jewish authorities as with the Arab
League. On May 14, 1948, on the day in which the British Mandate over Palestine
expired, the Jewish People's Council gathered at the Tel Aviv Museum and
approved a proclamation declaring the establishment of a Jewish state in Eretz
Israel, to be known as the State of Israel. The 1948 Palestine war entered its
second phase with the intervention of the Arab state armies and the beginning
of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. State of Israel (1948-present). On May 14,
1948, the last British forces left through Haifa. The next day, in a public
ceremony in Tel-Aviv, Ben-Gurion read out the Israeli Declaration of
Independence, naming the new country, Israel. Both superpower leaders, U.S.
President Harry S. Truman (de facto) and Soviet leader Joseph Stalin,
immediately recognized the new state. Israel's War of Independence, or First
Arab–Israeli War (1948–49). The Arab League members Egypt, Transjordan,
Syria, Lebanon and Iraq refused to accept the UN partition plan and proclaimed
the right of self-determination for the Arabs across the whole of Palestine.
The Arab states marched their forces into what had, until the previous day,
been the British Mandate for Palestine. The new state of Israel had an
organized and efficient army, the Haganah, under the command of Israel Galili.
The Arab forces were of varying quality, but Arab states had heavy military
equipment at their disposal. The invading Arab armies were initially on the
offensive but the Israelis soon recovered from the initial shock of being
invaded on all sides. On May 29, 1948, the British initiated United Nations
Security Council Resolution 50 and declared an arms embargo on the region.
Czechoslovakia violated the resolution supplying the Jewish state with critical
military hardware to match the (mainly British) heavy equipment and planes
already owned by the invading Arab states. On June 11, a month-long UN truce
was put into effect. Following the announcement of independence, the Haganah
became the Israel Defense Forces (IDF). The Palmach, Etzel and Lehi were
required to cease independent operations and join the IDF. During the
ceasefire, Etzel attempted to bring in a private arms shipment aboard a ship
called "Altalena". When they refused to hand the arms to the government, Ben-
Gurion ordered that the ship be sunk. Several Etzel members were killed in the
fighting. Large numbers of Jewish immigrants, many of them World War II
veterans and Holocaust survivors now began arriving in the new state of Israel,
and many joined the IDF. After an initial loss of territory by the Jewish state
and occupation of Arab Palestine by the Arab armies, from July the tide
gradually turned in the Israelis favour and they pushed the Arab armies out and
occupying some of the territory which had been allocated to the Palestinian
Arabs. At the end of November, tenuous local ceasefires were arranged between
the Israelis, Syrians and Lebanese. On December 1, King Abdullah announced the
union of Transjordan with Arab Palestine west of the Jordan, the new state name
being the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. He adopted the title "King of Arab
Palestine", much to the disgust of most other Arab states. Armistice Agreements
(March–July 1949). Peace talks were held on Rhodes, under the chairmanship of
UN mediator Dr. Ralph Bunche. Israel signed armistices with Egypt (February
24), Lebanon (March 23), Jordan (April 3) and Syria (July 20). No actual peace
agreements were signed. With permanent ceasefire coming into effect, Israel's
new borders, later known as the Green Line, were established. The IDF had
overrun Galilee and the Negev. The Syrians remained in control of a strip of
territory along the Sea of Galilee originally allocated to the Jewish state,
the Lebanese occupied a tiny area at Rosh Hanikra and the Egyptians retained
the Gaza strip and still had some forces surrounded inside Israeli territory.
Jordanian forces remained in occupation of the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
exactly where the British had stationed them before the war. Jordan annexed the
areas it occupied while Egypt kept Gaza as an occupied zone. Following the
ceasefire declaration, Britain released over 2,000 Jewish detainees it was
still holding in Cyprus and recognized the state of Israel. On May 11, 1949,
Israel was admitted as a member of the United Nations. Out of an Israeli
population of 650,000, some 6,000 men and women were killed in the fighting,
including 4,000 soldiers in the IDF. According to United Nations figures,
726,000 Palestinians had fled or were evicted by the Israelis between 1947 and
1949. Except in Jordan, the Palestinian refugees were settled in large refugee
camps in poor, overcrowded conditions. In December 1949, the UN (in response to
a British proposal) established an agency (UNRWA) to provide aid to the
Palestinian refugees. First years—Ben-Gurion I (1948–1954). A 120-seat
parliament, the Knesset, met first in Tel Aviv then moved to Jerusalem after
the 1949 ceasefire. In January 1949, Israel held its first elections. The
Socialist-Zionist parties Mapai and Mapam won the most seats (46 and 19
respectively), but not an outright majority. Mapai's leader, David Ben-Gurion
was appointed Prime Minister. The Knesset elected Chaim Weizmann as the first
(largely ceremonial) President of Israel. Hebrew and Arabic were made the
official languages of the new state. All governments have been coalitions—no
party has ever won a majority in the Knesset. From 1948 until 1977 all
governments were led by Mapai and the Alignment, predecessors of the Labour
Party. In these years Labour Zionists, initially led by David Ben-Gurion,
dominated Israeli politics and the economy was run on primarily socialist
lines. Within three years (1948 to 1951), immigration doubled the Jewish
population of Israel and left an indelible imprint on Israeli society. Overall,
700,000 Jews settled in Israel during this period. Some 300,000 arrived from
Asian and North African nations as part of the Jewish exodus from Arab and
Muslim countries. Among them, the largest group (over 100,000) was from Iraq.
The remaining came mostly from Europe, including 136,000 from the 250,000
displaced Jews of World War II living in refugee camps and urban centers in
Germany, Austria, and Italy, and more than 270,000 coming from Eastern Europe,
mainly Romania and Poland (over 100,000 each). In 1950 the Knesset passed the
Law of Return, which granted to all Jews and those of Jewish ancestry, and
their spouses, the right to settle in Israel and gain citizenship. That year,
50,000 Yemenite Jews (99%) were secretly flown to Israel. In 1951 Iraqi Jews
were granted temporary permission to leave the country and 120,000 (over 90%)
opted to move to Israel. Jews also fled from Lebanon, Syria and Egypt. By the
late sixties, about 500,000 Jews had left Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia. Over
the course of twenty years, some 850,000 Jews from Arab countries (almost the
entire Jewish population of the Arab lands) relocated to Israel. The land and
property left behind the Jews (much of it in Arab city centres) is still a
matter of some dispute. Today there are about 9,000 Jews living in Arab states,
of whom 75% live in Morocco and 15% in Tunisia. Between 1948 and 1958, the
population of Israel rose from 800,000 to two million. During this period,
food, clothes and furniture had to be rationed in what became known as the
Austerity Period ("Tkufat haTsena"). Immigrants were mostly refugees with no
money or possessions and many were housed in temporary camps known as
ma'abarot. By 1952, over 200,000 immigrants were living in tents or
prefabricated shacks built by the government. Israel received financial aid
from private donations from outside the country (mainly the United States). The
pressure on the new state's finances led Ben-Gurion to sign a reparations
agreement with West Germany. During the Knesset debate some 5,000 demonstrators
gathered and riot police had to cordon the building. Israel received several
billion marks and in return agreed to open diplomatic relations with Germany.
At the end of 1953, Ben-Gurion retired to Kibbutz Sde Boker in the Negev. In
1949, education was made free and compulsory for all citizens until the age of
14. The state now funded the party-affiliated Zionist education system and a
new body created by the Haredi Agudat Israel party. A separate body was created
to provide education for the remaining Palestinian-Arab population. The major
political parties now competed for immigrants to join their education systems.
Fearing that the immigrants lacked sufficient "Zionist motivation", the
government banned the existing educational bodies from the transit camps and
tried to mandate a unitary secular socialist education. Education came under
the control of "camp managers" who also had to provide work, food and housing
for the immigrants. There were attempts to force orthodox Yemenite children to
adopt a secular life style by teachers, including many instances of Yemenite
children having their side-curls cut by teachers. This treatment of Orthodox
children led to the first Israeli public enquiry (the Fromkin Inquiry). The
crisis led to the collapse of the coalition and an election in 1951, with
little change in the results from the previous election. In 1953 the party-
affiliated education system was scrapped. The General Zionist and Socialist
Zionist education systems were united to become the secular state education
system while the Mizrahi became the State Modern Orthodox system. Agudat Israel
were allowed to maintain their existing school system. In its early years
Israel sought to maintain a non-aligned position between the super-powers.
However, in 1952, an antisemitic public trial was staged in Moscow in which a
group of Jewish doctors were accused of trying to poison Stalin (the Doctors'
plot), followed by a similar trial in Czechoslovakia (Slánský trial). This,
and the failure of Israel to be included in the Bandung Conference (of non-
aligned states), effectively ended Israel's pursuit of non-alignment. On May
19, 1950, Egypt announced that the Suez Canal was closed to Israeli ships and
commerce. In 1952 a military coup in Egypt brought Abdel Nasser to power. The
United States pursued close relations with the new Arab states, particularly
the Nasser-led Egyptian Free Officers Movement and Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia.
Israel's solution to diplomatic isolation was to establish good relations with
newly independent states in Africa and with France, which was engaged in the
Algerian War. Sharett (1954–55). In the January 1955 elections Mapai won 40
seats and the Labour Party 10, Moshe Sharett became prime minister of Israel at
the head of a left-wing coalition. Archaeologist and General Yigael Yadin,
purchased the Dead Sea Scrolls on behalf of the State of Israel. The entire
first batch to be discovered were now owned by Israel and housed in the Shrine
of the Book at the Israel Museum. In 1954 the Uzi submachine gun first entered
use by the Israel Defense Forces. Between 1953 and 1956, there were
intermittent clashes along all of Israel's borders as Arab terrorism and
breaches of the ceasefire resulted in Israeli counter-raids. Palestinian
fedayeen attacks, often organized and sponsored by the Egyptians, were made
from (Egyptian occupied) Gaza. Fedayeen attacks led to a growing cycle of
violence as Israel launched reprisal attacks against Gaza. In 1955 the Egyptian
government began recruiting former Nazi rocket scientists for a missile
program. The two modern-orthodox (and religious-zionist) parties Mizrachi and
Hapoel HaMizrachi joined to form the National Religious Party. The party was a
component of every Israeli coalition until 1992, usually running the Ministry
of Education. Sharett's government was brought down by the Lavon Affair, a
crude plan to disrupt U.S.–Egyptian relations, involving Israeli agents
planting bombs at American sites in Egypt. The plan failed when eleven agents
were arrested. Defense Minister Lavon was blamed despite his denial of
responsibility. The Lavon affair led to Sharett's resignation and Ben-Gurion
returned to the post of prime minister. Ben-Gurion II (1956–63). In 1956, the
increasingly pro-Soviet President Nasser of Egypt, announced the
nationalization of the (French and British owned) Suez Canal, which was Egypt's
main source of foreign currency. Egypt also blockaded the Gulf of Aqaba
preventing Israeli access to the Red Sea. Israel made a secret agreement with
the French at Sèvres to coordinate military operations against Egypt. Britain
and France had already begun secret preparations for military action. It has
been alleged that the French also agreed to build a nuclear plant for the
Israelis and that by 1968 this was able to produce nuclear weapons. Britain and
France arranged for Israel to give them a pretext for seizing the Suez Canal.
Israel was to attack Egypt, and Britain and France would then call on both
sides to withdraw. When, as expected, the Egyptians refused, Anglo-French
forces would invade to take control the Canal. Israeli forces, commanded by
General Moshe Dayan, attacked Egypt on October 29, 1956. On October 30, Britain
and France made their pre-arranged call for both sides to stop fighting and
withdraw from the Canal area and for them to be allowed to take up positions at
key points on the Canal. Egypt refused and the allies commenced air strikes on
October 31 aimed at neutralizing the Egyptian air force. By November 5 the
Israelis had overrun the Sinai. The Anglo-French invasion began that day. There
was uproar in the UN, with the United States and USSR for once in agreement in
denouncing the actions of Israel, Britain and France. A demand for a ceasefire
was reluctantly accepted on November 7. At Egypt's request, the UN sent an
Emergency Force (UNEF), consisting of 6,000 peacekeeping troops from 10 nations
to supervise the ceasefire. From November 15, the UN troops marked out a zone
across the Sinai to separate the Israeli and Egyptian forces. Upon receiving
U.S. guarantees of Israeli access to the Suez Canal, freedom of access out of
the Gulf of Aqaba and Egyptian action to stop Palestinian raids from Gaza, the
Israelis withdrew to the Negev. In practice the Suez Canal remained closed to
Israeli shipping. The conflict signalled the end of West-European dominance in
the Middle East. Rudolph Kastner, a minor political functionary, was accused of
collaborating with the Nazis and sued his accuser. Kastner lost the trial and
was assassinated two years later. In 1958 the Supreme Court exonerated him. In
October 1957 a deranged man threw a hand grenade inside the Knesset wounding
Ben-Gurion. Mapai was once again victorious in the 1959 elections, increasing
its number of seats to 47, Labour had 7. Ben-Gurion remained Prime Minister. In
1959, there were renewed skirmishes along Israel's borders that continued
throughout the early 1960s. The Arab League continued to maintain an economic
boycott and there was a dispute over water rights in the River Jordan basin.
With Soviet backing, the Arab states, particularly Egypt, were continuing to
build up their forces. Israel's main military hardware supplier was France. In
May 1960 the Mossad located Adolf Eichmann, one of the chief administrators of
the Nazi Holocaust, in Argentina and kidnapped him to Israel. In 1961 he was
put on trial and after several months found guilty and sentenced to death. He
was hanged in 1962 and is the only person ever sentenced to death by an Israeli
court. Testimonies by Holocaust survivors at the trial and the extensive
publicity that surrounded it has led the trial to be considered a turning point
in public awareness of the Holocaust. In 1961 a Herut no-confidence motion over
the Lavon affair led to Ben-Gurion's resignation. Ben-Gurion declared that he
would only accept office if Lavon was fired from the position of the head of
Histadrut, Israel's labour union organization (due to his role in the Lavon
Affair). His demands were accepted and Mapai won the 1961 election (42 seats
keeping Ben-Gurion as PM) with a slight reduction in its share of the seats.
Menachem Begin's Herut party and the Liberals came next with 17 seats each. In
1962 the Mossad began assassinating German rocket scientists working in Egypt
after one of them reported the missile program was designed to carry chemical
warheads. This action was condemned by Ben-Gurion and led to the Mossad
director, Isser Harel's resignation. In 1963 Ben-Gurion quit again over the
Lavon scandal. His attempts to make his party Mapai support him over the issue
failed. Levi Eshkol became leader of Mapai and the new prime minister. Eshkol
(1963–69). In 1963 Yigael Yadin began excavating Masada. In 1964, Egypt,
Jordan and Syria developed a unified military command. Israel completed work on
a national water carrier, a huge engineering project designed to transfer
Israel's allocation of the Jordan river's waters towards the south of the
country in realization of Ben-Gurion's dream of mass Jewish settlement of the
Negev desert. The Arabs responded by trying to divert the headwaters of the
Jordan and this led to growing conflict between Israel and Syria. In 1964,
Israeli Rabbinical authorities accepted that the Bene Israel of India were
indeed Jewish and most of the remaining Indian Jews migrated to Israel. The
2,000-strong Jewish community of Cochin had already migrated in 1954. Ben-
Gurion quit Mapai to form a new party Rafi, he was joined by Shimon Peres and
Moshe Dayan. Begin's Herut party joined with the Liberals to form Gahal. Mapai
and Labour united for the 1965 elections, winning 45 seats and maintaining Levi
Eshkol as Prime Minister. Ben-Gurion's Rafi party received 10 seats, Gahal got
26 seats becoming the second largest party. Until 1966, Israel's principal arms
supplier was France, however in 1966, following the withdrawal from Algeria,
announced France would cease supplying Israel with arms (and refused to refund
money paid for 50 warplanes). On February 5, 1966, the United States announced
that it was taking over the former French and West German obligations, to
maintain military "stabilization" in the Middle East. Included in the military
hardware would be over 200 M48 tanks. In May of that year the U.S. also agreed
to provide A-4 Skyhawk tactical aircraft to Israel. In 1966 security
restrictions placed on Palestinians were eased and efforts made to integrate
them into Israeli life. Black and white TV broadcasts began. On May 15, 1967,
the first public performance of Naomi Shemer's classic song "Jerusalem of Gold"
took place and over the next few weeks it dominated the Israeli airwaves. Two
days later Syria, Egypt and Jordan amassed troops along the Israeli borders and
Egypt closed the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping. Nasser demanded that the
UNEF leave Sinai, threatening escalation to a full war. Egyptian radio
broadcasts talked of a coming genocide. Israel responded by calling up its
civilian reserves, bringing much of the Israeli economy to a halt. The Israelis
set up a national unity coalition, including for the first time Menachem
Begin's party, Herut in a coalition. During a national radio broadcast, Prime
Minister Levi Eshkol stammered, causing widespread fear in Israel. To calm
public concern Moshe Dayan (Chief of Staff during the Sinai war) was appointed
defence minister. On the morning before Dayan was sworn in, June 5, 1967, the
Israeli air force launched pre-emptive attacks destroying first the Egyptian
air force and then later the same day destroying the air forces of Jordan and
Syria. Israel then defeated (almost successively) Egypt, Jordan and Syria. By
June 11 the Arab forces were routed and all parties had accepted the cease-fire
called for by UN Security Council Resolutions 235 and 236. Israel gained
control of the Sinai Peninsula, the Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights, and the
formerly Jordanian-controlled West Bank of the Jordan River. East Jerusalem was
immediately arguably annexed by Israel and its population granted Israeli
citizenship. Other areas occupied remained under military rule (Israeli civil
law did not apply to them) pending a final settlement. The Golan was also
annexed in 1981. On November 22, 1967, the Security Council adopted Resolution
242, the "land for peace" formula, which called for the establishment of a just
and lasting peace based on Israeli withdrawal from territories occupied in 1967
in return for the end of all states of belligerency, respect for the
sovereignty of all states in the area, and the right to live in peace within
secure, recognized boundaries. The resolution was accepted by both sides,
though with different interpretations, and has been the basis of all subsequent
peace negotiations. For the first time since the end of the British Mandate,
Jews could visit the Old City of Jerusalem and pray at the Western Wall (the
holiest site in modern Judaism), to which they had been denied access by the
Jordanians in contravention of the 1949 Armistice agreement. The four-meter-
wide public alley beside the Wall was expanded into a massive plaza and
worshippers were allowed to sit, or use other furniture, for the first time in
centuries. In Hebron, Jews gained access to the Cave of the Patriarchs (the
second most holy site in Judaism) for the first time since the 14th century
(previously Jews were only allowed to pray at the entrance). A third Jewish
holy site, Rachel's Tomb, in Bethlehem, also became accessible. Sinai oil
fields made Israel self-sufficient in energy. After 1967 the U.S. began
supplying Israel with aircraft and the Soviet block (except Romania) broke off
relations with Israel. Antisemitic purges led to the final migration of the
last Polish Jews to Israel. In 1968 Moshe Levinger led a group of Religious
Zionists who created the first Jewish settlement, a town near Hebron called
Kiryat Arba. There were no other religious settlements until after 1974. Ben-
Gurion's Rafi party merged with the Labour-Mapai alliance. Ben-Gurion remained
outside as an independent. In 1968, compulsory education was extended until the
age of 16 for all citizens (it had been 14) and the government embarked on an
extensive program of integration in education. In the major cities children
from mainly Sephardi/Mizrahi neighbourhoods were bused to newly established
middle schools in better areas. The system remained in place until after 2000.
In March 1968, Israeli forces attacked the Palestinian militia, Fatah, at its
base in the Jordanian town of Karameh. The attack was in response to land mines
placed on Israeli roads. The Israelis retreated after destroying the camp.
Despite heavy casualties, Palestinians claimed victory, while Fatah and the PLO
(of which it formed part) became famous across the Arab world. In early 1969,
fighting broke out between Egypt and Israel along the Suez Canal. In
retaliation for repeated Egyptian shelling of Israeli positions along the Suez
Canal, Israeli planes made deep strikes into Egypt in the 1969–1970 "War of
Attrition". In late 1969, Levi Eshkol died in office of a heart attack and was
succeeded by Golda Meir. Meir (1969–74). In the 1969 election, Golda Meir
became Prime Minister with the largest percentage of the vote ever won by an
Israeli party, winning 56 of the 120 seats in the Knesset. Meir was the first
female prime minister of Israel and is the only woman to have headed a Middle
Eastern state in modern times. Gahal remained on 26 seats, and was the second
largest party. In December 1969, Israeli naval commandos took five missile
boats during the night from Cherbourg Harbour in France. Israel had paid for
the boats but the French had refused to supply them. In July 1970 the Israelis
shot down five Soviet fighters that were aiding the Egyptians in the course of
the War of Attrition. Following this the U.S. worked to calm the situation and
in August 1970 a cease fire was agreed. In September 1970 King Hussein of
Jordan drove the Palestine Liberation Organization out of his country. On
September 18, 1970 Syrian tanks invaded Jordan, intending to aid the PLO. At
the request of the U.S., Israel moved troops to the border and threatened
Syria, causing the Syrians to withdraw. The center of PLO activity then shifted
to Lebanon, where the 1969 Cairo agreement gave the Palestinians autonomy
within the south of the country. The area controlled by the PLO became known by
the international press and locals as "Fatahland" and contributed to the
1975–1990 Lebanese Civil War. The event also led to Hafez al-Assad taking
power in Syria. Egyptian President Nasser died immediately after and was
succeeded by Anwar Sadat. Increased Soviet antisemitism and enthusiasm
generated by the 1967 victory led to a wave of Jews applying to emigrate to
Israel. Those who left could only take two suitcases. Most Jews were refused
exit visas and persecuted by the authorities. Some were arrested and sent to
Gulag camps, becoming known as Prisoners of Zion. During 1971, violent
demonstrations by the Israeli Black Panthers, made the Israeli public aware of
resentment among Mizrahi Jews at ongoing discrimination and social gaps. In
1972 the U.S. Jewish Mafia leader, Meyer Lansky, who had taken refuge in
Israel, was deported to the United States. At the Munich Olympics, 11 members
of the Israeli team were taken hostage by Palestinian terrorists. A botched
German rescue attempt led to the death of all 11 Israeli athletes and coaches.
Five of the terrorists were shot and three survived unharmed. The three
surviving Palestinians were released without charge by the German authorities a
month later. The Israeli government responded with an assassination campaign
against the organizers and a raid on the PLO headquarters in Lebanon (led by
Ehud Barak). In 1972 the new Egyptian President Anwar Sadat expelled the Soviet
advisers from Egypt. This and frequent invasion exercises by Egypt and Syria
led to Israeli complacency about the threat from these countries. In addition
the desire not to be held responsible for initiating conflict and an election
campaign highlighting security, led to an Israeli failure to mobilize, despite
receiving warnings of an impending attack. The Yom Kippur War (also known as
the October War) began on October 6, 1973 (the Jewish Day of Atonement), the
holiest day in the Jewish calendar and a day when adult Jews are required to
fast. The Syrian and Egyptian armies launched a well-planned surprise attack
against the unprepared Israeli Defense Forces. For the first few days there was
a great deal of uncertainty about Israel's capacity to repel the invaders. Both
the Soviets and the Americans (at the orders of Richard Nixon) rushed arms to
their allies. The Syrians were repulsed by the tiny remnant of the Israeli tank
force on the Golan and, although the Egyptians captured a strip of territory in
Sinai, Israeli forces crossed the Suez Canal, trapping the Egyptian Third Army
in Sinai and were 100 kilometres from Cairo. The war cost over 2,000 dead,
resulted in a heavy arms bill (for both sides) and made Israelis more aware of
their vulnerability. It also led to heightened superpower tension. Following
the war, both Israelis and Egyptians showed greater willingness to negotiate.
On January 18, 1974, extensive diplomacy by U.S. Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger led to a Disengagement of Forces agreement with the Egyptian
government and on May 31 with the Syrian government. The war led the Saudi
government to initiate the 1973 oil crisis, an oil embargo in conjunction with
OPEC, against countries trading with Israel. Severe shortages led to massive
increases in the price of oil, and as a result, many countries broke off
relations with Israel or downgraded relations and Israel was banned from
participation in the Asian Games and other Asian sporting events. Prior to the
December 1973 elections, Gahal and a number of right-wing parties united to
form the Likud (led by Begin). In the December 1973 elections, Labour won 51
seats, leaving Golda Meir as Prime Minister. The Likud won 39 seats. In May
1974, Palestinians attacked a school in Ma'alot, holding 102 children hostage.
Twenty-two children were killed. In November 1974 the PLO was granted observer
status at the UN and Yasser Arafat addressed the General Assembly. Later that
year the Agranat Commission, appointed to assess responsibility for Israel's
lack of preparedness for the war, exonerated the government of responsibility
and held the Chief of Staff and head of military intelligence responsible.
Despite the report, public anger at the Government led to Golda Meir's
resignation. Rabin I (1974–77). Following Meir's resignation, Yitzhak Rabin
(Chief of Staff during the Six Day War) became prime minister. Modern Orthodox
Jews (Religious Zionist followers of the teachings of Rabbi Kook), formed the
Gush Emunim movement and began an organized drive to settle the West Bank and
Gaza Strip. In November 1975 the United Nations General Assembly, under the
guidance of Austrian Secretary General Kurt Waldheim, adopted Resolution 3379,
which asserted Zionism to be a form of racism. The General Assembly rescinded
this resolution in December 1991 with Resolution 46/86. In March 1976 there was
a massive strike by Israeli-Arabs in protest at a government plan to
expropriate land in the Galilee. In July 1976, an Air France plane carrying 260
people was hijacked by Palestinian and German terrorists and flown to Uganda,
then ruled by Idi Amin Dada. There, the Germans separated the Jewish passengers
from the non-Jewish passengers, releasing the non-Jews. The hijackers
threatened to kill the remaining, 100-odd Jewish passengers (and the French
crew who had refused to leave). Despite the distances involved, Rabin ordered a
daring rescue operation in which the kidnapped Jews were freed. UN Secretary
General Waldheim described the raid as "a serious violation of the national
sovereignty of a United Nations member state" (meaning Uganda). Waldheim was a
former Nazi and suspected war criminal, with a record of offending Jewish
sensibilities. In 1976, the ongoing Lebanese Civil War led Israel to allow
South Lebanese to cross the border and work in Israel. In January 1977, French
authorities arrested Abu Daoud, the planner of the Munich massacre, releasing
him a few days later. In March 1977 Anatoly Sharansky, a prominent Refusenik
and spokesman for the Moscow Helsinki Group, was sentenced to 13 years' hard
labour. Rabin resigned on April 1977 after it emerged that his wife maintained
a dollar account in the United States (illegal at the time), which had been
opened while Rabin was Israeli ambassador. The incident became known as the
Dollar Account affair. Shimon Peres informally replaced him as prime minister,
leading the Alignment in the subsequent elections. Begin (1977–82). In a
surprise result, the Likud led by Menachem Begin won 43 seats in the 1977
elections (Labour got 32 seats). This was the first time in Israeli history
that the government was not led by the left. A key reason for the victory was
anger among Mizrahi Jews at discrimination, which was to play an important role
in Israeli politics for many years. Talented small town Mizrahi social
activists, unable to advance in the Labour party, were readily embraced by
Begin. Moroccan-born David Levy and Iranian-born Moshe Katzav were part of a
group who won Mizrahi support for Begin. Many Labour voters voted for the
Democratic Movement for Change (15 seats) in protest at high-profile corruption
cases. The party joined in coalition with Begin and disappeared at the next
election. In addition to starting a process of healing the Mizrahi–Ashkenazi
divide, Begin's government included Ultra-Orthodox Jews and was instrumental in
healing the Zionist–Ultra-Orthodox rift, however it did so at the cost of
expanding the exemption from military service to all Haredi Jewish students of
military age. This led to creation of a huge class of unemployed Haredi Jews
(the exemption was conditional on attendance of a religious seminary, so they
kept studying until they were too old for military service). By remaining
students, they were a massive burden on the state, while also failing to
participate in the military burden. Begin's liberalization of the economy led
to hyper-inflation (around 150% inflation) but enabled Israel to begin
receiving U.S. financial aid. Begin actively supported Gush Emunim's efforts to
settle the West Bank and Jewish settlements in the occupied territories
received government support, thus laying the grounds for intense conflict with
the Palestinian population of the occupied territories. In November 1977,
Egyptian President Anwar Sadat broke 30 years of hostility with Israel by
visiting Jerusalem at the invitation of Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin.
Sadat's two-day visit included a speech before the Knesset, and was a turning
point in the history of the conflict. The Egyptian leader created a new
psychological climate in the Middle East in which peace between Israel and its
Arab neighbours seemed possible. Sadat recognized Israel's right to exist and
established the basis for direct negotiations between Egypt and Israel.
Following Sadat's visit, 350 Yom Kippur War veterans organized the Peace Now
movement to encourage Israeli governments to make peace with the Arabs. In
March 1978, eleven armed Lebanese Palestinians reached Israel in boats and
hijacked a bus carrying families on a day outing, killing 38 people, including
13 children. The attackers opposed the Egyptian–Israeli peace process. Three
days later, Israeli forces crossed into Lebanon beginning Operation Litani.
After passage of United Nations Security Council Resolution 425, calling for
Israeli withdrawal and the creation of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) peace-keeping force, Israel withdrew its troops. In September
1978, U.S. President Jimmy Carter invited President Sadat and Prime Minister
Begin to meet with him at Camp David, and on September 11 they agreed on a
framework for peace between Israel and Egypt and a comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. It set out broad principles to guide negotiations between Israel
and the Arab states. It also established guidelines for a West Bank–Gaza
transitional regime of full autonomy for the Palestinians residing in these
territories and for a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. The treaty was
signed on March 26, 1979, by Begin and Sadat, with President Carter signing as
witness. Under the treaty, Israel returned the Sinai peninsula to Egypt in
April 1982. The final piece of territory to be repatriated was Taba, adjacent
to Eilat, returned in 1989. The Arab League reacted to the peace treaty by
suspending Egypt from the organization and moving its headquarters from Cairo
to Tunis. Sadat was assassinated in 1981 by Islamic fundamentalist members of
the Egyptian army who opposed peace with Israel. Following the agreement Israel
and Egypt became the two largest recipients of U.S. military and financial aid
(Iraq and Afghanistan have now overtaken them). In December 1978 the Israeli
Merkava battle tank entered use with the IDF. In 1979, over 40,000 Iranian Jews
migrated to Israel, escaping the Islamic Revolution there. On June 30, 1981,
the Israeli air force destroyed the Osirak nuclear reactor that France was
building for Iraq. Three weeks later, Begin won yet again, in the 1981
elections (48 seats Likud, 47 Labour). Ariel Sharon was made defence minister.
The new government annexed the Golan Heights and banned the national airline
from flying on the Sabbath. In the decades following the 1948 war, Israel's
border with Lebanon was quiet compared to its borders with other neighbours.
But the 1969 Cairo agreement gave the PLO a free hand to attack Israel from
South Lebanon. The area was governed by the PLO independently of the Lebanese
Government and became known as "Fatahland" (Fatah was the largest faction in
the PLO). Palestinian irregulars constantly shelled the Israeli north,
especially the town of Kiryat Shmona, which was a Likud stronghold inhabited
primarily by Jews who had fled the Arab world. Lack of control over Palestinian
areas was an important factor in causing civil war in Lebanon. In June 1982,
the attempted assassination of Shlomo Argov, the ambassador to Britain, was
used as a pretext for an Israeli invasion aiming to drive the PLO out of the
southern half of Lebanon. Sharon agreed with Chief of Staff Raphael Eitan to
expand the invasion deep into Lebanon even though the cabinet had only
authorized a 40 kilometre deep invasion. The invasion became known as the 1982
Lebanon War and the Israeli army occupied Beirut, the only time an Arab capital
has been occupied by Israel. Some of the Shia and Christian population of South
Lebanon welcomed the Israelis, as PLO forces had maltreated them, but Lebanese
resentment of Israeli occupation grew over time and the Shia became gradually
radicalized under Iranian guidance. Constant casualties among Israeli soldiers
and Lebanese civilians led to growing opposition to the war in Israel. In
August 1982, the PLO withdrew its forces from Lebanon (moving to Tunisia).
Israel helped engineer the election of a new Lebanese president, Bashir
Gemayel, who agreed to recognize Israel and sign a peace treaty. Gemayal was
assassinated before an agreement could be signed, and one day later Phalangist
Christian forces led by Elie Hobeika entered two Palestinian refugee camps and
massacred the occupants. The massacres led to the biggest demonstration ever in
Israel against the war, with as many as 400,000 people (almost 10% of the
population) gathering in Tel Aviv. In 1983, an Israeli public inquiry found
that Israel's defence minister, Sharon, was indirectly but personally
responsible for the massacres. It also recommended that he never again be
allowed to hold the post (it did not forbid him from being Prime Minister). In
1983, the May 17 Agreement was signed between Israel and Lebanon, paving the
way for an Israeli withdrawal from Lebanese territory through a few stages.
Israel continued to operate against the PLO until its eventual departure in
1985, and kept a small force stationed in Southern Lebanon in support of the
South Lebanon Army until May 2000. Shamir (1983–91). In September 1983, Begin
resigned and was succeeded by Yitzhak Shamir as prime minister. The 1984
election was inconclusive and led to a power sharing agreement between Shimon
Peres of the Alignment (44 seats) and Shamir of Likud (41 seats). Peres was
prime minister from 1984 to 1986 and Shamir from 1986 to 1988. In 1984,
continual discrimination against Sephardi Ultra-Orthodox Jews by the Ashkenazi
Ultra-Orthodox establishment led political activist Aryeh Deri to leave the
Agudat Israel party and join former chief Rabbi Ovadia Yosef in forming Shas, a
new party aimed at the non-Ashkenazi Ultra-Orthodox vote. The party won 4 seats
in the first election it contested and over the next twenty years was the third
largest party in the Knesset. Shas established a nationwide network of free
Sephardi orthodox schools. In 1984, during a severe famine in Ethiopia, 8,000
Ethiopian Jews were secretly transported to Israel. In 1986 Natan Sharansky, a
famous Russian human rights activist and Zionist refusenik (denied an exit
visa) was released from the Gulag in return for two Soviet spies. In June 1985,
Israel withdrew most of its troops from Lebanon, leaving a residual Israeli
force and an Israeli-supported militia in southern Lebanon as a "security zone"
and buffer against attacks on its northern territory. By July 1985 Israel's
inflation, buttressed by complex index linking of salaries, had reached 480%
per annum and was the highest in the world. Peres introduced emergency control
of prices and cut government expenditure successfully bringing inflation under
control. The currency (known as the Israeli lira until 1980) was replaced and
renamed the Israeli new shekel. In October 1985 Israel responded to a
Palestinian terrorist attack in Cyprus by bombing the PLO headquarters in
Tunis. In August 1987, the Israeli government cancelled the IAI Lavi project,
an attempt to develop an independent Israeli fighter aircraft. The Israelis
found themselves unable to sustain the huge development costs and faced U.S.
opposition to a project that threatened U.S. influence in Israel and U.S.
global military ascendancy. In September 1988, Israel launched an Ofeq
reconsaissance satellite into orbit, using a Shavit rocket, thus becoming one
of only eight countries possessing a capacity to independently launch
satellites into space (two more have since developed this ability). Growing
Israeli settlement and continuing occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip,
led to the first Palestinian Intifada (uprising) in 1987, which lasted until
the Madrid Conference of 1991, despite Israeli attempts to suppress it. Human
rights abuses by Israeli troops led a group of Israelis to form B'Tselem, an
organization devoted to improving awareness and compliance with human rights
requirements in Israel. The Alignment and Likud remained neck and neck in the
1988 elections (39:40 seats). Shamir successfully formed a national unity
coalition with the Labour Alignment. In March 1990, Alignment leader Shimon
Peres engineered a defeat of the government in a non-confidence vote and then
tried to form a new government. He failed and Shamir became prime minister at
the head of a right-wing coalition. In 1990, the Soviet Union finally permitted
free emigration of Soviet Jews to Israel. Prior to this, Jews trying to leave
the USSR faced persecution; those who succeeded arrived as refugees. Over the
next few years some one million Soviet citizens migrated to Israel. Although
there was concern that some of the new immigrants had only a very tenuous
connection to Judaism, and many were accompanied by non-Jewish relatives, this
massive wave of migration slowly transformed Israel, bringing large numbers of
highly educated Soviet Jews and creating a powerful Russian culture in Israel.
In August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait, triggering the Gulf War between Iraq and a
large allied force, led by the United States. Iraq attacked Israel with 39 Scud
missiles. Israel did not retaliate. Israel provided gas masks for both the
Palestinian population and Israeli citizens. In May 1991, during a 36 hour
period, 15,000 Beta Israel (Ethiopian Jews) were secretly airlifted to Israel.
The coalition's victory in the Gulf War opened new possibilities for regional
peace, and in October 1991 the U.S. President, George H.W. Bush and Soviet
Union Premier, Mikhail Gorbachev, jointly convened a historic meeting in Madrid
of Israeli, Lebanese, Jordanian, Syrian, and Palestinian leaders. Shamir
opposed the idea but agreed in return for loan guarantees to help with
absorption of immigrants from the former Soviet Union. His participation in the
conference led to the collapse of his (right-wing) coalition. Rabin II
(1992–95). In the 1992 elections, the Labour Party, led by Yitzhak Rabin, won
a significant victory (44 seats) promising to pursue peace while promoting
Rabin as a "tough general" and pledging not to deal with the PLO in any way.
The pro-peace Zionist party Meretz won 12 seats and the Arab and communist
parties a further 5 meaning that parties supporting a peace treaty had a full
(albeit small) majority in the Knesset. On September 13, 1993, Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) signed the Oslo Accords (a Declaration
of Principles) on the South Lawn of the White House. The principles established
objectives relating to a transfer of authority from Israel to an interim
Palestinian Authority, as a prelude to a final treaty establishing a
Palestinian state, in exchange for mutual recognition. The DOP established May
1999 as the date by which a permanent status agreement for the West Bank and
Gaza Strip would take effect. In February 1994, a follower of the Kach movement
killed 29 Palestinian Arabs at the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron (Cave of
the Patriarchs massacre). Kach had been barred from participation in the 1992
elections (on the grounds that the movement was racist). It was subsequently
made illegal. Israel and the PLO signed the Gaza–Jericho Agreement in May
1994, and the Agreement on Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities
in August, which began the process of transferring authority from Israel to the
Palestinians. On July 25, 1994, Jordan and Israel signed the Washington
Declaration, which formally ended the state of war that had existed between
them since 1948 and on October 26 the Israel–Jordan Treaty of Peace,
witnessed by U.S. President Bill Clinton. Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and PLO
Chairman Yasser Arafat signed the Israeli–Palestinian Interim Agreement on
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip on September 28, 1995, in Washington. The
agreement was witnessed by President Bill Clinton on behalf of the United
States and by Russia, Egypt, Norway and the European Union and incorporates and
supersedes the previous agreements, marking the conclusion of the first stage
of negotiations between Israel and the PLO. The agreement allowed the PLO
leadership to relocate to the occupied territories and granted autonomy to the
Palestinians with talks to follow regarding final status. In return the
Palestinians promised to abstain from use of terror and changed the Palestinian
National Covenant, which had called for the expulsion of all Jews who migrated
after 1917 and the elimination of Israel. The agreement was opposed by Hamas
and other Palestinian factions, which launched suicide bomber attacks at
Israel. Rabin had a barrier constructed around Gaza to prevent attacks. The
growing separation between Israel and the "Palestinian Territories" led to a
labour shortage in Israel, mainly in the construction industry. Israeli firms
began importing labourers from the Philippines, Thailand, China and Romania;
some of these labourers stayed on without visas. In addition, a growing number
of Africans began illegally migrating to Israel. On November 4, 1995, a far-
right-wing religious Zionist opponent of the Oslo Accords, assassinated Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin. Direct elections 1996–2005. In 1992 the Israeli
electoral system was changed to allow for direct election of the prime
minister. It was hoped this would reduce the power of small parties (mainly the
religious parties) to extract concessions in return for coalition agreements.
The new system had the opposite effect; voters could split their vote for prime
minister from their (interest based) party vote and as a result larger parties
won fewer votes and smaller parties becoming more attractive to voters. It thus
increased the power of the smaller parties. By the 2006 election the system was
abandoned. Netanyahu I (1996–99). In February 1996 Rabin's successor, Shimon
Peres, called early elections. The May 1996 elections were the first featuring
direct election of the prime minister and resulted in a narrow election victory
for Likud leader Binyamin Netanyahu. A spate of suicide bombings reinforced the
Likud position for security. Hamas claimed responsibility for most of the
bombings. Despite his stated differences with the Oslo Accords, Prime Minister
Netanyahu continued their implementation, but his prime ministership saw a
marked slow-down in the Peace Process. Netanyahu also pledged to gradually
reduce U.S. aid to Israel. In January 1997 Netanyahu signed the Hebron Protocol
with the Palestinian Authority, resulting in the redeployment of Israeli forces
in Hebron and the turnover of civilian authority in much of the area to the
Palestinian Authority. Barak (1999–2001). In the election of July 1999, Ehud
Barak of the Labour Party became Prime Minister. His party was the largest in
the Knesset with 26 seats. In September 1999 the Supreme Court of Israel ruled
that the use of torture in interrogation of Palestinian prisoners was illegal.
On March 21, 2000, Pope John Paul II arrived in Israel for a historic visit. In
2000, Israel unilaterally withdrew its remaining forces from the "security
zone" in southern Lebanon. Several thousand members of the South Lebanon Army
(and their families) left with the Israelis. The UN Secretary-General concluded
that, as of June 16, 2000, Israel had withdrawn its forces from Lebanon in
accordance with UN Security Council Resolution 425. Lebanon claims that Israel
continues to occupy Lebanese territory called "Sheba'a Farms" (however this
area was governed by Syria until 1967 when Israel took control). The Sheba'a
Farms provide Hezbollah with a ruse to maintain warfare with Israel. The
Lebanese government, in contravention of the UN resolution, did not assert
sovereignty in the area, which came under the control of Hezbollah. In the Fall
of 2000, talks were held at Camp David to reach a final agreement on the
Israel/Palestine conflict. Ehud Barak offered to meet most of the Palestinian
teams requests for territory and political concessions, including Arab parts of
east Jerusalem; however, Arafat abandoned the talks without making a
counterproposal. On September 28, 2000, Israeli opposition leader Ariel Sharon
visited the Al-Aqsa compound, or Temple Mount, the following day the
Palestinians launched the al-Aqsa Intifada. David Samuels and Khaled Abu Toameh
have stated that the uprising was planned much earlier. In October 2000,
Palestinians destroyed Joseph's Tomb, a Jewish shrine in Nablus. The Arrow
missile, a missile designed to destroy ballistic missiles, including Scud
missiles, was first deployed by Israel. In 2001, with the Peace Process
increasingly in disarray, Ehud Barak called a special election for Prime
Minister. Barak hoped a victory would give him renewed authority in
negotiations with the Palestinians. Instead opposition leader Ariel Sharon was
elected PM. After this election, the system of directly electing the Premier
was abandoned. Sharon (2001–06). The failure of the peace process, increased
Palestinian terror, and occasional attacks by Hezbollah from Lebanon led much
of the Israeli public and political leadership to lose confidence in the
Palestinian Authority as a peace partner. Most felt that many Palestinians
viewed the peace treaty with Israel as a temporary measure only. Many Israelis
were thus anxious to disengage from the Palestinians. In response to a wave of
suicide bomb attacks, culminating in the "Passover massacre" (see List of
Israeli civilian casualties in the Second Intifada), in 2002 Israel launched
Operation Defensive Shield, and Sharon began construction of a barrier around
the West Bank. In January 2003 separate elections were held for the Knesset.
Likud won the most seats (27). An anti-religion party, Shinui, won 15 seats on
a secularist platform, making it the third largest party (ahead of orthodox
Shas). Internal fighting led to Shinui's demise at the next election. In
December 2003, Ariel Sharon announced he would consider a unilateral withdrawal
from parts of the occupied territories. This crystallized as a plan for total
withdrawal from the Gaza Strip. In 2004, the Black Hebrews were granted
permanent residency in Israel. The group had begun migrating to Israel 25 years
earlier from the United States, but had not been recognized as Jews by the
state and hence not granted citizenship under Israel's Law of Return. They had
settled in Israel without official status. From 2004 onwards, they received
citizen's rights. In 2005, all Jewish settlers were evacuated from Gaza (some
forcibly) and their homes demolished. Disengagement from the Gaza Strip was
completed on September 12, 2005. Military disengagement from the northern West
Bank was completed ten days later. Following the withdrawal, the Israeli town
of Sderot and other Israeli communities near the frontier became subject to
constant shelling and mortar bomb attacks from Gaza. In 2005 Sharon left the
Likud and formed a new party called Kadima, which accepted that the peace
process would lead to creation of a Palestinian state. He was joined by many
leading figures from both Likud and Labour. The Israeli withdrawal from Gaza
was interpreted by the Palestinians as a Hamas victory and the January
Palestinian legislative election, 2006 was won by Hamas, which rejected all
agreements signed with Israel, refused to recognize Israel's right to exist,
refused to abandon terror, and claimed the Holocaust was a Jewish conspiracy.
On April 14, 2006, Ariel Sharon was incapacitated by a severe haemorrhagic
stroke, and Ehud Olmert became Acting Prime Minister. Olmert (2006–08). Ehud
Olmert was elected Prime Minister after his party, Kadima, won the most seats
(29) in the Israeli legislative election, 2006. In 2005 Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was
officially elected president of Iran; since then, Iranian policy towards Israel
has grown more confrontational. Israeli analysts believe Ahmadinejad has worked
to undermine the peace process with arms supplies and aid to Hezbullah in South
Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza and is developing nuclear weapons, possibly for use
against Israel. Iranian support for Hezbollah and its nuclear arms program are
in contravention of UN Security Council resolutions 1559 and 1747. Iran also
encourages Holocaust denial. Following the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon,
Hezbollah had mounted periodic attacks on Israel, which did not lead to Israeli
retaliation. Similarly, the withdrawal from Gaza led to incessant shelling of
towns around the Gaza area with only minimal Israeli response. The failure to
react led to criticism from the Israeli right and undermined the government. On
March 14, 2006, Israel carried out an operation in the Palestinian Authority
prison of Jericho in order to capture Ahmad Sa'adat and several Palestinian
Arab prisoners located there who assassinated Israeli politician Rehavam Ze'evi
in 2001. The operation was conducted as a result of the expressed intentions of
the newly elected Hamas government to release these prisoners. On June 25,
2006, a Hamas force crossed the border from Gaza and attacked a tank, capturing
wounded Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, sparking clashes in Gaza. On July 12,
Hezbollah attacked Israel from Lebanon, shelled Israeli towns and attacked a
border patrol, taking two dead or badly wounded Israeli soldiers. These
incidents led Israel to initiate the Second Lebanon War, which lasted through
August 2006. Israeli forces entered some villages in Southern Lebanon, while
the air force attacked targets all across the country. Israel only made limited
ground gains until the launch of Operation Changing Direction 11, which lasted
for 3 days with disputed results. Shortly before a UN ceasefire came into
effect, Israeli troops captured Wadi Saluki. The war concluded with Hezbollah
evacuating its forces from Southern Lebanon, while the IDF remained until its
positions could be handed over to the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL. In 2007
education was made compulsory until the age of 18 for all citizens (it had been
16). Refugees from the genocide in Darfur, mostly Muslim, arrived in Israel
illegally, with some given Asylum. Illegal immigrants arrived mainly from
Africa in addition to foreign workers overstaying their visas. The numbers of
such migrants are not known and estimates vary between 30,000 and over 100,000.
In June 2007, Hamas took control of the Gaza Strip in the course of the Battle
of Gaza, seizing government institutions and replacing Fatah and other
government officials with its own. Following the takeover, Egypt and Israel
largely sealed their border crossings with Gaza imposing a blockade, on the
grounds that Fatah had fled and was no longer providing security on the
Palestinian side, and to prevent arms smuggling by terrorist groups. On
September 6, 2007, the Israeli Air Force destroyed a nuclear reactor in Syria.
On February 28, 2008, Israel launched a military campaign in Gaza in response
to the constant firing of Qassam rockets by Hamas militants. On July 16, 2008,
Hezbollah swapped the bodies of Israeli soldiers Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad
Regev, kidnapped in 2006, in exchange for the Lebanese terrorist Samir Kuntar,
four Hezbollah prisoners and the bodies of 199 Palestinian Arab and Lebanese
fighters. Olmert also came under investigation for corruption and this
ultimately led him to announce, on July 30, 2008, that he would be stepping
down as Prime Minister following election of a new leader of the Kadima party
in September 2008. Tzippi Livni won the election, but was unable to form a
coalition and he remained in office until the general election. Israel carried
out Operation Cast Lead in the Gaza Strip from December 27, 2008, to January
18, 2009 in response to rocket attacks from Hamas militants, leading to a
decrease of Palestinian rocket attacks. Netanyahu II. In the 2009 legislative
election Likud won 27 seats and Kadima 28; however, the right-wing camp won a
majority of seats, and President Shimon Peres called on Netanyahu to form the
government. Russian immigrant-dominated Yisrael Beiteinu came third with 15
seats, and Labour was reduced to fourth place with 13 seats. In 2009 Israeli
billionaire, Yitzhak Tshuva announced the discovery of huge natural gas
reserves off the coast of Israel. On May 31, 2010, an international incident
broke out in the Mediterranean Sea when foreign activists trying to break the
maritime blockade over Gaza, clashed with Israeli troops. During the struggle,
nine Turkish activists were killed. In late September 2010 took place direct
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians without success. On 14 July
2011 the largest social protest in the history of Israel began in which
hundreds of thousands of protesters from a variety of socio-economic and
religious backgrounds in Israel protested against the continuing rise in the
cost of living (particularly housing) and the deterioration of public services
in the country (such as health and education). The peak of the demonstrations
took place on September 3, 2011, in which about 400,000 people demonstrated
across the country. As a defensive countermeasure to the rocket threat against
Israel's civilian population, at the end of March 2011 Israel began to operate
the advanced mobile air defence system "Iron Dome" in the southern region of
Israel and along the border with the Gaza Strip. In October 2011, a deal was
reached between Israel and Hamas, by which the kidnapped Israeli soldier Gilad
Shalit was released in exchange for 1,027 Palestinians and Arab-Israeli
prisoners. In March 2012, Secretary-general of the Popular Resistance
Committees Zuhir al-Qaisi, a senior PRC member and two additional Palestinian
militants were assassinated during a targeted killing carried out by Israeli
forces in Gaza. The Palestinian armed factions in the Gaza Strip, led by the
Islamic Jihad and the Popular Resistance Committees, fired a massive amount of
rockets towards southern Israel in retaliation, sparking five days of clashes
along the Gaza border. In May 2012, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu reached
an agreement with the Head of Opposition Shaul Mofaz for Kadima to join the
current government, thus canceling the early election supposed to be held in
September. However, on July Kadima party left Netanyahu's government due to a
dispute concerning military conscription for ultra-Orthodox Jews in Israel. In
June 2012, Israel transferred the bodies of 91 Palestinian suicide bombers and
other militants as part of a goodwill gesture to PA chairman Mahmoud Abbas to
help revive the peace talks and reinstate direct negotiations between Israel
and the Palestinians. On October 21, 2012, United States and Israel began their
biggest joint air and missile defense exercise, known as Austere Challenge 12,
involving around 3,500 U.S. personnel in the region along with 1,000 IDF
members, expected to last three weeks. Germany and Britain also participated.
