Hyphenated American In the United States, the term hyphenated American is an
epithet commonly used from 1890 to 1920 to disparage Americans who were of
foreign birth or origin, and who displayed an allegiance to a foreign country.
It was most commonly used to disparage German Americans or Irish Americans
(Catholics) who called for U.S. neutrality in World War I. Former President
Theodore Roosevelt was an outspoken anti-hyphenate and Woodrow Wilson followed
suit. The term "hyphenated American" was published by 1889, and was common as a
derogatory term by 1904. During World War I the issue arose of the primary
political loyalty of ethnic groups with close ties to Europe, especially German
Americans and also Irish Americans. Former President Theodore Roosevelt in
speaking to the largely Irish Catholic Knights of Columbus at Carnegie Hall on
Columbus Day 1915, asserted that, President Woodrow Wilson regarded "hyphenated
Americans" with suspicion, saying, "Any man who carries a hyphen about with him
carries a dagger that he is ready to plunge into the vitals of this Republic
whenever he gets ready." Usage. Modern style guides most often recommend
dropping the hyphen between the two names except when the compound is used as
an adjective; some recommend dropping the hyphen even for the adjective form.
On the other hand, compounds with name fragments, such as "Afro-American" and
"Indo-European", are recommended to be hyphenated. In American English. The
first term typically indicates a region or culture of origin ancestry paired
with "American". The hyphen is employed when the compound term is used as an
adjective. Hence, correct forms include "an African American" and "an African-
American man". The linguistic construction functionally indicates ancestry, but
also may connote a sense that these individuals straddle two worldsâ€”one
experience is specific to their unique ethnic identity, while the other is the
broader multicultural amalgam that is Americana. In relation to Latin America.
Latin America includes most of the Western Hemisphere south of the United
States, including Mexico, Central America, South America and (in some cases)
the Caribbean. U.S. nationals with origins in Latin America are often referred
to as Hispanic or Latino Americans, or by their specific country of origin,
e.g. Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans and Cuban Americans. Hyphenated-American
identities. Some groups recommend dropping the hyphen because it implies to
some people dual nationalism and inability to be accepted as truly American.
The Japanese American Citizens League is supportive of dropping the hyphen
because the non-hyphenated form uses their ancestral origin as an adjective for
"American." By contrast, other groups have embraced the hyphen, arguing that
the American identity is compatible with alternative identities and that the
mixture of identities within the United States strengthens the nation rather
than weakens it. 'European American,' as opposed to White, Caucasian, has been
coined in response to the increasing racial and ethnic diversity of the U.S.,
as well as to this diversity moving more into the mainstream of the society in
the latter half of the 20th century. The term distinguishes whites of European
ancestry from those of other ancestries. In 1977, it was proposed that the term
"European American" replace "white" as a racial label in the U.S. Census,
although this was not done. The term "European American" is not in popular use
in the U.S. among the general public or in the mass media, and the terms
"white" or "white American" are commonly used instead.
