Italian American Italian Americans () are the United States citizens of Italian
ancestry. The designation may also refer to someone possessing Italian and
American dual citizenship. Italian Americans are the fourth largest European
ethnic group in the United States (not including American ethnicity, an
ethnonym used by many in the United States; overall, Italian Americans rank
seventh, behind German, Irish, African American, English, American and
Mexican). About 5.5 million Italians immigrated to the U.S. from 1820 to 2004.
The greatest surge of immigration, which occurred in the period between 1880
and 1920, alone brought more than 4 million Italians to America. About 80% of
the Italian immigrants came from Southern Italy, especially from Sicily,
Campania, Abruzzo and Calabria. This was a largely agricultural and
overpopulated region, where much of the populace had been impoverished by
centuries of foreign misrule, and the economic measures imposed on the South
after Italian unification in 1861. After unification, the Italian government
initially encouraged emigration to relieve economic pressures in the South. In
the U.S., most Italians began their new lives as unskilled, manual workers in
Eastern cities, mining camps and in agriculture. Italian Americans gradually
moved from the lower rungs of the economic scale in 1890-1910 to a level
comparable to the national average by 1970. By 1990, more than 65% of Italian
Americans were managerial, professional, or white-collar workers. The Italian-
American communities have often been characterized by strong ties with family,
the Catholic Church, fraternal organizations and political parties. Today, over
17 million Americans claim Italian ancestry. Italians and their descendents in
America helped shape the country, and were in turn shaped by it. No common
identity is shared by all Italian Americans; rather, they are as diverse as the
American population itself. They have gained prominence in politics, sports,
the media, the fine arts, the culinary arts, and numerous other fields of
endeavor. History. Early period. Italians and their descendants played a key
role in the discovery, exploration and settlement of the Americas. The fact
that English is the language spoken in the United States can be directly
attributed to England's claims in North America, based on the voyages of the
Italian explorer Giovanni Caboto (John Cabot). The Italian explorer Giovanni da
Verrazzano was the first European to enter New York Bay. The first Italian to
reside in America was Pietro Cesare Alberti, a Venetian seaman who, in 1635,
settled in what would eventually become New York City. A group of 200
Waldensians arrived from Italy in 1640 in search of a more hospitable place to
practice their religion. The Taliaferro family, originally from Venice, was one
of the first families to settle in Virginia. These were joined by a small but
steady stream of new arrivals, some of whom had been invited to come to America
because they possessed much needed skills in agriculture and the making of
glass, silk and wine. Others came because of their musical abilities as
teachers and performers, such as the group of Italian musicians Thomas
Jefferson invited to come to form a military band, which later became the
nucleus of the U.S. Marine Band. Still others came as adventurers, explorers,
military engineers, missionaries and political refugees. These early arrivals
settled in many different areas, but constituted a relatively small part of the
American population as a whole. However, their contributions were very
significant in the founding and settling of the country. Filippo Mazzei, a
physician and promoter of liberty, was a close friend and confidant of Thomas
Jefferson. He published a pamphlet containing the phrase: "All men are by
nature equally free and independent", which Jefferson incorporated essentially
intact into the Declaration of Independence. Italian artists and sculptors were
brought to Washington to work on the new Capitol building and to create some of
its major monuments. Constantino Brumidi created the frescoed interior of the
Capitol dome, and spent the rest of his life executing still other artworks to
beautify the Capitol. Numerous Italians in the employ of Spain and France,
whose territorial claims in America were based on the voyages of Italian
navigators, were involved in exploring and mapping these territories, and in
establishing settlements. Alessandro Malaspina explored and mapped much of the
west coast of the Americas, from Cape Horn to the Gulf of Alaska. The southwest
and California were explored and mapped by Eusebio Kino (Chino), an Italian
priest. Henri de Tonti (Enrico de Tonti), together with the French explorer
LaSalle, explored the Great Lakes region. De Tonti founded the first European
settlement in Illinois in 1679, and in Arkansas in 1683. With LaSalle, he co-
founded New Orleans, and was governor of the Louisiana Territory for the next
20 years. His brother Alphonse de Tonty (Alphonso de Tonti), with Antoine
Cadillac, was the co-founder of Detroit, and its colonial governor for 12
years. The route to the source of the Mississippi was discovered by Giacomo
Beltrami while exploring the territory that was later to become Minnesota.
Since France and Spain were Catholic countries, many missionaries were sent by
the Catholic Church to convert the native population to Christianity and to
provide for the spiritual needs of the settlers. Among these were numerous
Italians. Alessandro Geraldini was the first Catholic bishop in the Americas.
Father Francesco Bessani labored among the Algonquin and Huron Indians in the
early 17th century. Later, Italian missionaries of the Jesuit and Franciscan
orders, were active in many parts of America, and especially in the west.
Italian Jesuits founded numerous missions, schools and five colleges in the
west, subsequently to become Jesuit universities (San Francisco, Seattle,
Gonzaga, Santa Clara and Regis). The Italian Jesuits also laid the foundation
for the wine-making industry that would later flourish in California. In the
east, the Italian Franciscans founded hospitals, orphanages, schools, and a
college that later became St. Bonaventure University. Samuel Mazzuchelli, a
missionary and expert in Indian languages, ministered to whites and Indians in
Wisconsin and Iowa for 34 years and, after his death, was declared Venerable by
the Catholic Church. Joseph Rosati was named the first Catholic bishop of St.
Louis in 1824. Father Charles Constantine Pise, a Jesuit, served as Chaplain of
the Senate from 1832 to 1833, the only Catholic priest ever chosen to serve in
this capacity. Italian Americans served in the Revolutionary and Civil Wars,
both as soldiers and officers. Francesco Vigo aided colonial forces during the
American Revolutionary War by being one of the foremost financiers of the
Revolution in the Northwest. Later, he was a co-founder of Vincennes University
in Indiana. Six Italian Americans received the Congressional Medal of Honor
during the Civil War, among whom was Colonel Luigi di Cesnola, later to become
the first director of the Metropolitan Museum of Arts in New York. The early
arrivals were scattered throughout the country, with the largest concentration
of Italian Americans being in the northeast. It was there that recognition of
their common Italian roots and culture was the greatest. The first opera house
in the country opened in 1833 in New York through the efforts of Lorenzo Da
Ponte, Mozart's former librettist, who had immigrated to America. The first
Italian American newspaper, "L'Eco d'Italia" was published in New York in 1849
by Francesco de Casale. The first Columbus Day celebration was organized by
Italian Americans in San Francisco in 1869. Italian American involvement in
politics had already begun. In 1837 John Phinizy (Finizzi) became the mayor of
Augusta, Georgia. In 1880 Anthony Ghio became the mayor of Texarkana, Texas.
Francis Spinola, the first Italian American to serve in Congress, was elected
in 1887 from New York. An immigrant, Antonio Meucci, brought with him in 1845 a
concept for the telephone. He is credited by many researchers with being the
first to demonstrate the principle of the telephone; however, considerable
controversy exists relative to the priority of invention, with Alexander Graham
Bell also being accorded this distinction. The main period of immigration. The
newly created Italian constitution, drafted after unification in 1861, heavily
favored the North. This caused economic conditions to considerably worsen for
many in southern Italy and Sicily. Heavy taxes and other economic measures
imposed on the South made the situation virtually impossible for many tenant
farmers, and small business and land owners. Multitudes chose to emigrate
rather than try to eke out a meager living. Often, the father and older sons
would go first, leaving the mother and the rest of the family behind until the
male members could afford their passage. From 1880 to 1920, an estimated 4
million Italian immigrants arrived in the United States, the majority from 1900
to 1914. Once in America, the immigrants faced great challenges. Often with no
knowledge of the English language and with little education, many of the
immigrants were compelled to accept the poorest paying and most undesirable
jobs, and were frequently exploited by the middlemen who acted as
intermediaries between them and the prospective employers. Many sought housing
in the older sections of the large northeastern cities in which they settled,
which became known as "Little Italies", often in overcrowded substandard
tenements. About a third of the immigrants, so called "birds of passage",
intended to stay in the United States for only a limited time, followed by a
return to Italy with enough in savings to re-establish themselves there. While
many did return to Italy, others chose to stay, or were prevented from
returning by the outbreak of World War I. The Italian male immigrants in the
Little Italies were most often employed in manual labor, heavily involved in
public works, such as the construction of roads, sewers, subways and bridges
being carried out at the time in the northeastern cities. The woman most
frequently worked as seamstresses in the garment industry or in their homes.
Many established small businesses in the Little Italies to satisfy the day-to-
day needs of fellow immigrants. In spite of the economic hardship of the
immigrants, civil and social life flourished in the Italian American
neighborhoods of the large northeastern cities. Italian theater, band concerts,
choral recitals, puppet shows, mutual-aid societies, and social clubs were
available to the immigrants. An important event, the "festa", became for many
an important connection to the traditions of their ancestral villages in Italy
and Sicily. The festa involved an elaborate procession through the streets in
honor of a patron saint or the Virgin Mary in which a large statue was carried
by a team of men, with musicians marching behind. Followed by food, fireworks
and general merriment, the festa became an important occasion that helped give
the immigrants a sense of unity and common identity. To assist the immigrants
in the Little Italies, who were overwhelmingly Catholic, Pope Leo XIII
dispatched a contingent of priests, nuns and brothers of the Missionaries of
St. Charles Borromeo. Among these was Sister Francesca Cabrini, who founded
schools, hospitals and orphanages and who, after her death, was declared the
first American saint. Hundreds of parishes were founded by the St. Charles
missionaries to serve the needs of the Italian communities. The destinations of
many of the Italian immigrants were not only the large cities of the East
Coast, but also more remote regions of the country, such as Florida and
California. They were drawn there by opportunities in agriculture, mining,
railroad construction, lumbering and other activities underway at the time.
Many of the immigrants had contracted to work in these areas of the country as
a condition for payment of their passage. In many cases, especially in the
South, the immigrants were subject to economic exploitation, hostility and
sometimes even violence. Many of the Italian laborers who went to these areas
were later joined by wives and children, which resulted in the establishment of
permanent Italian American settlements in diverse parts of the country. In
time, the Italian immigrants and their descendants adjusted to life in their
adopted country, and began making contributions to mainstream American life and
culture. Many of the immigrants had brought with them specialized skills and
knowledge, and an entrepreneurial spirit. A significant number of business
innovations were brought about by Italian Americans. Amadeo Giannini originated
the concept of branch banking to serve the Italian American community in San
Francisco. He founded the Bank of Italy, which later became the Bank of
America. His bank was also instrumental in providing financing to the film
industry developing on the west coast at that time. Other companies founded by
Italian Americans - such as Ghirardelli Chocolate Company, Progresso, Planters
Peanuts, Contadina, Chef Boyardee, Italian Swiss Colony wines and Jacuzzi -
became nationally known brand names in time. An Italian immigrant, Italo
Marciony (Marcioni), is credited with inventing the earliest version of an ice
cream cone in 1898. Another Italian immigrant, Giuseppe Bellanca, brought with
him in 1912 an advanced aircraft design, which he began producing. It was
Charles Lindbergh's first choice for his flight across the Atlantic, but other
factors ruled this out; however, one of Bellanca's planes, piloted by Cesare
Sabelli and George Pond, made one of the first non-stop trans-Atlantic flights
in 1934. Following in the footsteps of Constantino Brumidi, other Italians and
their descendants helped create Washington’s impressive monuments. An Italian
immigrant, Attilio Piccirilli, and his five brothers carved the Lincoln
Memorial, which they began in 1911 and completed in 1922. Italian construction
workers helped build Washington's Union Station, considered one of the most
beautiful in the country, which was begun in 1905 and completed in 1908. The
six statues that decorate the station's facade were sculpted by Andrew
Bernasconi between 1909 and 1911. Two Italian American master stone carvers,
Roger Morigi and Vincent Palumbo, spent decades creating the sculptural works
that embellish Washington National Cathedral. Italian Americans became involved
in entertainment and sports. Rudolph Valentino was one of the first great film
icons. Dixieland jazz music had a number of important Italian American
innovators, the most famous being Nick LaRocca of New Orleans, whose quintet
made the first jazz recording in 1917. The first Italian American professional
baseball player, Ping Bodie (Giuseppe Pezzole), began playing for the Chicago
White Sox in 1912. Ralph DePalma won the Indianapolis 500 in 1915. Italian
Americans became increasingly involved in politics, government and the labor
movement. Andrew Longino was elected Governor of Mississippi in 1900. Fiorello
LaGuardia was elected from New York in 1916 to serve in the Congress. Charles
Bonaparte was Secretary of the Navy and later Attorney General in the Theodore
Roosevelt administration, and founded the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Italian Americans were leading activists in unionizing workers in industries
where they constituted a sizable part of the work force, such as the mining,
textile and garment industries. World War I and after. World War I, together
with the restrictive Emergency Quota Act of 1921 and Immigration Act of 1924,
effectively put an abrupt end to the large flow of Italian immigrants into the
country. By 1920, the Little Italies had stabilized and grown considerably more
prosperous as workers were able to obtain higher-paying jobs, often as skilled
workers. English was now the language most commonly heard on the streets of the
Little Italies. The passage of child labor laws resulted in Italian American
children staying in school at least through the eighth grade, which assured a
better future for them as they entered adulthood. The Italian American
community wholeheartedly supported the war effort, and its young men enlisted
in large numbers. It was estimated that Italian American servicemen made up
more than 10% of the total American forces in World War I, a disproportionately
high percentage of the total. An Italian American infantryman, Michael Valente,
was awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor for his service. Many of the
returning servicemen brought with them a new perspective and confidence, which
led them to seek better employment opportunities. Jobs as policemen, firemen
and civil servants became available to Italian Americans; while others found
employment as plumbers, electricians, mechanics and carpenters. Women found
jobs as civil servants, secretaries, dressmakers, and clerks. The changing
employment prospective occasioned large numbers to move to neighborhoods
outside of the Italian enclaves. The Depression (1929–39) had a major impact
on the Italian American community, and temporarily reversed some of the earlier
gains made. Many benefitted from New Deal work programs, such as the Works
Progress Administration, and the Civilian Conservation Corp. World War II and
after. As a member of the Axis powers, Italy declared war on the United States
in 1941. Any concerns about the loyalty of Italian Americans were quickly
dispelled. More than half a million Italian Americans served in the various
branches of the military. In spite of this display of loyalty, hundreds of
Italians viewed as a potential threat to the country were interned in detention
camps, some for up to 2 years. As many as 600,000 others, who had not become
citizens, were required to carry identity cards identifying them as "resident
alien". Thousands more on the West Coast were required to move inland, often
losing their homes and businesses in the process. A number of Italian-language
newspapers were forced to close because of their past support of Fascist
dictator Benito Mussolini. Two books, "Una Storia Segreta" by Lawrence Di Stasi
and "Uncivil Liberties" by Stephen Fox; and a movie, "Prisoners Among Us",
document these World War II developments. Italian Americans served with
distinction during the war, and 14 were awarded the Medal of Honor. Among these
was Sgt. John Basilone, one of the most decorated and famous servicemen in
World War II, who was later featured in the HBO series "The Pacific". In the
air, Capt. Don Gentile became one of the war's leading aces, with 25 German
planes downed. At home, the work of Enrico Fermi was crucial in shortening the
war. Fermi, a Nobel Prize laureate nuclear physicist, immigrated to the United
States from Italy in 1938. He led a research team at the University of Chicago
that was able to produce the world's first sustained nuclear chain reaction,
which clearly demonstrated the feasibility of an atom bomb. After the first
sustained nuclear chain reaction was achieved, President Franklin Delano
Roosevelt received the message: "The Italian navigator has landed". Fermi later
became a key member of the team at Los Alamos Laboratory that developed the
first atom bomb. He was subsequently joined at Los Alamos by Emilio Segre, one
of his students from Italy, who was also destined to become a Nobel Prize
laureate in Physics. Fermi's work on the nuclear chain reaction laid the
foundation for the nuclear power industry which began developing after the war.
Two United States World War II destroyers were named after Italian Americans.
The was named for Corporal Anthony P. Damato, who was awarded the Medal of
Honor posthumously for his valor during World War II. The (later DMS-30) was
named for Rear Admiral Bancroft Gherardi, who served during the
Mexican–American and U.S. Civil Wars. World War II opened up new employment
opportunities for large numbers of Italian Americans in the factories producing
war materiel. This included many Italian American women, such as Rose Bonavita,
who was recognized by President Roosevelt with a personal letter commending her
for her performance as an aircraft riveter. She was subsequently known as
"Rosie the Riveter", and came to symbolize all of the millions of American
women workers in the war industries. "Chef Boyardee", the company founded by
Ettore Boiardi, was the largest supplier of rations for U.S. and allied forces
during World War II. For his contribution to the war effort, Boiardi was
awarded a gold star order of excellence from the United States War Department.
The post-war period was a time of great social change for Italian Americans.
Many aspired to a college education, which became possible for returning
veterans through the GI Bill. Better educated, Italian Americans entered
mainstream American life in great numbers. The Little Italies were largely
abandoned by the younger generation, who more often chose to live in other
urban areas and in the suburbs. Many married outside of their ethnic group,
most frequently with other ethnic Catholics, but increasingly also with those
of diverse religious and ethnic backgrounds. Italians continued to immigrate
after the war, and an estimated 600,000 arrived in the United States in the
post-war decades. Many were well educated men and women who had come seeking
greater opportunities in their chosen fields. Among these were five who were
destined to become Noble Prize laureates: Salvatore Luria, Renato Dulbecco,
Franco Modigliani, Mario Capecchi and Riccardo Giacconi. Contemporary period.
In less than a century, Italian Americans had risen into the highest ranks of
politics, the judiciary, business, the professions, the military and the
Catholic hierarchy. They were counted among the country's best known sports and
entertainment figures. Politics. In the 1930s, Italian Americans voted heavily
Democratic. Since 1968, voters have split about evenly between the Democratic
(37%) and the Republican (36%) parties. The U.S. Congress includes Italian
Americans who are leaders in both the Republican and Democratic parties. The
highest ranking Italian American politician is currently Nancy Pelosi (D-CA),
who became the first woman and Italian American Speaker of the United States
House of Representatives. Former Republican New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani
was a candidate for the U.S. presidency in the 2008 election, as was Colorado
Congressman Tom Tancredo. Geraldine Ferraro was the first woman on a major
party ticket, running for Vice President as a Democrat in 1984. Two of the
justices of the Supreme Court—Antonin Scalia and Samuel Alito—are Italian-
Americans, appointed by Republican presidents. Both are members of the
conservative wing of the court, along with Clarence Thomas and Chief Justice
John Roberts. The family name of Jill Jacobs Biden, the Second Lady, was
originally Giacoppa. The Italian American Congressional Delegation currently
includes 30 members of Congress who are of Italian descent. They are joined by
more than 150 associate members, who are not Italian American but have large
Italian American constituencies. Since its founding in 1975, the National
Italian American Foundation (NIAF) has worked closely with the bicameral and
bipartisan Italian American Congressional Delegation, which is led by co-chairs
Rep. Bill Pascrell of New Jersey and Rep. Pat Tiberi of Ohio. The NIAF hosts a
variety of public policy programs, contributing to public discourse on timely
policy issues facing the nation and the world. These events are held on Capitol
Hill and other locations under the auspices of NIAF's Frank J. Guarini Public
Policy Forum and its sister program, the NIAF Public Policy Lecture Series.
NIAF's 2009 public policy programs on Capitol Hill featured prominent Italians
and Italian Americans as keynote speakers, including Leon Panetta, Director of
the CIA, and Franco Frattini, Minister of Foreign Affairs for the Republic of
Italy. By the 1890s Italian Americans in New York City were mobilizing as a
political force. They helped elect Fiorello La Guardia (a Republican) as mayor
in 1933, and helped reelect him in 1937, and 1941. They rallied for Vincent R.
Impellitteri (a Democrat) in 1950, and Rudolph W. Giuliani (a Republican) in
1989 (when he lost), and in 1993 and 1997 (when he won). All three Italian
Americans aggressively fought to reduce crime in the city; each was known for
his good relations with the city's powerful labor unions. La Guardia and
Giuliani have the reputation among specialists on urban politics as two of the
best mayors in American history. Business and economy. Italian-Americans have
served an important role in the economy of the United States, and have founded
companies of great national prominence, such as Bank of America (by Amadeo
Giannini in 1904), and many companies that have contributed to the local
culture and character of U.S. cities, such as Petrini's Markets (founded by
Frank Petrini in 1935), among many others. Italian-Americans have also made
important contributions to the growth of the U.S. economy through their
business expertise. Italian Americans have served as CEO’s of numerous major
corporations, such as the Ford Motor Company and Chrysler Corporation by Lee
Iacocca, IBM Corporation by Samuel Palmisano, Lucent Technologies by Patricia
Russo, The New York Stock Exchange by Richard Grasso and Honeywell Incorporated
by Michael Bonsignore. Workers. About two thirds of America's Italian
immigrants arrived during 1900-24. Having little education and industrial
skills, most became unskilled laborers heavily concentrated in the cities.
While 71% of the second-generation men had blue collar jobs, the proportion was
down to 52% in the third generation, according to surveys in 1963. The 1970
census revealed, however, that those under age 45 had achieved a level of
education comparable to the national average. By 1990, according to the U.S.
census, more than 65% of Italian Americans were employed as managerial,
professional, or white-collar workers. In 1999, the median annual income of
Italian-American families was $61,300, while the median annual income of all
American families was $50,000. Women. Italian women who arrived during the
period of mass immigration had to adapt to new and unfamiliar social and
economic conditions. Mothers, who had the task of raising the children and
providing for the welfare of the family, commonly demonstrated great courage
and resourcefulness in meeting these obligations, often under adverse living
conditions. Their cultural traditions, which placed the highest priority on the
family, remained strong as Italian immigrant women adapted to these new
circumstances. Married women typically avoided factory work and chose home-
based economic activities such as dressmaking, taking in boarders, and
operating small shops in their homes or neighborhoods. Italian neighborhoods
also proved attractive to midwives, women who trained in Italy before coming to
America. Many single women were employed in the garment industry as
seamstresses, often in unsafe working environments. Many of the 146 who died in
the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire in 1911 were Italian American women.
Angela Bambace, an 18-year-old Italian American organizer for the International
Ladies Garment Workers Union in New York worked to secure better working
conditions and shorter hours for women workers in the garment industry. The
National Organization of Italian American Women (NOIAW), founded in 1980, is an
organization for women of Italian heritage committed to preserving Italian
heritage, language and culture by promoting and supporting the advancement of
women of Italian ancestry. Culture. Most Italian Americans have assumed a
mainstream American identity. Erik Amfitheatrof observed in 1973 that, "The
children of the Italian immigrants no longer feel Italian. They are American.
In shedding a sense of apartness from American life, they have also
relinquished their once-powerful emotional associations with a remote Italian
world..." Most immigrants arrived from Italy by 1914, so most can trace
multiple generations in the new country. Many have inter-married with other
ethnic groups. They are well represented in all fields of endeavor. Many
Italian Americans still retain aspects of their culture. This includes Italian
food, drink, art, annual Italian American festivals, and a strong commitment to
family, including extended family. Italian Americans influenced popular music,
especially in the 1940s and 1950s, and continuing into the present, one of
their major contributions to American culture. A University of Chicago study of
fifteen ethnic groups showed that Italian Americans were among those groups
having the lowest percentages of divorce, unemployment, people on welfare and
those incarcerated. On the other hand, they were among those groups with the
highest percentages of two-parent families, elderly family members still living
at home, and families who eat together on a regular basis. The National Italian
American Foundation (NIAF) - a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization
headquartered in Washington, D.C. - works to represent Italian Americans,
spread knowledge of the Italian language, foster U.S./Italy relations and
connect the greater Italian American community. Additionally, two major Italian
American fraternal and service organizations, Order Sons of Italy in America
and Unico National, actively promote knowledge of Italian American history and
culture. Another prominent organization, The Italic Institute of America, is
also in the forefront of these activities. Italian-Americans remain strongly
connected with their culture today. Literature. A large and growing number of
Italian American authors are having success getting their works publishing in
America. Some of the authors who have written about the Italian American
experience are Pietro Di Donato; Lawrence Ferlinghetti; Dana Gioia, Executive
Director of the National Endowment for the Arts; John Fusco, author of
"Paradise Salvage"; and Daniela Gioseffi, winner of the John Ciardi Award for
Lifetime Achievement in Poetry and The American Book Award. Poets Sandra
(Mortola) Gilbert and Kim Addonizio were also winner of the award from "Italian
Americana", Vol. 19, no. 1 and Vol. 21, no. 2, respectively; and Helen
Barolini, author of "The Dream Book", a collection of Italian American women's
writings. Several of these herein mentioned Italian American women writers and
editors are American Book Award winners and pioneers of Italian American
writing, as is poet Maria Mazziotti Gillan. These women have authored many
books depicting Italian American women in a new light. Helen Barolini's "The
Dream Book: An Anthology of Writings by Italian American Women" (1985) was the
first anthology that pulled together the historic range of writing from the
late 19th century to the 1980s. It exhibited the wealth of fiction, poetry,
essays, and letters, and paid special attention to the interaction of Italian
American women with American social activism. A scholarly literature has also
emerged that critiques the literary output. Common themes include conflicts
between marginal Italian American and mainstream culture, and tradition-bound
immigrant parents opposed by their more assimilated children. Mary Jo Bona
(1999) provided the first full-length scholarly analysis of the literary
tradition. She is especially interested in showing how authors portrayed the
many configurations of family relationships, from the early immigrant
narratives of journeying to a new world, through novels that stress
intergenerational conflicts, to contemporary works about the struggle of modern
women to form nontraditional gender roles. Among the scholars who have led the
renaissance in Italian American literature are professors Richard Gambino,
Anthony Julian Tamburri, Paolo Giordano, and Fred Gardaphe. The latter three
founded Bordighera Press and edited "From the Margin, An Anthology of Italian
American Writing", Purdue University Press. These men, along with academics
like novelist and accomplished critic, Dr. Josephine Gattuso Hendin of New York
University, have taught Italian American studies at such institutions as the
City University of New York, John D. Calandra Institute, Queens College (CUNY),
and Stony Brook University, as well as Brooklyn College, where Dr. Robert
Viscusi founded the Italian American Writers Association, and is an author and
American Book Award winner, himself. As a result of the efforts of magazines
like "VIA: Voices in Italian Americana", "Ambassador", a publication of the
National Italian American Foundation and "Italian Americana", edited by Carol
Bonomo Albright, and numerous authors young and old, as well as early immigrant
pioneer writers like poet Emanuel Carnevali ("Furnished Rooms") and novelist
Pietro DiDonato, author of "Christ in Concrete", Italian Americans have been
reading more works of their own writers. A supplemental website at
www.italianamericana.com to the journal "Italian Americana", edited by novelist
Christine Palamidessi Moore, also offers historical articles, stories, memoirs,
poetry, and book reviews. A growing number of books about the Italian American
experience are published each year. Famed authors such as Don DeLillo, Giannina
Braschi, Gilbert Sorrentino, Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Gay Talese, John Fante Tina
DeRosa, Daniela Gioseffi, Kim Addonizio and Dana Gioia have broken into
mainstream American literature and publishing. Many of these authors' books and
writings are easily found on the internet, as for example on an archive of
Contemporary Italian American authors always in-progress edited by American
Book Award winning author, Daniela Gioseffi, as well as in bibliographies
online at Stonybrook University's Italian American Studies Department in New
York, or at the Italian American Writers Association website. Dana Gioia was
Poetry Editor of "Italian Americana" from 1993 to 2003. He initiated an
educational series in which a featured poet talked about his/her work with poet
Kim Addonizio as his first Featured Poet selection. Poet Michael Palma
continues Dana Gioia's work in the journal. He also selects poems for "Italian
Americana"s webpage supplement. Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Daniela Gioseffi and
Paul Mariani, are among the widely and internationally published authors who
have been awarded The John Ciardi Award for Lifetime Achievement in Poetry by
"Italian Americana" during Michael Palma's tenure as Poetry Editor. Daniela
Gioseffi with Alfredo De Palchi founded The Annual $2000 Bordighera Poetry
Prize to further the names of Italian American Poets in American literature. As
of 1997, twelve books have been published in the bilingual series from
Bordighera Press. Italian Americans have written not only about the Italian
American experience but, indeed, the human experience. Some of the most popular
inspirational books have been authored by Italian Americans - notably, those of
Og Mandino, Max Lucado, Leo Buscaglia and Antoinette Bosco. Mario Puzo's first
novel, "The Fortunate Pilgrim", was a highly inspiration treatment of the
immigrant experience, which was widely reviewed as being well crafted, moving
and poetic. Puzo considered it to be his best work. "The Right Thing to Do", by
Josephine Gattuso Hendin, is an iconic inspirational novel for Italian American
women. A series of inspirational books for children has been written by Tomie
dePaola. Contemporary best-selling fiction writers include David Baldacci, Kate
DiCamillo, Adriana Trigiani and Lisa Scottoline. Religion. The vast majority of
the Italian Americans are Catholics, at least nominally. Four hundred Italian
Jesuit priests left Italy for the American West between 1848 and 1919. Most of
these Jesuits left their homeland involuntarily, expelled by Italian
nationalists in the successive waves of Italian unification that dominated
Italy. When they came to the West, they ministered to Indians in the Northwest,
Irish-Americans in San Francisco and Mexican Americans in the South West; they
also ran the nation's most influential Catholic seminary, in Woodstock, Md. In
addition to their pastoral work, they founded numerous high schools and
colleges, including Regis University, Santa Clara University, the University of
San Francisco, Gonzaga University and Seattle University. In some Sicilian
American communities, primarily Buffalo and New Orleans, Saint Joseph's Day
(March 19) is marked by parades and celebrations, including traditional "St.
Joseph's tables", where meatless dishes are served for the benefit of the
communities' poor. Columbus Day is also widely celebrated, as are the feasts of
some regional Italian patron saints. In Boston's North End, the Italian
immigrants celebrate the "Feast of all Feasts" Saint Anthony's Feast. Started
by Italian immigrants from Montefalcione, a small town near Naples, Italy in
1919, the feast is widely considered the largest and most authentic Italian
Religious festival in the United States. Over 100 vendors and 300,000 people
attend the feast over a 3 day period in August. San Gennaro (September 19) is
another popular saint, especially among Neapolitans. Santa Rosalia (September
4), by immigrants from Sicily. Immigrants from Potenza celebrate the San
Rocco's Day (August 16) feast at the Potenza Lodge in Denver the third weekend
of August. San Rocco is the patron saint of Potenza, as is San Gerardo. Many
still celebrate the Christmas season with a Feast of the Seven Fishes. The
Feast of the Assumption is celebrated in Cleveland's Little Italy on August 15.
On this feast day, people will pin money on a Blessed Virgin Mary statue as a
symbol of prosperity. The statue is then paraded through Little Italy to Holy
Rosary Church. For almost 25 years, Cleveland Bishop Anthony Pilla participated
in the parade and Mass to celebrate his Italian heritage. Bishop Pilla retired
in April 2006, but continues to participate. While most Italian-American
families have a Catholic background, there are converts to Protestantism as
well. In the early 20th century, about 300 Protestant missionaries worked in
urban Italian American neighborhoods. Some have joined the Episcopal Church,
which still retains much of the Catholic liturgical form. Some have converted
to evangelical churches. Fiorello La Guardia was an Episcopalian on his
father's side; his mother was from the small but significant community of
Italian Jews. There is a small charismatic denomination, known as the Christian
Church of North America, which is rooted in the Italian Pentecostal Movement
that originated in Chicago in the early 20th century. A group of Italian
immigrants in Trenton, New Jersey converted to the Baptist denomination. Max
Lucado—bestselling author, alumnus of Abilene Christian University, and
preacher in the Churches of Christ—is a prominent leader. The Church of Jesus
Christ (Bickertonite), a denomination of the Latter Day Saint movement, which
is headquartered in Monongahela, Pennsylvania, counts significant numbers of
Italian-Americans in its leadership and membership. Education. During the era
of mass immigration, rural families in Italy did not place a high value on
education since they needed their children to help with chores as soon as they
were old enough. For many, this attitude did not change upon arriving in
America, where children were expected to help support the family as soon as
possible. This view toward education steadily changed with each successive
generation and, within six decades of their peak immigration year, Italian
Americans had equaled the national average in educational attainment.
Presently, according to Census Bureau data, Italian Americans have an average
high school graduation rate, and a higher rate of advanced degrees compared to
the national average. Italian Americans throughout the United States are well
represented in a wide variety of occupations and professions, from skilled
trades, to the arts, to engineering, science, mathematics, law, and medicine,
and include a number of Nobel prize winners. Language. According to the Sons of
Italy News Bureau, from 1998 to 2002 the enrollment in college Italian language
courses grew by 30%, faster than the enrollment rates for French and German.
Italian is the fourth most commonly taught foreign language in U.S. colleges
and universities behind Spanish, French, and German. According to the U.S. 2000
Census, Italian (including Sicilian) is the fifth (seventh overall) most spoken
language in the United States (tied with Vietnamese) with over 1 million
speakers. As a result of the large wave of Italian immigration to the United
States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Italian and Sicilian were
once widely spoken in much of the U.S., especially in northeastern and Great
Lakes area cities like Buffalo, Rochester, Detroit, Chicago, Cleveland, and
Milwaukee, as well as San Francisco, St. Louis and New Orleans. Italian-
language newspapers exist in many American cities, especially New York City,
and Italian-language movie theatres existed in the U.S. as late as the 1950s.
"L'Idea" is a bilingual quarterly published in Brooklyn since 1974. "Arba
Sicula" (Sicilian Dawn) is a semiannual publication of the society of the same
name, dedicated to preserving the Sicilian language. The magazine and a
periodic newsletter offer prose, poetry and comment in Sicilian, with adjacent
English translations. Today, prizes like the Bordighera Annual Poetry Prize,
founded by Daniela Gioseffi, Pietro Mastrandrea and Alfredo di Palchi, with
support from the Sonia Rraiziss-Giop Foundation and Bordighera Press, which
publishes the winners in bilingual editions, have helped to encourage writers
of the diaspora to write in Italian. Chelsea Books in New York City and Gradiva
Press on Long Island have published many bilingual books due to the efforts of
bilingual writers of the diaspora like Paolo Valesio, Alfredo de Palchi, and
Luigi Fontanella. Dr. Luigi Bonaffini of the City University of New York,
publisher of "The Journal of Italian Translation" at Brooklyn College, has
fostered Italian dialectic poetry throughout Italy and the U.S. Joseph Tusiani
of New York and New York University, a distinguished linguist and prize-winning
poet born in Italy, paved the way for Italian works of literature in English
and has published many bilingual books and Italian classics for the American
audience, among them the first complete works of Michelangelo's poems in
English to be published in the United States. All of this literary endeavor has
helped to foster the Italian language, along with Italian opera, of course, in
the United States. Many of these authors and their bilingual books are located
throughout the internet. Author Lawrence Distasi argues that the loss of spoken
Italian among the Italian American population can be tied to U.S. government
pressures during World War II. During World War II, in various parts of the
country, the U.S. government displayed signs that read, "Don't Speak the
Enemy's Language". Such signs designated the languages of the Axis powers,
German, Japanese, and Italian, as "enemy languages". Shortly after the Axis
powers declared war on the U.S., many Italian, Japanese and German citizens
were interned. Among the Italian Americans, those who spoke Italian, who had
never become citizens, and who belonged to groups that praised Benito
Mussolini, were most likely to become candidates for internment. Distasi claims
that many Italian language schools closed down in the San Francisco Bay Area
within a week of the U.S. declaration of war on the Axis powers. Such closures
were inevitable since most of the teachers in Italian languages were interned.
Despite previous decline, Italian and Sicilian are still spoken and studied by
those of Italian American descent, and it can be heard in various American
communities, especially among older Italian Americans. During the late 20th and
early 21st centuries, interest in Italian language and culture has surged among
Italian Americans. The official Italian that is taught in colleges and
universities is an amalgam of the Tuscan and Roman dialects. It is generally
not the "Italian" with which Italian Americans are generally acquainted.
Because the languages spoken by Italian Americans come from a time just after
the unification of Italy, their languages are in many ways archaic and resemble
the southern Italian and Sicilian dialects of pre-unification Italy. These
variations, though still spoken along with Standard Italian (Tuscan/Roman),
have also evolved in minor ways. Despite it being the fifth most studied
language in higher education (college and graduate) settings throughout
America, the Italian language has struggled to maintain being an AP course of
study in high schools nationwide. It was only in 2006 that AP Italian classes
were first introduced, and they were soon dropped from the national curricula
after the spring of 2009. The organization which manages such curricula, the
College Board, ended the AP Italian program because it was "losing money" and
had failed to add 5,000 new students each year. Since the program's termination
in the spring of 2009, various Italian organizations and activists have
attempted to revive the course of study. Most notable in the effort is Margaret
Cuomo, sister of New York Governor Andrew Cuomo. She provided the impetus for
the program's birth in 2006 and is currently attempting to secure funding and
teachers to reinstate the program. It is also worth noting that Italian
organizations have begun fundraisers to revive AP Italian. Organizations such
as the NIAF and Order Sons of Italy in America have made strides in collecting
money, and are prepared to aid in the monetary responsibility any new AP
Italian program would bring with it. Moreover, web-based Italian organizations,
such as ItalianAware, have begun book donation campaigns to improve the status
and representation of Italian and Italian American literature in the New York
public libraries. According to ItalianAware, the Brooklyn Public Library is the
worst offender in New York City. It has 11 books pertaining to the Italian
immigrant experience available for checkout spread across 60 branches. That
amounts to 1 book for every 6 branches in Brooklyn, which (according to
ItalianAware) cannot supply the large Italian/Italian American community in the
borough. ItalianAware aims to donate 100 books to the Brooklyn Public Library
by the end of 2010. Newspapers. Generoso Pope (1891–1950), the owner of a
chain of Italian-language newspapers in major cities, stands out as the epitome
of the Italian American ethnic political broker. He bought "Il Progresso Italo-
Americano" in 1928 for $2 million; he doubled its circulation to 200,000 in New
York City, making it the largest Italian-language paper in the country. He
purchased additional papers in New York and Philadelphia, which became the
chief source of political, social, and cultural information for the community.
Pope encouraged his readers to learn English, become citizens, and vote; his
goal was to instill pride and ambition to succeed in modern America. A
conservative Democrat who ran the Columbus Day parade and admired Mussolini,
Pope was the most powerful enemy of anti-Fascism among Italian Americans.
Closely associated with Tammany Hall politics in New York, Pope and his
newspapers played a vital role in securing the Italian vote for Franklin D.
Roosevelt's Democratic tickets. He served as chairman of the Italian Division
of the Democratic National Committee in 1936, and helped persuade the president
to take a neutral attitude over Italy's invasion of Ethiopia. He broke with
Mussolini in 1941 and enthusiastically supported the American war effort. In
the late 1940s Pope supported the election of William O'Dwyer as mayor in 1945
and Harry S. Truman as president. His business concerns continued to prosper
under New York's Democratic administrations, and in 1946 he added the Italian-
language radio station WHOM to his media holdings. In the early years of the
Cold War, Pope was a leading anti-Communist and orchestrated a letter-writing
campaign by his subscribers to stop the Communists from winning the Italian
elections in 1948. Voters did not always vote the way editorials dictated, but
they depended on the news coverage. At many smaller papers, support for
Mussolini, short-sighted opportunism, deference to political patrons who were
not members of the Italian-American communities, and the necessity of making a
living through periodicals with a small circulation, generally weakened the
owners of Italian-language newspapers when they tried to become political
brokers of the Italian American vote. James V. Donnaruma purchased Boston's "La
Gazzetta del Massachusetts" in 1905. "La Gazzetta" enjoyed a wide readership in
Boston's Italian community because it emphasized detailed coverage of local
ethnic events and explained how events in Europe affected the community.
Donnaruma's editorial positions, however, were frequently at odds with the
sentiments of his readership. Donnaruma's conservative views and desire for
greater advertising revenue prompted him to court the favor of Boston's
Republican elite, to whom he pledged editorial support in return for the
purchase of advertising space for political campaigns. "La Gazzetta"
consistently supported Republican candidates and policy positions, even when
the party was proposing and passing laws to restrict Italian immigration.
Nevertheless, voting records from the 1920s-1930s show that Boston's Italian
Americans voted heavily for Democratic candidates. Carmelo Zito took over the
San Francisco newspaper "Il Corriere del Popolo" in 1935. Under Zito, it became
one of the fiercest foes of Mussolini's fascism on the West Coast. It
vigorously attacked Italy's 1935 invasion of Ethiopia and its intervention in
the Spanish Civil War. Zito helped form the Italian-American Anti-Fascist
League and often attacked certain Italian prominenti like Ettore Patrizi,
publisher of "L'Italia" and "La Voce del Popolo". Zito's paper campaigned
against alleged Italian pro-Fascist language schools of San Francisco. In 1909,
Vincenzo Giuliano, an immigrant from Calabria, Italy, and his wife Maria
(Oliva) founded "La Tribune Italiana d'America", known today as "The Italian
Tribune", which circulates throughout southeastern Michigan. After landing in
New York, Giuliano went to Pittsburgh, where he worked as a clerk in a bank. At
the end of four months, he returned to New York and worked in the wholesale
liquor business for a year. He then moved to Utica, New York, where he worked
in a factory for a short time, after which he went to Chicago. To give a voice
to his fellow immigrants in Chicago, he created a pro-union paper that
reflected their concerns. Not long after the Chicago paper began, a Detroit
group asked him to start a newspaper for Italians there, and thus "La Tribuna
Italiana d’America" was born. A second newspaper founded by a Catholic order
of priests, " La Voce del Popolo" also served the Metro Detroit community until
the 1920s, when that newspaper merged with "La Tribuna Italiana d’America".
Upon Giuliano's death in the 1960s, his grandson Edward M. Baker assumed the
role of publisher, along with his wife, Marlene. For over 50 years the couple
ran the newspaper and were cornerstones of the Italian American community in
Detroit. Upon Edward Baker's death in 2004 and his wife's death in 2009, their
daughters Marilyn Borner and Pam White have taken over as publishers of the
newspaper. Marilyn's daughter, Linda Richardson, and son, Daniel Kammer, are
both active in the business as well, making five generations of the Giuliano
family to run the paper. The content of the paper has changed a bit. In the
early days, it focused on English language lessons, citizenship requirements
and the basic necessities for living in Metro Detroit. Now the paper's focus is
on providing the Italian American community news and events of Italian American
clubs, organizations, churches, senior centers and entertainment venues in
Metro Detroit. Folklore. The most characteristic and popular of Italian
American cultural contributions has been their feasts. Throughout the United
States, wherever one may find an "Italian neighborhood" (often referred to as
"Little Italy"), one can find festive celebrations such as the well-known Feast
of San Gennaro in New York City, the unique Our Lady of Mount Carmel "Giglio"
Feast in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, New York, Italian feasts involve
elaborate displays of devotion to Jesus Christ and patron saints. On the
weekend of the last Sunday in August, the residents of Boston's North End
celebrate the "Feast of all Feasts" in honor of St. Anthony of Padua, which was
started over 300 years ago in Montefalcione, Italy. Perhaps the most widely
known is St. Joseph's feast day on March 19. These feasts are much more than
simply isolated events within the year. Feast ("Festa" in Italian) is an
umbrella term for the various secular and religious, indoor and outdoor
activities surrounding a religious holiday. Typically, Italian feasts consist
of festive communal meals, religious services, games of chance and skill and
elaborate outdoor processions consisting of statues resplendent in jewels and
donations. The celebration usually takes place over the course of several days,
and is communally prepared by a church community or a religious organization
over the course of several months. Currently, there are more than 300 Italian
feasts celebrated throughout the United States. The largest is Festa Italiana,
held in Milwaukee every summer. These feasts are visited each year by millions
of Americans from various backgrounds who come together to enjoy Italian music
and food delicacies. In the past, as to this day, an important part of Italian
American culture centers around music and cuisine. Stereotyping. In 1891,
eleven Italian immigrants in New Orleans were lynched due to their alleged role
in the murder of the police chief David Hennessy. This was one of the largest
mass lynchings in U.S. history. The lynching took place after nine of the
immigrants were tried for the murder and acquitted. Subsequently, a mob broke
into the jail where they were being held and dragged them out to be lynched,
together with two other Italians who were being held in the jail at the time,
but had not been accused in the killing. In 1920, two Italian immigrants,
Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, were tried for robbery and murder in
Braintree, Massachusetts. Many historians agree that they were given a very
unfair and biased trial because of their anarchistic political beliefs and
their Italian immigrant status. In spite of world-wide protests, Sacco and
Vanzetti were eventually executed. While the vast majority of Italians
immigrants brought with them a tradition of honesty and hard work, a very small
minority brought a very different custom. This criminal element preyed on the
immigrants of the Little Italies, using intimidation and threats to extract
protection money from the wealthier immigrants and shop owners, and were also
involved in a multitude of other illegal activities. When the Fascists came to
power in Italy, they made the destruction of the Mafia in Sicily a high
priority. Hundreds fled to America in the 1920s and 1930s to avoid prosecution.
Prohibition, which went into effect in 1920, proved to be an economic windfall
for those in the Italian American community already involved in illegal
activities, and those who had fled from Sicily. This entailed smuggling liquor
into the country, wholesaling it, and then selling it through a network of
outlets. While other ethnic groups were also deeply involved in these illegal
ventures, and the associated violence, Chicago mobster Al Capone became the
most notorious figure of the Prohibition era. Though eventually repealed,
Prohibition had a long-term effect as the spawning ground for later criminal
activities. In the 1950s, the scope of Italian American organized crime became
well known though a number of highly publicized congressional hearings that
followed a police raid on a top-level meeting of racketeers in Apalachin, New
York. With advanced surveillance techniques, the Witness Protection Program,
the Racketeer Influenced & Corrupt Organizations Act, and vigorous and
sustained prosecution the power and influence of organized crime were greatly
diminished in the decades that followed. Two Italian American prosecutors, Rudy
Giuliani and Louis Freeh, were instrumental in bringing this about. Freeh was
later appointed director of the FBI. From the earliest days of the movie
industry, Italians have been portrayed as violent criminals and sociopaths.
This trend has continued to the present day. The stereotype of Italian
Americans is the standardized mental image which has been fostered by the
entertainment industry, especially through commercially successful movies like
"The Godfather", "Goodfellas" and "Casino"; and TV programs such as "The
Sopranos". This follows a known pattern in which it is possible for the mass
media to effectively create universally recognized, and sometimes accepted,
stereotypes. A highly publicized protest from the Italian American community
came in 2001 when the Chicago-based organization AIDA (American Italian
Defamation Association) unsuccessfully sued Time Warner for distribution of
HBO's series "The Sopranos" because of its negative portrayal of Italian
Americans. More recently, MTV launched a reality show, "Jersey Shore", which
prompted severe criticism from Italian American organizations such as the
National Italian American Foundation, Order Sons of Italy in America, and Unico
National for its stereotypical portrayal of Italian Americans. The effective
stereotyping of Italian Americans as being associated with organized crime was
shown by a comprehensive study of Italian American culture on film, conducted
from 1996 to 2001 by the Italic Institute of America. The findings showed that
over two-thirds of the more than 2,000 films studied portray Italian Americans
in a negative light. Further, close to 300 movies featuring Italian Americans
as criminals have been produced since "The Godfather", an average of nine per
year. The study also cites recent FBI statistics which indicate that Italian-
American organized crime members and associates number approximately 3,000 and,
given an Italian American population estimated to be approximately 18 million,
shows that only one in 6,000 has any involvement with organized crime.
According to the Italic Institute of America: "The mass media has consistently
ignored five centuries of Italian American history, and has elevated what was
never more than a minute subculture to the dominant Italian American culture.
Communities. Little Italies were, to a considerable extent, the product of
Italophobia by the English-speaking, WASP society. Ethnocentrism and anti-
Catholicism by Protestant English-speakers helped to create an ideological
foundation for fixing foreignness on urban spaces occupied by immigrants, who
seemed racially different from the earlier Anglo-Celtic and northern European
settlers. Communities of Italian Americans were established in most major
industrial cities of the early 20th century, such as Baltimore, Maryland;
Boston, Massachusetts (the "North End"); Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Providence, Rhode Island; St. Louis, Missouri;
Chicago, Illinois; Cleveland, Ohio; Buffalo, New York; and Kansas City,
Missouri. New Orleans, Louisiana was the first site of immigration of Italians
and Sicilians into America in the 19th century, before Italy was a unified
nation-state. This was before New York Harbor and Baltimore became the
preferred destinations for Italian immigrants. In sharp contrast to the
Northeast, most of the Southern states (exceptions being the Atlantic coast of
Florida, New Orleans, and a fast-growing community in Atlanta) have very few
Italian-American residents. During the labor shortage in the 19th and early
20th centuries, planters in the Deep South did attract some Italian immigrants
to work as sharecroppers, but they soon left the extreme anti-Italian
discrimination and strict regimen of the plantations for towns or other states.
The state of California has had Italian-American residents since the 1850s. By
the 1970s gentrification of inner city neighborhoods and the arrival of new
immigrant groups caused a sharp decline in the old Italian-American and other
ethnic enclaves. Many Italian Americans moved to the rapidly growing Western
states, including Arizona, Colorado, Nevada, and California. Today, New York
and New Jersey have the largest numbers of Italian Americans in the U.S. while
smaller Northeastern cities such as Pittsburgh, Providence and Hartford have
the highest percentage of Italian Americans in their metropolitan areas. New
York. Several Little Italies exist in New York City, including Manhattan,
Bronx, Bensonhurst, Howard Beach and Rosebank. Historically, Little Italy on
Mulberry Street in Manhattan, extends as far south as Canal Street, as far
north as Bleecker, as far west as Lafayette and as far east as the Bowery. The
neighborhood was once known for its large population of Italians. Today it
consists of Italian stores and restaurants. The Italian immigrants congregated
along Mulberry Street in Manhattan's "Little Italy" to celebrate San Gennaro as
the Patron Saint of Naples. The "Feast of San Gennaro" is a large street fair,
lasting 11 days, that takes place every September along Mulberry Street between
Houston and Canal Streets. The festival is as an annual celebration of Italian
culture and the Italian-American community. Today, much of the neighborhood has
been absorbed and engulfed by Chinatown, as immigrants from China moved to the
area. Arthur Avenue in the Fordham section of New York City's northernmost
borough, The Bronx, was once the heart of the Bronx's "Little Italy". Robert De
Niro's directing debut, "A Bronx Tale", takes place within Little Italy,
however, it was largely filmed in Astoria, Queens. The series "Third Watch" was
initially based on Arthur Avenue, with the first episode referring to the
firehouse as "Camelot", based on its location at the intersection of King
Street and Arthur Avenue. The 1973 film "The Seven-Ups", starring Roy Scheider,
was filmed on Arthur Avenue and Hoffman Street. In 2003, a scene from the HBO
series "The Sopranos" was shot in Mario's Restaurant. Leonard, of James Frey's
"A Million Little Pieces", grew up in this area. Much of the novel "Underworld"
takes place near Arthur Avenue. The author himself, Don DeLillo, grew up in
that neighborhood. Bensonhurst is heavily Italian-American, and it is usually
considered the main "Little Italy" of Brooklyn. The Italian-speaking community
remains over 20,000 strong, according to the census of 2000. However, the
Italian-speaking community is becoming "increasingly elderly and isolated, with
the small, tight-knit enclaves they built around the city slowly disappearing
as they give way to demographic changes". Its main thoroughfare, 18th Avenue
(also known as Cristoforo Colombo Boulevard) between roughly 60th Street and
Shore Parkway, is lined with predominantly small, Italian family-owned
businesses—many of which have remained in the same family for several
generations. 86th Street is another popular local thoroughfare, lined by the
arches of the elevated BMT West End Subway Line. The 18th Avenue Station was
popularized in opening credits of "Welcome Back, Kotter". Rosebank in Staten
Island was another one of NYC's main area of Italian immigrants since the
1880s, and their descendants have continued as its predominant ethnic group,
exemplified by the location of the Garibaldi Memorial in the community. In
recent years the town has experienced an influx of other ethnic groups,
including Eastern Europeans, various Latin nationalities as well as Asians,
particularly from the Philippines. Howard Beach in the Queens is also home to a
large Italian population. Philadelphia. Philadelphia's Italian American
community is the second-largest in the United States. South Philadelphia is
largely Italian, and the area has many Italian stores and restaurants.
Philadelphia is well known for its Italian Market in South Philadelphia. The
Italian Market is the popular name for the South 9th Street Curb Market, an
area of Philadelphia featuring many grocery shops, cafes, restaurants,
bakeries, cheese shops, and butcher shops, many with an Italian influence. The
historical heart of the market is the area of 9th Street between Christian
Street and Washington Avenue, and is now generally considered to extend from
Fitzwater Street at the north to Wharton Street at the south. The term Italian
Market is also used to describe the surrounding neighborhood between South
Street to the North and Wharton Street to the South running a few blocks to the
east and west of 9th street. It is entirely contained in the Bella Vista
neighborhood. The "outdoor" market features bright, colorful metal awnings that
cover the sidewalks where vendors of fruit, vegetables, fish, and housewares
conduct business year round. Ground floor shops in traditional Philadelphia
rowhouses line the street. Owners would have originally lived above their
shops, and many still do. The market has also played a role in the culture of
Philadelphia, and is often included in cultural depictions of the city. For
example, the Italian Market was featured in Rocky, most notably, the running/
training montage where a vendor tosses the boxer an orange. The television
series Hack also filmed several episodes that featured the Italian Market. The
Italian Market was also featured on a season 5 episode of the television show
Its Always Sunny in Philadelphia. Philadelphia has played a large role in
Italian-American cooking, featuring numerous Cheese Steak shacks such as Pat's
and Geno's, throughout the city and suburbs. Italian-Philadelphian's have
created, Cheese Steaks, Italian ices, Hoagies and Tomato Pie's. South
Philadelphia has produced many well-known Italian American popular singers and
musicians, including: Frankie Avalon, Jim Croce, Joey DeFrancesco, Buddy
DeFranco, Fred Diodati (lead singer of The Four Aces), Fabian, Buddy Greco,
Mario Lanza, Al Martino, Bobby Rydell, Charlie Ventura and Joe Venuti Newark.
In its heyday, Seventh Avenue in Newark was one of the largest Little Italies
in the U.S. with a population of 30,000, in an area of less than a square mile.
The center of life in the neighborhood was St. Lucy's Church, founded by
Italian immigrants in 1891. Throughout the year, St. Lucy's and other churches
sponsored processions in honor of saints that became community events. The most
famous procession was the Feast of St. Gerard, but there were also great feasts
for Our Lady of Mt. Carmel, Our Lady of Snow, the Assumption, and St. Rocco.
Joe DiMaggio loved the restaurants of Seventh Avenue so much that he would take
the New York Yankees to Newark to show them "real Italian food". Frank Sinatra
had bread from Giordano's Bakery sent to him every week until his death, no
matter where in the world he was. New York Yankees catcher Rick Cerone also
grew up in the First Ward. One of the nation's largest Italian newspapers, "The
Italian Tribune", was founded on Seventh Avenue. Seventh Avenue produced stars
such as Joe Pesci and Frankie Valli of the Four Seasons. Congressman Peter
Rodino, Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee during its impeachment
proceedings against Richard Nixon was a native of the First Ward as well.
Seventh Avenue was notoriously devastated by urban renewal efforts during the
1950s. Eighth Avenue was obliterated by the city council, scattering the
Italian American residents. Most of its businesses never recovered. The
construction of Interstate 280 also served to cut the neighborhood off from the
rest of the city. After the devastating urban renewal, some of the First Ward's
Italians stayed in the neighborhood, while others migrated to other Newark
neighborhoods like Broadway, Roseville, and the Ironbound. Syracuse. Italian
immigrants first came to the area around Syracuse, New York in 1883 after
providing labor for the construction of the West Shore Railroad. At first, they
were quite transient and came and went, but eventually settled down on the
Northside. By 1899, the Italian immigrants were living on the Northside of the
city in the area centered around Pearl Street. The Italians all but supplanted
the Germans in that area of the city and had their own business district along
North State and North Salina Streets. By September 2009, Syracuse's Little
Italy district received millions of dollars of public and private investment
for new sidewalks, streetscapes, landscaping, lighting and to set up a "Green
Train" program, which trains men to work in green construction and renovation
industries. In recent years, the neighborhood is a mix of Italian shops,
restaurants and businesses that cater to the area's South Asian and African
population. Although the neighborhood is far less Italian than in past years,
banners throughout the district still read "Little Italy". By 2010,
demographics showed that 14.1% of the population in Syracuse was Italian
descent. Providence. Federal Hill in Providence, Rhode Island, is best known
for its Italian American community and abundance of restaurants. The first two
decades of the 20th century witnessed heavy Italian-American immigration into
Federal Hill, making it the city's informal Little Italy. Though the area today
is more diverse, Federal Hill still retains its status as the traditional
center for the city's Italian-American community. The neighborhood features a
huge square dedicated to Giuseppe Garibaldi, a monumental gateway arch
decorated with La Pigna sculpture (a traditional Italian symbol of welcome,
abundance, and quality) and a DePasquale Plaza used for outdoor dining.
Providence's annual Columbus Day parade marches down Atwells Avenue. Boston.
North End in Boston since the early 20th century became the center of the
Italian community of Boston. It is still largely residential and well known for
its small, authentic Italian restaurants and for the first Italian cafe, Caffe
Vittoria. The influx of Italian inhabitants has left a lasting mark on the
area; many seminal Italian American institutions have called Boston's North End
their home. Some multi-national Italian products companies that began in the
North End include Dragone Cheese, Prince Pasta and the Pastene Corporation.
Prince Pasta was begun by three Sicilian immigrants Gaetano LaMarco, Giuseppe
Seminara, and Michele Cantella. Pastene was formed by Sicilian immigrant Luigi
Pastene. Both companies have grown into million dollar a year businesses, and
continue to succeed to this day. To fully understand the sheer size of the
Italian immigrant population, one must look back at the groups that preceded
them. The Irish, at their peak, numbered roughly 14,000 and the Jews numbered
17,000. The Italians, however, peaked at over 44,000. Chicago. Chicago's
legendary Taylor Street has been called the port of call for Chicago's Italian
American immigrants. Taylor Street's Little Italy became the laboratory upon
which Hull House, America's first settlement house, founded by Jane Addams and
Ellen Starr in 1889, tested its sociological theories and formulated its
protests to the Establishment. The Italian American experience, as documented
in the chronicles of Chicago's Taylor Street Archives, receives a unique
treatment, abandoning political correctness in favor of some hard-hitting,
finger-pointing historical accuracies. Chicago's Italian American experience
begins with the mass migration from the shores of southern Italy, the Hull
House experiment, the Great Depression, World War II, and the machinations
behind the physical demise of a neighborhood by the University of Illinois in
1963. Italian Americans dominated the inner core of the Hull House
neighborhood, 1890s–1930s. One of the first newspaper articles about Hull
House ("Chicago Tribune", May 19, 1890) acknowledges the following invitation,
written in Italian, sent to the residents of the Hull House neighborhood. It
begins with the following salutation: "Mio Carissimo Amico", and is signed, "Le
Signorine, Jane Addams and Ellen Starr". The Bethlehem-Howard Neighborhood
Center Records further substantiate the observation that, as early as the
1890s, the inner core of "The Hull House Neighborhood", from the river on the
east, Roosevelt Road on the south, Harrison Street on the north, and on out to
the neighborhood's western most boundaries, was virtually all Italian. The 1924
historic picture, "Meet the 'Hull House Kids'", was taken by Wallace K.
Kirkland Sr., one of the Hull House directors. It served as a poster for Jane
Addams and the Hull House Settlement House. All twenty kids were first
generation Italian Americans...all with vowels at the end of their names. "They
grew up to be lawyers and mechanics, sewer workers and dump truck drivers, a
candy shop owner, a boxer and a mob boss." That picture became a classic and
was circulated throughout the world. Chicago's current and official "little
Italy" is concentrated on the city's northwestern side and neighboring Elmwood
Park, which has the highest concentration of Italian Americans in the state.
Harlem Avenue, "La Corsa Italia", is lined with Italian stores, bakeries, clubs
and organizations. The Feast of our Lady of Mount Carmel, in nearby Melrose
Park, has been a regular event in the area for more than one hundred years. The
near-west suburbs of Elmwood Park, Melrose Park, Schiller Park, Franklin Park,
River Grove, Norridge, Chicago Heights, and Harwood Heights are where many
Italian Americans live. Suburban Stone Park is home of Casa Italia and the
area's Italian American cultural center. Cleveland. Cleveland's Little Italy,
also known as Murray Hill, is the epicenter of Italian culture in Northeast
Ohio, a combined statistical area reporting 285,000 (9.9%) Italian Americans.
Little Italy took root when Joseph Carabelli, immigrating in 1880, saw the
opportunity for monument work in Cleveland's Lake View Cemetery and established
what soon became the city's leading marble and granite works. Most fresco and
mosaic work in Cleveland was accomplished by Italian artist immigrants. Local
Cleveland industrial billionaire John D. Rockefeller took a special liking to
the Italian immigrants of the neighborhood and commissioned the building of the
community center Alta House, named after his daughter Alta Rockefeller
Prentice, in 1900. In 1906, Italian immigrant Angelo Vitantonio invented the
first hand-crank pasta machine, which made pasta much easier to produce by
eliminating the need to flatten and cut it by hand. Some other famous Italian
Americans from Northeast Ohio included Anthony J. Celebrezze (49th Mayor of
Cleveland), Ettore "Hector" Boiardi (Chef Boyardee), Frank Battisti (Federal
Judge), and Dean Martin, born Dino Paul Crocetti in Steubenville, Ohio. Ohio's
largest outdoor Italian American street festival, the Feast of the Assumption,
takes place the weekend of August 15 every year and draws over 100,000 people
to the Little Italy neighborhood. The festival is sponsored by the congregation
of Holy Rosary Church, which was founded in 1892 with the current church built
in 1905. Milwaukee. Italians first came to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in the late
19th century. Then in the 19th and 20th centuries large numbers of Italian
immigrants began to come in mainly from Sicily and southern Italy. Brady
Street, the historic Third Ward and the east side of Milwaukee is considered
the heart of Italian immigration to the city, where as many as 20 Italian
grocery stores once existed on Brady Street alone. Every year the largest
Italian American festival in the United States, Festa Italiana, takes place in
Milwaukee. Italians number at around 40,000 in the city, but in Milwaukee
County they number at 111,000. There is also an Italian newspaper called "The
Italian Times" printed by the Italian Community Center (ICC). Ybor City. The
community of Ybor City in Tampa, Florida is a cigar-centric company town
founded in 1885 and originally populated by a unique mix of Spanish, Cuban,
Jewish, and Italian immigrants, with most of the Italians coming from a small
group of villages in southwestern Sicily. At first, Italians found it difficult
to find employment in the insular and guild-like cigar industry, which had
moved to Tampa from Cuba and Key West and was dominated by Hispanic workers.
Many founded businesses to serve cigar workers, most notably small grocery
stores in the neighborhood's commercial district supplied by Italian-owned
vegetable and dairy farms located on open land east of Tampa's city limits. The
immigrant cultures in town became better integrated as time went by;
eventually, approximately 20% of the workers in the cigar industry were Italian
Americans. The tradition of local Italian-owned groceries continued, however,
and a handful of such businesses founded in the late 1800s were still operating
into the 21st century Many descendants of Sicilian immigrants eventually became
prominent local citizens, such as mayors Nick Nuccio and Dick Greco.
Birmingham. Birmingham, Alabama, was representative of smaller industrial
centers. Most Italians in the early 20th century came to work in the burgeoning
iron and coal industries. Dorothy L. Crim founded the Ensley Community House in
the Italian district in 1912 at the behest of the Birmingham City Mission
Board. From 1912 to 1969, Ensley House eased the often difficult transition to
American life by providing direct assistance such as youth programs and day
care services, social clubs, and 'Americanization' programs. San Francisco.
According to the 1940 census, 18.5% of all European Immigrants were Italian,
the Largest in the City. North Beach is San Francisco's Little Italy, and has
historically been home to a large Italian American population. It still holds
many Italian restaurants today, though many other ethnic groups currently live
in the neighborhood. It was also the historic center of the beatnik subculture.
Today, North Beach is one of San Francisco's main red light and nightlife
districts as well as a residential neighborhood populated by a mix of young
urban professionals, families and Chinese immigrants connected to the adjacent
Chinatown. Thanks to its valuable architectural heritage, the American Planning
Association (APA) has named North Beach as one of ten 'Great Neighborhoods in
America'. San Diego. Historically, Little Italy in San Diego was the home to
Italian fishermen and their families. Many Italians moved to San Diego from San
Francisco after the 1906 San Francisco earthquake in search of tuna and other
deep-sea sport and commercial fish. When Interstate 5 was constructed through
Little Italy in the early 1970s, 35% of the neighborhood was destroyed and
during the same time the California tuna industry was declining, which caused
the neighborhood to suffer nearly 30 years of decline. With the creation of the
Little Italy Association in 1996, the neighborhood has gone through
gentrification and has seen a renaissance as Community Benefit District
specializing in Italian food, boutique shopping and maintenance that makes this
shopping district the place to live in Downtown San Diego. Prior to
gentrification, the neighborhood was mainly composed of low-density commercial
businesses and single-family detached homes. Currently, the neighborhood is
mainly composed of residential units, mostly mid-rises, high-rises, and lofts,
with ground floor retail stores and a few commercial buildings. Demographics.
In the 2000 U.S. Census, Italian Americans constituted the fifth largest
ancestry group in America with about 15.6 million people, 5.6% of the total
U.S. population. Sicilian Americans are a subset of numerous Americans of
regional Italian ancestries. As of 2006, the U.S. Census estimated the Italian-
American population at 17.8 million persons, or 6% of the population,
constituting a 14% increase over the six year period. U.S. States with over
100,000 people of Italian ancestry. [[Image:Most common ancestries in the
United States.svg|400px|thumb|right|Plurality ancestry in each state, ranging
from 11.8% (FL) to 43.9% (ND).
