Louisiana Louisiana ( or ; , ; Louisiana Creole: "LÃ©ta de la LwizyÃ n") is a
state located in the southern region of the United States of America. Louisiana
is the 31st most extensive and the 25th most populous of the 50 United States.
Its capital is Baton Rouge and largest city is New Orleans. Louisiana is the
only state in the U.S. with political subdivisions termed parishes, which are
local governments equivalent to counties. The largest parish by population is
East Baton Rouge Parish, and the largest by land area is Cameron Parish. Much
of the state was formed from sediment washed down the Mississippi River,
leaving enormous deltas and vast areas of coastal marsh and swamp. These
contain a rich southern biota; typical examples include birds such as ibis and
egrets. There are also many species of tree frogs, and fish such as sturgeon
and paddlefish. In more elevated areas, fire is a natural process in the
landscape, and has produced extensive areas of longleaf pine forest and wet
savannas. These support an exceptionally large number of plant species
including many species of orchids and carnivorous plants. Some Louisiana urban
environments have a multicultural, multilingual heritage, being so strongly
influenced by an admixture of 18th century French, Spanish, Native American
(Indian) and African cultures that they are considered to be somewhat
exceptional in the U.S. Before the American influx and statehood at the
beginning of the 19th century, the territory of current Louisiana State had
been both a Spanish and French colony. In addition, the pattern of development
included importing numerous African slaves in the 18th century, with many from
the same region of West Africa, thus concentrating their culture. Toponym.
Louisiana was named after Louis XIV, King of France from 1643â€“1715. When
RenÃ©-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle claimed the territory drained by here
the Mississippi River for France, he named it , meaning "Land of Louis". Once
part of the French Colonial Empire, the Louisiana Territory stretched from
present-day Mobile Bay to just north of the present-day Canadian border, and
included a small part of what is now southwestern Canada. Geology. Even the
Gulf of Mexico did not exist 250 million years ago when there was but one
supercontinent, Pangea. As Pangea split apart, the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of
Mexico opened. Louisiana was then slowly built, over millions of years, from
water into land, and from north to south. The oldest rocks are exposed in the
north, in areas like the Kisatchie National Forest. The oldest rocks date back
only to the early Tertiary Era, some 60 million years ago. The best history of
the formation of these rocks can be found in Spearing's "Geological History of
Lousiana". The youngest parts of the state were formed over the last 7,500
years as deltas of the Mississippi River: The Maringouin, Teche, St. Bernard,
Lafourche, the modern Mississippi, and now the Atchafalaya. The sediments were
carried from north to south by the Mississippi River. In between the Tertiary
rocks of the north, and the relatively new sediments along the coast, is a vast
belt known as the Pleistocene Terraces. Their age and distribution can be
largely related to the rise and fall of sea levels during past ice ages. In
general, the northern terraces have had sufficient time for rivers to cut deep
channels, while the newer terraces tend to be much flatter. Salt domes are also
found in Louisiana. Their origin can be traced back to the early Gulf of
Mexico, when the shallow ocean had high rates of evaporation. There are several
hundred salt domes in the state; one of the most familiar is Avery Island. Salt
domes are important not only as a source of salt; they also serve as
underground traps for oil and gas. Geography. Topography. Louisiana is bordered
to the west by Texas; to the north by Arkansas; to the east by the state of
Mississippi; and to the south by the Gulf of Mexico. The surface of the state
may properly be divided into two parts, the uplands of the north, and the
alluvial along the coast. The alluvial region includes low swamp lands, coastal
marshlands and beaches, and barrier islands that cover about . This area lies
principally along the Gulf of Mexico and the Mississippi River, which traverses
the state from north to south for a distance of about 600 miles (1,000Â km) and
empties into the Gulf of Mexico; the Red River; the Ouachita River and its
branches; and other minor streams (some of which are called bayous). The
breadth of the alluvial region along the Mississippi is from 10 to 60 miles (15
to 100Â km), and along the other rivers the alluvial region averages about 10
miles (15Â km) across. The Mississippi River flows along a ridge formed by its
own deposits (known as a levee), from which the lands decline toward a river
beyond at an average fall of six feet per mile (3Â m/km). The alluvial lands
along other streams present similar features. The higher and contiguous hill
lands of the north and northwestern part of the state have an area of more than
. They consist of prairie and woodlands. The elevations above sea level range
from 10 feet (3Â m) at the coast and swamp lands to 50 and 60 feet (15â€“18Â m)
at the prairie and alluvial lands. In the uplands and hills, the elevations
rise to Driskill Mountain, the highest point in the state at only 535 feet
(163Â m) above sea level. Besides the navigable waterways already named, there
are the Sabine (Sah-BEAN), forming the western boundary; and the Pearl, the
eastern boundary; the Calcasieu (KAL-cah-shew), the Mermentau, the Vermilion,
Bayou Teche, the Atchafalaya (a-CHAF-a-LI-a), the Boeuf (bEHf), Bayou
Lafourche, the Courtableau, Bayou D'Arbonne, the Macon, the Tensas (TEN-saw),
Amite River, the Tchefuncte (CHA-Funk-ta), the Tickfaw, the Natalbany, and a
number of other smaller streams, constituting a natural system of navigable
waterways, aggregating over long. The state also has political jurisdiction
over the approximately -wide portion of subsea land of the inner continental
shelf in the Gulf of Mexico. Through a peculiarity of the political geography
of the United States, this is substantially less than the -wide jurisdiction of
nearby states Texas and Florida, which, like Louisiana, have extensive Gulf
coastlines. The southern coast of Louisiana in the United States is among the
fastest disappearing areas in the world. This is largely a consequence of human
mismanagement of the coast (see Wetlands of Louisiana). At one time, the land
actually grew when spring floods from the Mississippi River added sediment and
stimulated marsh growth; the land is now shrinking. There are multiple causes.
Artificial levees now block spring flood water that would bring fresh water and
sediment to marshes. Swamps have been extensively logged, leaving canals and
ditches that allow saline water to move inland. Canals dug for the oil and gas
industry also allow storms to move sea water inland where it damages swamps and
marshes. Rising sea waters have exacerbated the problem. Some estimates
conclude that the state is losing a land mass equivalent to 30 football fields
every day. There are many proposals to save coastal areas by reducing human
damage, including restoring natural floods from the Mississippi. Without such
restoration, coastal communities will continue to disappear. And as the
communities disappear, more and more people are leaving the region. Since the
coastal wetlands also support an economically important coastal fishery, the
loss of wetlands will also negatively affect this industry. Climate. Louisiana
has a humid subtropical climate (KÃ¶ppen climate classification "Cfa"), perhaps
the most "classic" example of a humid subtropical climate of all the
Southcentral states, with long, hot, humid summers and short, mild winters. The
subtropical characteristics of the state are due in large part to the influence
of the Gulf of Mexico, which even at its farthest point is no more than 200
miles (320Â km) away. Precipitation is frequent throughout the year, although
the summer is slightly wetter than the rest of the year. There is a dip in
precipitation in October. Southern Louisiana receives far more copious
rainfall, especially during the winter months. Summers in Louisiana are hot and
humid, with high temperatures from mid-June to mid-September averaging 90 Â°F
(32 Â°C) or more and overnight lows averaging above 70 Â°F (22 Â°C). In the
summer, the extreme maximum temperature is much warmer in the north than in the
south, with temperatures near the Gulf of Mexico occasionally reaching 100 Â°F
(38 Â°C), although temperatures above 95 Â°F (35 Â°C) are commonplace. In
northern Louisiana, the temperatures reach above 105 Â°F (41 Â°C) in the
summer. Temperatures are generally mildly warm in the winter in the southern
part of the state, with highs around New Orleans, Baton Rouge, the rest of
south Louisiana, and the Gulf of Mexico averaging 66 Â°F (19 Â°C), while the
northern part of the state is mildly cool in the winter with highs averaging 59
Â°F (15 Â°C). The overnight lows in the winter average well above freezing
throughout the state, with 46 Â°F (8 Â°C) the average near the Gulf and an
average low of 37 Â°F (3 Â°C) in the winter in the northern part of the state.
Louisiana does have its share of cold fronts, which frequently drop the
temperatures below 20 Â°F (âˆ’8 Â°C) in the northern part of the state, but
almost never do so in the southern part of the state. Snow is not very common
near the Gulf of Mexico, although those in the northern parts of the state can
expect one to three snowfalls per year, with the frequency increasing
northwards. Louisiana's highest recorded temperature is in Plain Dealing on
August 10, 1936 while the coldest recorded temperature is at Minden on February
13, 1899. Louisiana is often affected by tropical cyclones and is very
vulnerable to strikes by major hurricanes, particularly the lowlands around and
in the New Orleans area. The unique geography of the region with the many
bayous, marshes and inlets can make major hurricanes especially destructive.
The area is also prone to frequent thunderstorms, especially in the summer. The
entire state averages over 60 days of thunderstorms a year, more than any other
state except Florida. Louisiana averages 27 tornadoes annually, some in part in
2010. The entire state is vulnerable to a tornado strike, with the extreme
southern portion of the state slightly less so than the rest of the state.
Tornadoes are much more common from January to March in the southern part of
the state, and from February through March in the northern part of the state.
Geographic and statistical areas. Louisiana is divided into 64 parishes (the
equivalent of counties in most other states). File:
LPD18USSNewOrleansPassingNewOrleans.jpg|New Orleans 360,740 File:OKC
BatonRougeSkyline.JPG|Baton Rouge 230,139 File:Shreveskyline.JPG|Shreveport
200,975 File:VeteransBlvdMetairie.jpg|Metairie 138,481 File:
Lafayetteair.jpg|Lafayette 122,130 File:Downtown Lake Charles.JPG|Lake Charles
72,475 File:Kenner, LA.jpg|Kenner 66,715 File:Bossier City Brdwlk.jpg|Bossier
City 62,745 File:Monroe, LA, City Hall IMG 1291.JPG|Monroe 48,815 File:
DowntownAlexandria3rd.jpg|Alexandria 47,723  Protected areas. Owing to its
location, and geology, the state has high biological diversity. Some vital
areas, such as southwestern prairie, have experienced a loss in excess of 98
percent. The pine flatwoods of the Florida parishes are also at great risk,
mostly from fire suppression and urban sprawl. There is not yet a properly
organized system of natural areas to represent and protect Louisiana's
biological diversity. Such as system would consist of a protected system of
core areas linked by biological corridors, such as Florida is planning. None-
the-less, Louisiana contains a number of areas which are, in varying degrees,
protected from human intervention. In addition to National Park Service sites
and areas and a United States National Forest, Louisiana operates a system of
state parks, state historic sites, one state preservation area, one state
forest, and many Wildlife Management Areas. The Nature Conservancy also owns
and manages a set of natural areas. One of Louisiana's largest natural areas is
Kisatchie National Forest. It is some 600,000 acres in area, more than half of
which is vital flatwoods vegetation, which supports many rare plant and animal
species. These include the Louisiana pine snake and Red-cockaded woodpecker.
The system of protected cypress swamps around Lake Pontchartrain provides
another large and important natural area, with southern wetland species
including egrets, alligators, and sturgeon. At least 12 core areas would be
needed to build a protected areas system for the state; these would range from
southwestern prairies, to the Pearl River Floodplain in the east, to the
Mississippi River alluvial swamps in the north. The Louisiana Natural and
Scenic Rivers System provides a degree of protection for 48 rivers, streams and
bayous in the state. It is administered by the Louisiana Department of Wildlife
and Fisheries State parks and recreational areas. Louisiana operates a system
of 22 state parks, 17 state historic sites and one state preservation area.
Transportation. In March 2011, Louisiana ranked as the second bottom "Worst"
state (next to number 50 Kentucky), in the American State Litter Scorecard. The
Pelican State suffers from an overall poor effectiveness and quality of its
statewide public space cleanliness (primarily from roadway and adjacent litter/
debris)--in state and related eradication standards. The Louisiana Department
of Transportation and Development is the state government organization in
charge of maintaining public transportation, roadways, bridges, canals, select
levees, floodplain management, port facilities, commercial vehicles, and
aviation which includes 69 airports. United States highways. The Intracoastal
Waterway is an important means of transporting commercial goods such as
petroleum and petroleum products, agricultural produce, building materials and
manufactured goods. In 2011, Louisiana ranked among the five deadliest states
for debris/litter â€“caused vehicle accidents per total number of registered
vehicles and population size. Figures derived from the NTSHA show at least 25
persons in Louisiana were killed each year in motor vehicle collisions with
non-fixed objects, including debris, dumped litter, animals and their
carcasses. History. Prehistory. Louisiana was inhabited by Native Americans for
many millennia before the arrival of Europeans in the 16th century. During the
Middle Archaic period, Louisiana was the site of the earliest mound complex in
North America and one of the earliest dated, complex constructions in the
Americas, the Watson Brake site near present-day Monroe. An 11-mound complex,
it was built about 5400 BP (3500 BCE). The Middle Archaic sites of Caney and
Frenchman's Bend have also been securely dated to 5600-5000 BP, demonstrating
that seasonal hunter-gatherers organized to build complex constructions in
present-day northern Louisiana. The Hedgepeth Site in Lincoln Parish is more
recent, dated to 5200-4500 BP. Nearly 2,000 years later, Poverty Point, the
largest and best-known Late Archaic site in the state, was built. Modern-day
Epps developed near it. The Poverty Point culture may have hit its peak around
1500 BCE, making it the first complex culture, and possibly the first tribal
culture in North America. It lasted until approximately 700 BCE. The Poverty
Point culture was followed by the Tchefuncte and Lake Cormorant cultures of the
Tchula period, local manifestations of Early Woodland period. The Tchefuncte
culture were the first people in Louisiana to make large amounts of pottery.
These cultures lasted until 200 CE. The Middle Woodland period starts in
Louisiana with the Marksville culture in the southern and eastern part of the
state and the Fourche Maline culture in the northwestern part of the state. The
Marksville culture takes its name from the Marksville Prehistoric Indian Site
in Avoyelles Parish, Louisiana. These cultures were contemporaneous with the
Hopewell cultures of Ohio and Illinois, and participated in the Hopewell
Exchange Network. Trade with peoples to the southwest brought the bow and arrow
The first burial mounds were built at this time. Political power begins to be
consolidated as the first platform mounds at ritual centers are constructed for
the developing hereditary political and religious leadership. By 400 CE in the
southern part of the state the Late Woodland period had begun with the Baytown
culture and it was not all that much of a change in the cultural history of the
area. Population increased dramatically and there is strong evidence of a
growing cultural and political complexity. Many Coles Creek sites were erected
over earlier Woodland period mortuary mounds, leading researchers to speculate
that emerging elites were symbolically and physically appropriating dead
ancestors to emphasize and project their own authority. The Mississippian
period in Louisiana sees the emergence of the Plaquemine and the Caddoan
Mississippian cultures. This period is when extensive maize agriculture is
adopted. The Plaquemine culture in the lower Mississippi River Valley in
western Mississippi and eastern Louisiana begins in 1200 CE and goes to about
1400 CE. Good examples of this culture are the Medora Site in West Baton Rouge
Parish, Louisiana, and the Emerald Mound, Winterville and Holly Bluff sites in
Mississippi. Plaquemine culture was contemporaneous with the Middle
Mississippian culture in the Cahokia site near St. Louis, Missouri. This group
is considered ancestral to the Natchez and Taensa Peoples. By 1000 CE in the
northwestern part of the state the Fourche Maline culture had evolved into the
Caddoan Mississippian culture. The Caddoan Mississippians covered a large
territory, including what is now eastern Oklahoma, western Arkansas, northeast
Texas, and northwest Louisiana. Archeological evidence that the cultural
continuity is unbroken from prehistory to the present, and that the direct
ancestors of the Caddo and related Caddo language speakers in prehistoric times
and at first European contact and the modern Caddo Nation of Oklahoma is
unquestioned today. Many current place names in the state, including
Atchafalaya, Natchitouches (now spelled Natchitoches), Caddo, Houma,
Tangipahoa, and Avoyel (as Avoyelles), are transliterations of those used in
various Native American languages. Exploration and colonization by Europeans.
The first European explorers to visit Louisiana came in 1528 when a Spanish
expedition led by Panfilo de NarvÃ¡ez located the mouth of the Mississippi
River. In 1542, Hernando de Soto's expedition skirted to the north and west of
the state (encountering Caddo and Tunica groups) and then followed the
Mississippi River down to the Gulf of Mexico in 1543. Then Spanish interest in
Louisiana lay dormant. In the late 17th century, French and French Canadian
expeditions, which included sovereign, religious and commercial aims,
established a foothold on the Mississippi River and Gulf Coast. With its first
settlements, France lay claim to a vast region of North America and set out to
establish a commercial empire and French nation stretching from the Gulf of
Mexico to Canada. In 1682, the French explorer Robert Cavelier de La Salle
named the region Louisiana to honor France's King Louis XIV. The first
permanent settlement, Fort Maurepas (at what is now Ocean Springs, Mississippi,
near Biloxi), was founded by Pierre Le Moyne d'Iberville, a French military
officer from Canada, in 1699. By then the French had also built a small fort at
the mouth of the Mississippi at a settlement they named La Balise (or La
Balize), "seamark" in French. By 1721 they built a wooden lighthouse-type
structure to guide ships on the river. The French colony of Louisiana
originally claimed all the land on both sides of the Mississippi River and
north to French territory in Canada. The following States were part of
Louisiana: Louisiana, Mississippi, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Missouri, Kansas,
Nebraska, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, North
Dakota, South Dakota. The settlement of Natchitoches (along the Red River in
present-day northwest Louisiana) was established in 1714 by Louis Juchereau de
St. Denis, making it the oldest permanent European settlement in the Louisiana
Purchase territory. The French settlement had two purposes: to establish trade
with the Spanish in Texas, and to deter Spanish advances into Louisiana. Also,
the northern terminus of the Old San Antonio Road was at Natchitoches. The
settlement soon became a flourishing river port and crossroads, giving rise to
vast cotton kingdoms along the river. Over time, planters developed large
plantations and built fine homes in a growing town. This became a pattern
repeated in New Orleans and other places. Louisiana's French settlements
contributed to further exploration and outposts, concentrated along the banks
of the Mississippi and its major tributaries, from Louisiana to as far north as
the region called the Illinois Country, around present-day St. Louis, Missouri.
"See also:" French colonization of the Americas Initially Mobile, Alabama, and
Biloxi, Mississippi, functioned as the capital of the colony. Recognizing the
importance of the Mississippi River to trade and military interests, France
made New Orleans the seat of civilian and military authority in 1722. From then
until the United States acquired the territory in the Louisiana Purchase on
December 20, 1803, France and Spain traded control of the region's colonial
empire. In the 1720s, German immigrants settled along the Mississippi River in
a region referred to as the German Coast. France ceded most of its territory to
the east of the Mississippi to Great Britain in the aftermath of Britain's
victory in the Seven Years' War or French and Indian War, as it is known in
North America. It retained the area around New Orleans and the parishes around
Lake Pontchartrain. The rest of Louisiana became a colony of Spain after the
Seven Years' War by the Treaty of Fontainebleau of 1763. In 1765, during the
period of Spanish rule, several thousand French-speaking refugees from the
region of Acadia (now Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island,
Canada) made their way to Louisiana after having been expelled from their
homelands by the British during the French and Indian War. They settled chiefly
in the southwestern Louisiana region now called Acadiana. The Spanish, eager to
gain more Catholic settlers, welcomed the Acadian refugees. Cajuns descend from
these Acadian refugees. Spanish Canary Islanders, called IsleÃ±os, emigrated
from the Canary Islands of Spain to Louisiana under the Spanish crown between
1778 and 1783. In 1800, France's Napoleon Bonaparte reacquired Louisiana from
Spain in the Treaty of San Ildefonso, an arrangement kept secret for two years.
Expansion of slavery. In 1709, French financier Antoine Crozat obtained a
monopoly of commerce in the French dominion of Louisiana that extended from the
Gulf of Mexico to what is now Illinois. "That concession allowed him to bring
in a cargo of blacks from Africa every year," the British historian Hugh Thomas
wrote. When France sold the Louisiana territory to the United States in 1803,
it was soon accepted that enslaved Africans could be brought there as easily as
they were brought to neighboring Mississippi though it violated U.S. law to do
so. Though Louisiana was, at the start of the 19th century, a small producer of
sugar with a relatively small number of slaves, it soon became a big sugar
producer after plantation owners purchased enslaved people who had been
transported from Africa and then to South Carolina before being sold in
Louisiana where plantation owners forced the captive labor to work at no pay on
their growing sugar cane plantations. Despite demands by United States Rep.
James Hillhouse and by the pamphleteer Thomas Paine to enforce existing federal
law against slavery in the newly acquired territory., slavery prevailed because
it was the source of great profits and the lowest cost labor. The last Spanish
governor of the Louisiana territory wrote that "Truly, it is impossible for
lower Louisiana to get along without slaves" and with the use of slaves, the
colony had been "making great strides toward prosperity and wealth." Forced
slave labor was needed, said William C. C. Claiborne, Louisiana's first United
States governor, because unforced white laborers "cannot be had in this
unhealthy climate." Hugh Thomas wrote that Claiborne was unable to enforce the
abolition of trafficking in human beings where he was charged with doing so in
Louisiana. Haitian migration and influence. Pierre ClÃ©ment de Laussat
(Governor of Louisiana, 1803): "Saint-Domingue was, of all our colonies in the
Antilles, the one whose mentality and customs influenced Louisiana the most."
Louisiana and her Caribbean parent colony developed intimate links during the
18th century, centered on maritime trade, the exchange of capital and
information, and the migration of colonists. From such beginnings, Haitians
exerted a profound influence on Louisiana's politics, people, religion, and
culture. The colony's officials, responding to anti-slavery plots and uprisings
on the island, banned the entry of enslaved Saint Dominguans in 1763. Their
rebellious actions would continue to impact upon Louisiana's slave trade and
immigration policies throughout the age of the American and French revolutions.
These two democratic struggles struck fear in the hearts of the Spaniards, who
governed Louisiana from 1763 to 1800. They suppressed what they saw as
seditious activities and banned subversive materials in a futile attempt to
isolate their colony from the spread of democratic revolution. In May 1790 a
royal decree prohibited the entry of blacks â€“ enslaved and free â€“ from the
French West Indies. A year later, the first successful slave revolt in history
started, which would lead eventually to the founding of Haiti. The revolution
in Saint Domingue unleashed a massive multiracial exodus: the French fled with
the slaves they managed to keep; so did numerous free people of color, some of
whom were slaveholders themselves. In addition in 1793, a catastrophic fire
destroyed two-thirds of the principal city, Cap FranÃ§ais (present-day Cap
HaÃ¯tien), and nearly ten thousand people left the island for good. In the
ensuing decades of revolution, foreign invasion, and civil war, thousands more
fled the turmoil. Many moved eastward to Santo Domingo (present-day Dominican
Republic) or to nearby Caribbean islands. Large numbers of immigrants, black
and white, found shelter in North America, notably in New York, Baltimore
(fifty-three ships landed there in July 1793), Philadelphia, Norfolk,
Charleston and Savannah as well as in Spanish Florida. Nowhere on the
continent, however, did the refugee movement exert as profound an influence as
in southern Louisiana. Between 1791 and 1803, thirteen hundred refugees arrived
in New Orleans. The authorities were concerned that some had come with
"seditious" ideas. In the spring of 1795, Pointe CoupÃ©e was the scene of an
attempted insurrection during which planters' homes were burned down. Following
the incident, a free Ã©migrÃ© from Saint Domingue, Louis Benoit, accused of
being "very imbued with the revolutionary maxims which have devastated the said
colony" was banished. The failed uprising caused planter Joseph Pontalba to
take "heed of the dreadful calamities of Saint Domingue, and of the germ of
revolt only too widespread among our slaves." Continued unrest in Pointe
CoupÃ©e and on the German Coast contributed to a decision to shut down the
entire slave trade in the spring of 1796. In 1800 Louisiana officials debated
reopening it, but they agreed that Saint Domingue blacks would be barred from
entry. They also noted the presence of black and white insurgents from the
French West Indies who were "propagating dangerous doctrines among our
Negroes." Their slaves seemed more "insolent," "ungovernable," and
"insubordinate" than they had been just five years before. That same year,
Spain ceded Louisiana back to France, and planters continued to live in fear of
revolts. After future emperor Napoleon Bonaparte sold the colony to the United
States in 1803 because his disastrous expedition against Saint Domingue had
stretched his finances and military too thin, events in the island loomed even
larger in Louisiana. Purchase by the United States. When the United States won
its independence from Great Britain in 1783, one of its major concerns was
having a European power on its western boundary, and the need for unrestricted
access to the Mississippi River. As American settlers pushed west, they found
that the Appalachian Mountains provided a barrier to shipping goods eastward.
The easiest way to ship produce was to use a flatboat to float it down the Ohio
and Mississippi Rivers to the port of New Orleans, from whence goods could be
put on ocean-going vessels. The problem with this route was that the Spanish
owned both sides of the Mississippi below Natchez. Napoleon's ambitions in
Louisiana involved the creation of a new empire centered on the Caribbean sugar
trade. By the terms of the Treaty of Amiens of 1800, Great Britain returned
ownership of the islands of Martinique and Guadaloupe to the French. Napoleon
looked upon Louisiana as a depot for these sugar islands, and as a buffer to
U.S. settlement. In October 1801 he sent a large military force to conquer the
important island of Santo Domingo and re-introduced slavery, which had been
abolished in St. Domingue following a slave revolt there in 1792-3, and the
legal and constitutional abolition of slavery in French colonies in 1794. When
the army led by Napoleon's brother-in-law Leclerc was defeated by the forces
opposed to the re-enslavement of most of the population of St. Domingue,
Napoleon decided to sell Louisiana. Thomas Jefferson, third President of the
United States, was disturbed by Napoleon's plans to re-establish French
colonies in America. With the possession of New Orleans, Napoleon could close
the Mississippi to U.S. commerce at any time. Jefferson authorized Robert R.
Livingston, U.S. Minister to France, to negotiate for the purchase of the City
of New Orleans, portions of the east bank of the Mississippi, and free
navigation of the river for U.S. commerce. Livingston was authorized to pay up
to $2 million. An official transfer of Louisiana to French ownership had not
yet taken place, and Napoleon's deal with the Spanish was a poorly kept secret
on the frontier. On October 18, 1802, however, Juan Ventura Morales, Acting
Intendant of Louisiana, made public the intention of Spain to revoke the right
of deposit at New Orleans for all cargo from the United States. The closure of
this vital port to the United States caused anger and consternation. Commerce
in the west was virtually blockaded. Historians believe that the revocation of
the right of deposit was prompted by abuses of the Americans, particularly
smuggling, and not by French intrigues as was believed at the time. President
Jefferson ignored public pressure for war with France, and appointed James
Monroe a special envoy to Napoleon, to assist in obtaining New Orleans for the
United States. Jefferson also raised the authorized expenditure to $10 million.
However, on April 11, 1803, French Foreign Minister Talleyrand surprised
Livingston by asking how much the United States was prepared to pay for the
entirety of Louisiana, not just New Orleans and the surrounding area (as
Livingston's instructions covered). Monroe agreed with Livingston that Napoleon
might withdraw this offer at any time (leaving them with no ability to obtain
the desired New Orleans area), and that approval from President Jefferson might
take months, so Livingston and Monroe decided to open negotiations immediately.
By April 30, they closed a deal for the purchase of the entire Louisiana
territory of for 60 million Francs (approximately $15 million). Part of this
sum was used to forgive debts owed by France to the United States. The payment
was made in United States bonds, which Napoleon sold at face value to the Dutch
firm of Hope and Company, and the British banking house of Baring, at a
discount of 87Â½ per each $100 unit. As a result, France received only
$8,831,250 in cash for Louisiana. Dutiful English banker Alexander Baring
conferred with Marbois in Paris, shuttled to the United States to pick up the
bonds, took them to Britain, and returned to France with the money â€“ which
Napoleon used to wage war against Baring's own country. When news of the
purchase reached the United States, Jefferson was surprised. He had authorized
the expenditure of $10 million for a port city, and instead received treaties
committing the government to spend $15 million on a land package which would
double the size of the country. Jefferson's political opponents in the
Federalist Party argued that the Louisiana purchase was a worthless desert, and
that the Constitution did not provide for the acquisition of new land or
negotiating treaties without the consent of the Senate. What really worried the
opposition was the new states which would inevitably be carved from the
Louisiana territory, strengthening Western and Southern interests in Congress,
and further reducing the influence of New England Federalists in national
affairs. President Jefferson was an enthusiastic supporter of westward
expansion, and held firm in his support for the treaty. Despite Federalist
objections, the U.S. Senate ratified the Louisiana treaty on October 20, 1803.
A transfer ceremony was held in New Orleans on November 29, 1803. Since the
Louisiana territory had never officially been turned over to the French, the
Spanish took down their flag, and the French raised theirs. The following day,
General James Wilkinson accepted possession of New Orleans for the United
States. A similar ceremony was held in St. Louis on March 9, 1804, when a
French tricolor was raised near the river, replacing the Spanish national flag.
The following day, Captain Amos Stoddard of the First U.S. Artillery marched
his troops into town and had the American flag run up the fort's flagpole. The
Louisiana territory was officially transferred to the United States government,
represented by Meriwether Lewis. The Louisiana Territory, purchased for less
than 3 cents an acre, doubled the size of the United States overnight, without
a war or the loss of a single American life, and set a precedent for the
purchase of territory. It opened the way for the eventual expansion of the
United States across the continent to the Pacific. Demographics. The United
States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Louisiana was 4,574,836
on July 1, 2011, a 0.91% increase since the 2010 United States Census. The
population density of the state is 104.9 people per square mile. The center of
population of Louisiana is located in Pointe Coupee Parish, in the city of New
Roads. According to the 2000 U.S. Census, 4.7% of the population aged 5 and
older speak French or Cajun French at home, while 2.5% speak Spanish. Racial
and ancestral makeup. The major ancestry groups of Louisiana are African
American (32.0%), French (15.1%), German (8.7%), Irish (8.1%), and English
(6.7%). Economy. The total gross state product in 2010 for Louisiana was
US$213.6 billion, placing it 24th in the nation. Its per capita personal income
is $30,952, ranking 41st in the United States. The state's principal
agricultural products include seafood (it is the biggest producer of crawfish
in the world, supplying approximately 90%), cotton, soybeans, cattle,
sugarcane, poultry and eggs, dairy products, and rice. The seafood industry
directly supports an estimated 16,000 jobs. Industry generates chemical
products, petroleum and coal products, processed foods and transportation
equipment, and paper products. Tourism is an important element in the economy,
especially in the New Orleans area. The Port of South Louisiana, located on the
Mississippi between New Orleans and Baton Rouge, is the largest volume shipping
port in the Western Hemisphere and 4th largest in the world, as well as the
largest bulk cargo port in the world. New Orleans, Shreveport, and Baton Rouge
are also home to a thriving film industry. State financial incentives and
aggressive promotion have put the local film industry on a fast track. In late
2007 and early 2008, a film studio was scheduled to open in TremÃ©, with state-
of-the-art production facilities, and a film training institute. Tabasco sauce,
which is marketed by one of the United States' biggest producers of hot sauce,
the McIlhenny Company, originated on Avery Island. Louisiana has three personal
income tax brackets, ranging from 2% to 6%. The sales tax rate is 4%: a 3.97%
Louisiana sales tax and a .03% Louisiana Tourism Promotion District sales tax.
Political subdivisions also levy their own sales tax in addition to the state
fees. The state also has a use tax, which includes 4% to be distributed by the
Department of Revenue to local governments. Property taxes are assessed and
collected at the local level. Louisiana is a subsidized state, receiving $1.44
from the federal government for every dollar paid in. Tourism and culture are
major players in Louisiana's economy, earning an estimated $5.2 billion per
year. Louisiana also hosts many important cultural events, such as the World
Cultural Economic Forum, which is held annually in the fall at the New Orleans
Morial Convention Center. As of January 2010, the state's unemployment rate was
7.4%. An African American is three times as likely as a white person to be
unemployed in Louisiana. Federal subsidies and spending. Louisiana taxpayers
receive more federal funding per dollar of federal taxes paid compared to the
average state. Per dollar of federal tax collected in 2005, Louisiana citizens
received approximately $1.78 in the way of federal spending. This ranks the
state 4th highest nationally and represents a rise from 1995 when Louisiana
received $1.35 per dollar of taxes in federal spending (ranked 7th nationally).
Neighboring states and the amount of federal spending received per dollar of
federal tax collected were: Texas ($0.94), Arkansas ($1.41), and Mississippi
($2.02). Federal spending in 2005 and subsequent years since has been
exceptionally high due to the recovery from Hurricane Katrina. Tax Foundation.
Energy. Louisiana is rich in petroleum and natural gas. Petroleum and gas
deposits are found in abundance both onshore and offshore in State-owned
waters. In addition, vast petroleum and natural gas reserves are found offshore
from Louisiana in the federally administered Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) in
the Gulf of Mexico. According to the Energy Information Administration, the
Gulf of Mexico OCS is the largest U.S. petroleum-producing region. Excluding
the Gulf of Mexico OCS, Louisiana ranks fourth in petroleum production and is
home to about 2 percent of total U.S. petroleum reserves. One third of the oil
produced in the United States comes from offshore, and 80% of offshore
production comes from deep water off Louisiana. The oil industry employs about
58,000 Louisiana residents and has created another 260,000 oil-related jobs,
accounting for about 17% of all Louisiana jobs. Louisiana's natural gas
reserves account for about 5 percent of the U.S. total. The recent discovery of
the Haynesville Shale formation in parts of or all of Caddo, Bossier,
Bienville, Sabine, De Soto, Red River, Sabine, and Natchitoches parishes have
made it the world's fourth largest gas field with some wells initially
producing over 25 million cubic feet of gas daily. Louisiana was the first site
of petroleum drilling over water in the world, on Caddo Lake in the northwest
corner of the state. The petroleum and gas industry, as well as its subsidiary
industries such as transport and refining, have dominated Louisiana's economy
since the 1940s. Beginning in 1950, Louisiana was sued several times by the
U.S. Interior Department, in efforts by the federal government to strip
Louisiana of its submerged land property rights. These control vast stores of
reservoirs of petroleum and natural gas. When petroleum and gas boomed in the
1970s, so did Louisiana's economy. The Louisiana economy as well as its
politics of the last half-century cannot be understood without thoroughly
accounting for the influence of the petroleum and gas industries. Since the
1980s, these industries' headquarters have consolidated in Houston, but many of
the jobs that operate or provide logistical support to the U.S. Gulf of Mexico
crude-oil-and-gas industry remained in Louisiana . Law and government. In 1849,
the state moved the capital from New Orleans to Baton Rouge. Donaldsonville,
Opelousas, and Shreveport have briefly served as the seat of Louisiana state
government. The Louisiana State Capitol and the Louisiana Governor's Mansion
are both located in Baton Rouge. The current Louisiana governor is Bobby
Jindal, the first Indian American to be elected governor. The current U.S.
senators are Mary Landrieu (Democrat) and David Vitter (Republican). Louisiana
has seven congressional districts and is represented in the U.S. House of
Representatives by six Republicans and one Democrat. Louisiana will have eight
votes in the Electoral College for the 2012 election after losing one House
seat due to stagnant population growth in the 2010 Census. Civil law. The
Louisiana political and legal structure has maintained several elements from
the times of French and Spanish governance. One is the use of the term "parish"
(from the French: paroisse) in place of "county" for administrative
subdivision. Another is the legal system of civil law based on French, German
and Spanish legal codes and ultimately Roman lawâ€”as opposed to English common
law. Common law is "judge-made" law based on precedent, and is the basis of
statutes in all other U.S. states. Louisiana's type of civil law system is what
the majority of nations in the world use, especially in Europe and its former
colonies, excluding those that derive from the British Empire. However, it is
incorrect to equate the Louisiana Civil Code with the Napoleonic Code. Although
the Napoleonic Code strongly influenced Louisiana law, it was never in force in
Louisiana, as it was enacted in 1804, after the Louisiana Purchase of 1803.
While the Louisiana Civil Code of 1808 has been continuously revised and
updated since its enactment, it is still considered the controlling authority
in the state. Differences still exist between Louisianan civil law and the
common law found in the other U.S. states. While some of these differences have
been bridged due to the strong influence of common law tradition, it is
important to note that the "civilian" tradition is still deeply rooted in most
aspects of Louisiana private law. Thus property, contractual, business entities
structure, much of civil procedure, and family law, as well as some aspects of
criminal law, are still mostly based on traditional Roman legal thinking. Model
Codes, such as the Uniform Commercial Code, which are adopted by most states
within the union including Louisiana, are based on civilian thought, the
essence being that it is deductive, as opposed to the common law which is
inductive. In the civilian tradition the legislative body agrees "a priori" on
the general principles to be followed. When a set of facts are brought before a
judge, he deduces the court's ruling by comparing the facts of the individual
case to the law. In contrast, common law, which really does not exist in its
pure historical form due to the advent of statutory law, was created by a judge
applying other judges' decisions to a new fact pattern brought before him in a
case. The result is that historically English judges were not constrained by
legislative authority. Marriage. In 1997, Louisiana became the first state to
offer the option of a traditional marriage or a covenant marriage. In a
covenant marriage, the couple waives their right to a "no-fault" divorce after
six months of separation, which is available in a traditional marriage. To
divorce under a covenant marriage, a couple must demonstrate cause. Marriages
between ascendants and descendants and marriages between collaterals within the
fourth degree (i.e., siblings, aunt and nephew, uncle and niece, first cousins)
are prohibited. Same-sex marriages are prohibited. Louisiana is a community
property state. Elections. From 1898â€“1965, after Louisiana had effectively
disfranchised African Americans and poor whites by provisions of a new
constitution, it essentially was a one-party state dominated by elite white
Democrats. The franchise for whites was expanded somewhat during the decades,
but blacks remained essentially disfranchised until the Civil Rights Movement,
culminating in passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. In multiple acts of
resistance, blacks left the segregation, violence and oppression of the state
to seek better opportunities in northern and western industrial cities during
the Great Migrations of 1910â€“1970, markedly reducing their proportion of
population in Louisiana. Since the 1960s, when civil rights legislation was
passed under President Lyndon Johnson to protect voting and civil rights, most
African Americans in the state have affiliated with the Democratic Party. In
the same years, many white conservatives have moved to support Republican Party
candidates in national and gubernatorial elections. David Vitter is the first
Republican in Louisiana to be popularly elected as a U.S. Senator. The previous
Republican Senator, John S. Harris, who took office in 1868, was chosen by the
state legislature. Louisiana is unique among U.S. states in using a system for
its state and local elections similar to that of modern France. All candidates,
regardless of party affiliation, ran in a nonpartisan blanket primary (or
"jungle primary") on Election Day. If no candidate had more than 50% of the
vote, the two candidates with the highest vote total competed in a runoff
election approximately one month later. This run-off did not take into account
party identification; therefore, it was not uncommon for a Democrat to be in a
runoff with a fellow Democrat or a Republican to be in a runoff with a fellow
Republican. Congressional races have also been held under the jungle primary
system. All other states (except Washington) use single-party primaries
followed by a general election between party candidates, each conducted by
either a plurality voting system or runoff voting, to elect Senators,
Representatives, and statewide officials. Between 2008 and 2010, federal
congressional elections were run under a closed primary system â€” limited to
registered party members. However, upon the passage of House Bill 292,
Louisiana once again adopted a nonpartisan blanket primary for its federal
congressional elections. Louisiana has seven seats in the U.S. House of
Representatives, six of which are currently held by Republicans and one by a
Democrat. The state will lose a House seat at the end of the 112th Congress due
to stagnant population growth enumerated by the 2010 United States Census.
Louisiana is not classified as a "swing state" for future presidential
elections, as it regularly supports Republican candidates. Law enforcement.
Louisiana's statewide police force is the Louisiana State Police. It began in
1922 from the creation of the Highway Commission. In 1927 a second branch, the
Bureau of Criminal Investigations, was formed. In 1932 the State Highway Patrol
was authorized to carry weapons. On July 28, 1936 the two branches were
consolidated to form The Louisiana Department of State Police and its motto
became "courtesy, loyalty, service". In 1942 this office was abolished and
became a division of the Department of Public Safety called the Louisiana State
Police. In 1988 the Criminal Investigation Bureau was reorganized. Its troopers
have statewide jurisdiction with power to enforce all laws of the state,
including city and parish ordinances. Each year, they patrol over 12 million
miles (20 million km) of roadway and arrest about 10,000 impaired drivers. The
State Police are primarily a traffic enforcement agency, with other sections
that delve in to trucking safety, narcotics enforcement and gaming oversight.
The sheriff in each parish is the chief law enforcement officer in the parish.
They are the keepers of the local parish prisons which house felony and
misdemeanor prisoners. They are the primary criminal patrol and first responder
agency in all matters criminal and civil. They are also the official tax
collectors in each parish. The sheriffs are responsible for general law
enforcement in their respective parishes. Orleans Parish is an exception, as
there the general law enforcement duties fall to the New Orleans Police
Department. Prior to 2010, Orleans parish was the only parish to have two (2)
Sheriff's Offices. Orleans Parish divided Sheriff's duties between criminal and
civil, with a different elected sheriff overseeing each aspect. In 2006 a bill
was passed which eventually consolidated the two sheriffs' departments into one
parish Sheriff responsible for both civil and criminal matters. Most parishes
are governed by a Police Jury. Eighteen of the 64 parishes are governed under
an alternative form of government under a Home Rule Charter. They oversee the
parish budget and operate the parish maintenance services. This includes parish
road maintenance and other rural services. Louisiana had the highest murder
rate of any state in 2010 (11.2 murders per 100,000) which marked the 22nd
consecutive year (1989â€“2010) that Louisiana has posted the highest per-capita
murder rate of any U.S. state. Louisiana is also the only state with an average
per capita murder rate (14.5 per 100,000) at least twice as high as the U.S.
average (6.9 per 100,000) during that period according to Bureau of Justice
Statistics from FBI Uniform Crime Reports. The Chicago Tribune reports that
Louisiana is the most corrupt state in the United States. According the Times
Picayune, Louisiana is the prison capital of the world, because of its many
for-profit/Sheriff owned prisons. Louisiana's incarceration rate is nearly five
times Iran's, 13 times China's and 20 times Germany's. National Guard.
Louisiana has over 9,000 Soldiers in the Louisiana Army National Guard
including both the 225th Engineer Brigade and the 256th Infantry Brigade. Both
these units have seen overseas service in either Iraq, Afghanistan, or both.
The Louisiana Air National Guard has over 2,000 airmen and its 159th Fighter
Squadron has likewise seen overseas service in combat theaters. Training sites
include Camp Beauregard near Pineville, LA, Camp Villerie near Slidell, LA,
Camp Minden near Minden, LA, England Air Park (formerly England Air Force Base)
near Alexandria, LA, Gillis Long Center near Carville, LA, and Jackson Barracks
in New Orleans, LA. Sports teams. Louisiana is nominally the least populous
state with more than one major professional sports league franchise: the
National Basketball Association's New Orleans Hornets and the National Football
League's Super Bowl XLIV Champions New Orleans Saints. Louisiana has a AAA
Minor League baseball team, the New Orleans Zephyrs. The Zephyrs are currently
affiliated with the Miami Marlins. Louisiana has 11 collegiate NCAA Division I
programs, a high number given its population. The state has no Division II
teams and only one Division III team. The State of Louisiana in 2010 produced
the most NFL players per capita for the second year in a row. Culture.
Louisiana is home to many, especially notable are the distinct culture of the
Creoles and Cajuns. Creole culture is a cultural amalgamation that takes a
little from each of the French, Spanish, African, and Native American cultures.
The Creole culture is part of White Creoles' and Black Creoles' culture.
Originally CrÃ©oles referred to native-born whites of French-Spanish descent.
Later the term also referred to descendants of the white men's relationships
with black women, many of whom were educated free people of color. Many of the
wealthy white men had quasi-permanent relationships with women of color outside
their marriages, and supported them as "placÃ©es". If a woman was enslaved at
the beginning of the relationship, the man usually arranged for her
manumission, as well as that of any of her children. Creoles became associated
with the New Orleans area, where the elaborated arrangements flourished. Most
wealthy planters had houses in town as well as at their plantations. Popular
belief that a Creole is a mixed Black / French person came from the "Haitian"
connotation of an African French person. There were many immigrants from Haiti
to New Orleans after the Revolution. Although a Black Creole is one type of
Creole, it is not the only type, nor the original meaning of Creole. All of the
respective cultures of the groups that settled in southern Louisiana have been
combined to make one "New Orleans" culture. The creative combination of
cultures from these groups, along with Native American culture, was called
"Creole" Culture. It has continued as one of the dominant social, economic and
political cultures of Louisiana, along with Cajun culture, well into the 20th
century. Cajun Culture. The ancestors of Cajuns came from west central France
to the provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, Canada, known as Acadia.
When the British won the French and Indian War, the British forcibly separated
families and evicted them because of their long-stated political neutrality.
Most captured Acadians were placed in internment camps in England and the New
England colonies for 10 to 30 years. Many of those who escaped the British
remained in French Canada. Once freed by England, many scattered, some to
France, Canada, Mexico, or the Falkland Islands. The majority found refuge in
south Louisiana centered in the region around Lafayette and the LaFourche Bayou
country. Until the 1970s, Cajuns were often considered lower-class citizens,
with the term "Cajun" being somewhat derogatory. Once flush with oil and gas
riches, Cajun culture, food, music, and their infectious "joie de vivre"
lifestyle quickly gained international acclaim. A third distinct culture in
Louisiana is that of the "IsleÃ±os", who are descendants of Spanish Canary
Islanders who migrated from the Canary Islands of Spain to Louisiana under the
Spanish crown beginning in the mid-1770s. They settled in four main
settlements, but many relocated to what is modern-day St. Bernard Parish, where
the majority of the IsleÃ±o population is still concentrated. An annual
festival called Fiesta celebrates the heritage of the IsleÃ±os. St Bernard
Parish has an IsleÃ±os museum, cemetery and church, as well as many street
names with Spanish words and Spanish surnames from this heritage. IsleÃ±o
identity is an active concern in the New Orleans suburbs of St. Bernard Parish,
LA. Some members of the IsleÃ±o community still speak Spanish â€“ with their
own Canary Islander accent. Numerous IsleÃ±o identity clubs and organizations,
and many members of IsleÃ±os society keep contact with the Canary Islands of
Spain. Languages. Louisiana has a unique linguistic culture, owing to its
French and Spanish heritage. According to the 2000 census, among persons five
years old and older, 90.8% of Louisiana residents speak only English (99% total
speak English) and 4.7% speak French at home (7% total speak French). Other
minority languages are Spanish, which is spoken by 2.5% of the population;
Vietnamese, by 0.6%; and German, by 0.2%. Although state law recognizes the
usage of English and French in certain circumstances, the Louisiana State
Constitution does not declare any ""de jure official language or languages"".
Currently the ""de facto administrative languages"" of the Louisiana State
Government are English and French. There are several unique dialects of French,
Creole, and English spoken in Louisiana. There are two unique dialects of the
French language: Cajun French (predominant after the Great Upheaval of Acadians
from Canada) and Colonial French. For the Creole language, there is Louisiana
Creole French. There are also two unique dialects of the English language:
Cajun English, a French-influenced variety of English, and what is informally
known as Yat, which resembles the New York City dialect, particularly that of
historical Brooklyn, as both accents were influenced by large communities of
immigrant Irish and Italian, but the Yat dialect was also influenced by French
and Spanish. Colonial French was the predominant language of Louisiana during
the French colonial period and was spoken primarily by the white settlers; the
black/creole population spoke mostly creole. Cajun French was only introduced
in Louisiana after the Great Upheaval of Acadians from Canada during 1710-1763.
The Cajun people and culture (hence the Cajun language as well) did not appear
immediately but was rather a slow evolution from the original Acadian culture
with influences from local cultures. English and its associated dialects became
predominant only after the Louisiana Purchase and even then it still retained
some French influences as seen with Cajun English. Cajun French and Colonial
French have somewhat merged since English took over. Renewed interest in the
French language in Louisiana has led to the establishment of Canadian-modeled
French immersion schools as well as bilingual signage in the historic French
neighborhoods of New Orleans and Lafayette. Organizations such as CODOFIL
promote the French language in the state. Religion. The largest denominations
by number of adherents in 2000 were the Roman Catholic Church with 1,382,603;
Southern Baptist Convention with 868,587; and the United Methodist Church with
160,153. Like other Southern states, the population of Louisiana is also made
up of numerous Protestant denominations, comprising 60% of the state's adult
population. Protestants are concentrated in the northern and central parts of
the state and in the northern tier of the Florida Parishes. Because of French
and Spanish heritage, whose descendants are Cajun and French Creole, and later
Irish, Italian, Portuguese and German immigrants, there is a majority Roman
Catholic population, particularly in the southern part of the state. Since
French Creoles were the first settlers, planters and leaders of the territory,
they have traditionally been well represented in politics. For instance, most
of the early governors were French Creole Catholics. Because Catholics
constitute a majority of Louisiana's population, Catholics have continued to be
influential in state politics. both Senators and the Governor were Catholic.
The high proportion and influence of the Catholic population makes Louisiana
distinct among Southern states. Jewish communities exist in the state's larger
cities, notably Baton Rouge and New Orleans. The most significant of these is
the Jewish community of the New Orleans area, with a pre-Katrina population of
about 12,000. The presence of a significant Jewish community well established
by the early 20th century also made Louisiana unusual among Southern states,
although South Carolina and Virginia also had influential populations in some
of their major cities from the 18th and 19th centuries. Prominent Jews in
Louisiana's political leadership have included Whig (later Democrat) Judah P.
Benjamin (1811â€“1884), who represented Louisiana in the U.S. Senate prior to
the American Civil War and then became the Confederate Secretary of State;
Democrat Adolph Meyer (1842â€“1908), Confederate Army officer who represented
the state in the U.S. House from 1891 until his death in 1908; Republican
Secretary of State Jay Dardenne (1954â€“), and Republican (Democrat prior to
2011) Attorney General Buddy Caldwell (1946â€“).
