Poles The Polish people, or Poles ( ; singular masculine: "Polak", feminine:
"Polka"), are a nation and a West Slavic ethnic group native to Central Europe,
inhabiting mostly Poland, other European countries and North America. The
preamble to the Constitution of the Republic of Poland defines the Polish
nation as comprising all the citizens of Poland. Poland's inhabitants live in
the following historic regions of the country: Wielkopolska, Ma≈Çopolska,
Mazovia (), Silesia (), Pomerania (), Kujawy, Warmia, Mazury, and Podlasie. A
wide-ranging Polish diaspora exists throughout Europe (Germany, France, the
United Kingdom, Belarus, Lithuania and Ukraine), the Americas (the United
States, Brazil and Argentina) and Australia. Chicago, in the United States, has
the world's largest urban Polish population after Warsaw. Over a thousand years
ago, the Polans of Giecz, Gniezno and Pozna≈Ñ¬ ‚Äî an influential tribe in
Wielkopolska¬ ‚Äî succeeded in uniting Lechitic tribes under what became the
Piast dynasty, thus giving rise to the Polish state. Statistics. Polish people
are the sixth largest national group in the European Union. Estimates vary
depending on source, though available data suggest a total number of around 60
million people worldwide (with roughly 21 million living outside of Poland,
many of whom are not of Polish ethnicity, but Polish nationals). There are
almost 39 million Poles in Poland alone. There are also Polish minorities in
the surrounding countries including Germany, and indigenous minorities in the
Czech Republic, Lithuania, Ukraine, and Belarus. There are some smaller
indigenous minorities in nearby countries such as Moldova and Latvia. There is
also a Polish minority in Russia which includes indigenous Poles as well as
those forcibly deported during and after World War II; the total number of
Poles in what was the former Soviet Union is estimated at up to 3 million. The
term "Polonia" is usually used in Poland to refer to people of Polish origin
who live outside Polish borders, officially estimated at around 10 to 20
million. There is a notable Polish diaspora in the United States, Canada, and
Brazil. France has a historic relationship with Poland and has a relatively
large Polish-descendant population. Poles have lived in France since the 18th
century. In the early 20th century, over a million Polish people settled in
France, mostly during world wars, among them Polish √©migr√©s fleeing either
Nazi occupation or later Soviet rule. In the United States a significant number
of Polish immigrants settled in Chicago, Ohio, Detroit, New York City, Orlando,
Pittsburgh, Buffalo, and New England. The highest concentration of Poles in the
United States is in New Britain, Connecticut. The majority of Polish Canadians
have arrived in Canada since World War II. The number of Polish immigrants
increased between 1945 and 1970, and again after the end of Communism in Poland
in 1989. In Brazil the majority of Polish immigrants settled in Paran√° State.
Smaller, but significant numbers settled in the states of Rio Grande do Sul,
Esp√≠rito Santo and S√£o Paulo (state). The city of Curitiba has the second
largest Polish diaspora in the world (after Chicago) and Polish music, dishes
and culture are quite common in the region. In recent years, since joining the
European Union, many Polish people have emigrated to countries such as Ireland,
where an estimated 200,000 Polish people have entered the labour market. It is
estimated that over half a million Polish people have come to work in the
United Kingdom from Poland. Since 2011, Poles have been able to work freely
throughout the EU and not just in the UK, Ireland, Denmark and Sweden where
they have had limited rights since Poland's EU accession in 2004. The Polish
community in Norway has increased substantially and has grown to a total number
of 120,000, making Poles the largest immigrant group in Norway. Before World
War II many Polish Jews became followers of Zionism and subsequently emigrated
to the British Mandate of Palestine. Following the Holocaust, the vast majority
of surviving Polish Jews moved to Israel. Poland is the largest single place of
origin of Israeli Jews. Culture. The culture of Poland has a history of 1000
years. Located in Central Europe, its character developed as a result of its
geography at the confluence of fellow Central European cultures (German,
Western Ukrainian, Czech and Austrian) the Western European cultures (French
and Dutch), Southern European cultures (Italian and Turkish), Northern European
cultures (Lithuanian, Swedish and Danish) and Eastern European cultures (East
Ukrainian and Russian) along with cultural influence of the Jewish culture.
Confluences were conveyed by immigrants (Jewish, German and Dutch), political
alliances (with Lithuania, Hungary, Saxony, France and Sweden), conquests of
the Polish state (Ukraine, Belarus and Latvia) or conquerors of the Polish
lands (Tsardom of Russia, Kingdom of Prussia and the Habsburg Monarchy, later
on Austrian Empire and Austria-Hungary). Over time Polish culture has been
greatly influenced by its ties with the Germanic, Latinate and other ethnic
groups and minorities living in Poland like the Jews. The people of Poland have
traditionally been seen as hospitable to artists from abroad (especially Italy)
and open to cultural and artistic trends popular in other European countries.
Owing to this central location, the Poles came very early into contact with
both civilizations¬ ‚Äì eastern and western, and as a result developed
economically, culturally, and politically. A German general Helmut Carl von
Moltke, in his "Poland. A historical sketch" (1885), stated that Poland prior
to her partitions was "the most civilized country in Europe". In the 19th and
20th centuries the Polish focus on cultural advancement often took precedence
over political and economic activity, experiencing severe crisis, especially
during the II World War and in the coming years. These factors have contributed
to the versatile nature of Polish art, with all its complex nuances. Language.
The Polish language () is a West Slavic language and the official language of
Poland. Its written standard is the Polish alphabet which corresponds basically
to the Latin alphabet with a few additions. Polish-speakers use the language in
a uniform manner throughout most of Poland, though numerous languages, speeches
and dialects coexist along the standard Polish language. Religion. Most Poles
adhere to the Christian faith, the majority belonging to the Roman Catholic
Church. The rest of the population consists mainly of Eastern Orthodox,
Jehovah's Witnesses, various Protestant and Judaism. Roman Catholics live all
over the country, while Orthodox Christians can be found mostly in north-east,
in the area of Bia≈Çystok, and Lutherans in Cieszyn Silesia. Exonyms. Among the
exonyms not native to the Polish people or language are: –ª—è—Ö ("lyakh") used
in East Slavic languages. Today, the word "Lachy" is used by Eastern Slavs as
synonyms for "Poles" and "Poland". The foreign exonyms include also: Lithuanian
"Lenkai", Hungarian "Lengyelek" and Turkish "Leh". The former became the basis
for Poland exonyms in a number of other Middle Eastern languages, including:
"Lehastan"; "Lehest√¢n"; "Lahestan").
