Sociology of race and ethnic relations The sociology of race and of ethnic
relations is the area of the discipline that studies the social, political, and
economic relations between races and ethnicities at all levels of society. This
area encompasses the study of racism, residential segregation, and other
complex social processes between different racial and ethnic groups. The
sociological analysis of race and ethnicity frequently interacts with other
areas of sociology such as stratification and social psychology, as well as
with postcolonial theory. At the level of political policy, ethnic relations is
discussed in terms of either assimilationism or multiculturalism. Anti-racism
forms another style of policy, particularly popular in the 1960s and 70s. At
the level of academic inquiry, ethnic relations is discussed either by the
experiences of individual racial-ethnic groups or else by overarching
theoretical issues. Classical Theorists. Marx. Marx views society as two
separate classes, the capitalist class and the working class. He hoped for the
working class to rise up against the capitalist class in an attempt to stop the
exploitation of the working class. He blamed part of their failure to organize
on the capitalist class, as they separated black and white laborers. This
separation, specifically between Blacks and Whites in America, contributed to
racism. Marx attributes capitalism's contribution to racism through segmented
labor markets and a racial inequality of earnings. Weber. Weber laid the
foundations for a micro-sociology of ethnic relations beginning in 1906. Weber
argued that biological traits could not be the basis for group foundation
unless they were conceived as shared characteristics. It was this shared
perception and common customs that create and distinguish one ethnicity from
another. This differs from the views of many of his contemporaries who believed
that an ethnic group was formed from biological similarities alone apart from
social perception of membership in a group. W.E.B. DuBois. W.E.B. DuBois is
well known as one of the most influential black scholars and activists of the
19th century. DuBois educated himself on his people, and sought academia as a
way to enlighten others on the social injustices against his people. DuBois
research "revealed the Negro group as a symptom, not a cause; as a striving,
palpitating group, and not an inert, sick body of crime; as a long historic
development and not a transient occurrence." Dubois believed that Black
Americans should embrace higher education and use their new access to schooling
to achieve a higher position within society. He referred to this idea as the
Talented Tenth. With gaining popularity, he also preached the belief that for
blacks to be free in some places, they must be free everywhere. After traveling
to Africa and Russia, he recanted his original philosophy of integration and
acknowledged it as a long term vision. Booker T. Washington. Booker T.
Washington was considered one of the most influential black educators of the
19th and 20th centuries. Washington offered an industrial education for Blacks
through the Tuskegee Institute. He hoped to provide them with an education to
escape sharecropping and debt, instead engaging in self-employment, land
ownership, and small business. His theory regarding race in America advocated
to continue black disfranchisement and segregation, in return for the whites
support in economic and educational attainment. This theory highlighted the
accommodationist philosophy he became well known for. Social psychology. One of
the most important social psychological findings concerning race relations is
that members of stereotyped groups internalize those stereotypes and thus
suffer a wide range of harmful consequences. For example, in a phenomenon
called stereotype threat, members of racial and ethnic groups that are
stereotyped as scoring poorly on tests will perform poorer on those tests if
they are reminded of this stereotype. The effect is so strong that even simply
asking the test-taker to state her or his race before taking the test (such is
by bubbling in "African American" on a multiple choice question) will
significantly alter test performance. A specifically sociological contribution
to this line of research has found that such negative stereotypes can be
created on the spot: an experiment by Michael Lovaglia et al.(1998)
demonstrated that left-handed people can be made to suffer stereotype threat if
they are led to believe that they are a disadvantaged group for a particular
kind of test. Audit studies. Another important line of research on race takes
the form of audit studies. The audit study approach creates an artificial pool
of people among whom there are no average differences by race. For instance,
groups of white and black auditors are matched on every category other than
their race, and thoroughly trained to act in identical ways. Given nearly
identical resumes, they are sent to interview for the same jobs. Simple
comparisons of means can yield strong evidence regarding discrimination. The
best known audit study in sociology is "The Mark of a Criminal Record" by Devah
Pager. This study compares job prospects of black and white men who were
recently released from jail. Its key finding is that blacks are significantly
discriminated against when applying for service jobs. Moreover, whites "with" a
criminal record have about the same prospect of getting an interview as blacks
"without" one. Discipline Development By Country. United States. In the United
States, the study of racial and ethnic relations has been widely influenced by
the factors associated with each major wave of immigration as the incoming
group struggles with keeping its own cultural and ethnic identity while also
assimilating into the broader mainstream American culture and economy. One of
the first and most prevalent topics within American study is that of the
relations between white Americans and African Americans due to the heavy
collective memory and culture borne out of and lingering from centuries of
forced slavery in plantations. Throughout the rest of American history, each
new wave of immigration to the United States has brought another set of issues
as the tension between maintaining diversity and assimilating takes on new
shapes. Racism and conflict often rears up during these times. United Kingdom.
In the United Kingdom, foreign nationals were actively encouraged and sponsored
to migrate in the 1950s after the dissolution of the Empire and the social
devastation of the Second World War. The 1962 Commonwealth Immigrants Act
changed the law so that only certain British Commonwealth members were able to
migrate. This law was tightened again with the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968
and Immigration Act 1971. The Race Relations Act 1968 extended certain policies
with respect to employment, housing, commercial and other services. This was
extended again with the Race Relations Act 1976. As with the UK establishments
of media and cultural studies, 'ethnic relations' is often taught as a loosely-
distinct discipline either within sociology departments or other schools of
humanities. Major British theorists include Paul Gilroy, Stuart Hall, Richard
Jenkins, John Rex, Michael Banton and Tariq Modood.
