Sarah Palin Sarah Louise Palin (nÃ©e Heath; born February 11, 1964) is an
American politician, commentator and author. As the Republican Party nominee
for Vice President in the 2008 presidential election, she was the first Alaskan
on the national ticket of a major party and first Republican woman nominated
for the vice presidency. Her book "" has sold more than two million copies.
Since January 2010, she has provided political commentary for Fox News, and
hosted a television show, "Sarah Palin's Alaska". Five million viewers tuned in
for the first episode, a record for TLC. She was elected to Wasilla City
Council in 1992 and became mayor of Wasilla in 1996. In 2003, after an
unsuccessful run for lieutenant governor, she was appointed Chairman of the
Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, responsible for overseeing the
state's oil and gas fields for safety and efficiency. The youngest person and
first woman to be elected Governor of Alaska, Palin held the office from
December 2006 until her resignation in July 2009. She has since endorsed and
campaigned for the Tea Party movement, as well as several candidates in the
2010 midterm elections. From the time of her Vice Presidential nomination in
2008, Palin was considered a potential candidate for the 2012 presidential
election until she announced in October 2011 that she would not run. Early life
and family. Palin was born in Sandpoint, Idaho. She is the third of four
children (three daughters, one son) born to Charles R. "Chuck" Heath, a science
teacher and track and field coach, and Sarah "Sally" (nÃ©e Sheeran), a school
secretary. Palin's siblings are Chuck Jr., Heather, and Molly. Palin is of
English, Irish, and German ancestry. When Palin was a few months old, the
family moved to Skagway, Alaska, where her father received his teaching job.
They relocated to Eagle River in 1969, and finally settled to Wasilla in 1972.
Palin played flute in the junior high band, then attended Wasilla High School
where she was the head of the Fellowship of Christian Athletes, and a member of
the girls' basketball and cross country running teams. During her senior year,
she was co-captain and point guard of the basketball team that won the 1982
Alaska state championship, earning the nickname "Sarah Barracuda" for her
competitive streak. College. After graduating from high school, Palin enrolled
at the University of Hawaii at Hilo. Shortly after arriving in Hawaii, Palin
transferred to Hawaii Pacific University in Honolulu for a semester in the fall
of 1982, and then to North Idaho College, a community college in Coeur d'Alene,
for the spring and fall semesters of 1983. (In June 2008, the Alumni
Association of NIC gave her its Distinguished Alumni Achievement Award.) In
1984, Palin won the Miss Wasilla beauty pageant, then finished third in the
Miss Alaska pageant. She played the flute in the talent portion of the contest,
and received both the Miss Congeniality award and a college scholarship. She
enrolled at the University of Idaho in Moscow for an academic year, starting in
August 1984, then attended Matanuska-Susitna College in Alaska in the fall of
1985. Palin returned to the University of Idaho in January 1986, and received
her bachelor's degree in communications with an emphasis in journalism in May
1987. Early career and marriage. After graduation, she worked as a sportscaster
for KTUU-TV and KTVA-TV in Anchorage, and as a sports reporter for the "Mat-Su
Valley Frontiersman", fulfilling an early ambition. On August 29, 1988, she
eloped at age 24 with her high school sweetheart, Todd Palin. Following the
birth of their first child, she helped in her husband's commercial fishing
business. Early political career. City council. Palin was elected to the
Wasilla City Council in 1992 winning 530 votes to 310. Throughout her tenure on
the city council and the rest of her political career, Palin has been a
Republican since registering in 1982. Mayor of Wasilla. Concerned that revenue
from a new Wasilla sales tax would not be spent wisely, Palin ran for mayor of
Wasilla in 1996, defeating incumbent mayor John Stein 651 to 440 votes. Her
biographer described her campaign as targeting wasteful spending and high
taxes; her opponent, Stein, said that Palin introduced abortion, gun rights,
and term limits as campaign issues. The election was nonpartisan, though the
state Republican Party ran advertisements for Palin. Palin ran for re-election
against Stein in 1999 and won, 909 votes to 292. In 2002, she completed the
second of the two consecutive three-year terms allowed by the city charter. She
was elected president of the Alaska Conference of Mayors in 1999. First term.
Palin had a contretemps with the "Mat-Su Valley Frontiersman", a local
newspaper, and became involved in personnel challenges and "a thwarted attempt
to pack the City Council" during her first year in office. Using income
generated by a 2% sales tax that had been approved by Wasilla voters in October
1992, Palin cut property taxes by 75% and eliminated personal property and
business inventory taxes. Using municipal bonds, she made improvements to the
roads and sewers, and increased funding to the Police Department. She also
oversaw new bike paths and procured funding for storm-water treatment to
protect freshwater resources. At the same time, she shrank the local museum's
budget and deterred talk of a new library and city hall. Soon after taking
office in October 1996, Palin eliminated the position of museum director and
asked for updated resumes and resignation letters from "city department heads
who had been loyal to Stein," including the police chief, public works
director, finance director, and librarian. Palin stated this request was to
find out their intentions and whether they supported her. She temporarily
required department heads to get her approval before talking to reporters,
saying that they first needed to become acquainted with her administration's
policies. She created the position of city administrator, and reduced her own
$68,000 salary by 10%, although by mid-1998 this was reversed by the city
council. In October 1996, Palin asked library director Mary Ellen Emmons if she
would object to the removal of a book from the library if people were picketing
to have the book removed. Emmons responded that she would, and others as well.
Palin explained that she not been proposing censorship but had been discussing
many issues with her staff that were "both rhetorical and realistic in nature."
No attempt was made to remove books from the library during Palin's tenure as
mayor. Palin said she fired Police Chief Irl Stambaugh because he did not fully
support her efforts to govern the city. Stambaugh filed a lawsuit alleging
wrongful termination and violation of his free speech rights. The judge
dismissed Stambaugh's lawsuit, holding that the police chief served at the
discretion of the mayor, and could be terminated for nearly any reason, even a
political one, and ordered Stambaugh to pay Palin's legal fees. Second term.
During her second term as mayor, Palin proposed and promoted the construction
of a municipal sports center to be financed by a 0.5% sales tax increase and
$14.7Â  million bond issue. Voters approved the measure by a 20 vote margin and
the Wasilla Multi-Use Sports Complex (later named the Curtis D. Menard Memorial
Sports Center) was built on time and under budget. However, the city spent an
additional $1.3Â million because of an eminent domain lawsuit caused by the
failure to obtain clear title to the property before beginning construction.
The city's long-term debt grew from about $1 million to $25 million due to $15
million for the sports complex, $5.5 million for street projects, and $3
million for water improvement projects. "The Wall Street Journal" characterized
the project as a "financial mess." A city council member defended the spending
increases as being caused by the city's growth during that time. Palin also
joined with nearby communities in hiring the Anchorage-based lobbying firm of
Robertson, Monagle & Eastaugh to lobby for federal funds. The firm secured
nearly $8 million in earmarks for the Wasilla city government, including
$500,000 for a youth shelter, $1.9Â million for a transportation hub, and
$900,000 for sewer repairs. In 2008, Wasilla's current mayor credited Palin's
75 percent property tax cuts and infrastructure improvements with bringing
"big-box stores" and 50,000 shoppers per day to Wasilla. State-level politics.
In 2002, Palin ran for the Republican nomination for lieutenant governor,
coming in second to Loren Leman in a five-way Republican primary. Following her
defeat, she campaigned throughout the state for the nominated Republican
governor-lieutenant governor ticket of Frank Murkowski and Leman. Murkowski and
Leman won, Murkowski resigned from his long-held U.S. Senate seat in December
2002 to assume the governorship. Palin was said to be on the "short list" of
possible appointees to Murkowski's U.S. Senate seat, but Murkowski ultimately
appointed his daughter, State Representative Lisa Murkowski, as his successor
in the Senate. Governor Murkowski offered other jobs to Palin, and in February
2003, she accepted an appointment to the Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation
Commission, which oversees Alaska's oil and gas fields for safety and
efficiency. While she had little background in the area, she said she wanted to
learn more about the oil industry, and was named chair of the commission and
ethics supervisor. By November 2003 she was filing non-public ethics complaints
with the state attorney general and the governor against a fellow commission
member, Randy Ruedrich, a former petroleum engineer and at the time the chair
of the state Republican Party. He was forced to resign in November 2003. Palin
resigned in January 2004 and put her protests against Ruedrich's "lack of
ethics" into the public arena by filing a public complaint against Ruedrich,
who was then fined $12,000. She also joined with Democratic legislator Eric
Croft in complaining that Gregg Renkes, then the attorney general of Alaska,
had a financial conflict of interest in negotiating a coal exporting trade
agreement. Renkes also resigned his post. From 2003 to June 2005, Palin served
as one of three directors of "Ted Stevens Excellence in Public Service, Inc.,"
a 527 group designed to provide political training for Republican women in
Alaska. In 2004, Palin told the "Anchorage Daily News" that she had decided not
to run for the U.S. Senate that year against the Republican incumbent Lisa
Murkowski because her teenage son opposed it. Palin said, "How could I be the
team mom if I was a U.S. Senator?" Governor of Alaska. In 2006, running on a
clean-government platform, Palin defeated incumbent Governor Frank Murkowski in
the Republican gubernatorial primary. Her running mate was Sean Parnell, who
since leaving the state senate in 2001 had worked as a corporate lobbyist. In
the November election, Palin was outspent but victorious, defeating former
Democratic governor Tony Knowles by a margin of 48.3% to 40.9%. She became
Alaska's first female governor, and, at the age of 42, the youngest governor in
Alaskan history, the state's first governor to have been born after Alaska
achieved U.S. statehood, and the first not to be inaugurated in Juneau (she
chose to have the ceremony held in Fairbanks instead). She took office on
December 4, 2006, and for most of her term was very popular with Alaska voters.
Polls taken in 2007 showed her with 93% and 89% popularity among all voters,
which led some media outlets to call her "the most popular governor in
America." A poll taken in late September 2008 after Palin was named to the
national Republican ticket showed her popularity in Alaska at 68%. A poll taken
in May 2009 showed Palin's popularity among Alaskans was at 54% positive and
41.6% negative. Palin declared that top priorities of her administration would
be resource development, education and workforce development, public health and
safety, and transportation and infrastructure development. She had championed
ethics reform throughout her election campaign. Her first legislative action
after taking office was to push for a bipartisan ethics reform bill. She signed
the resulting legislation in July 2007, calling it a "first step", and
declaring that she remained determined to clean up Alaska politics. Palin
frequently broke with the Alaskan Republican establishment. For example, she
endorsed Parnell's bid to unseat the state's longtime at-large U.S.
Representative, Don Young, and she publicly challenged then-U.S. Senator Ted
Stevens to come clean about the federal investigation into his financial
dealings. Shortly before his July 2008 indictment, she held a joint news
conference with Stevens, described by "The Washington Post" as intended to
"make clear she had not abandoned him politically." Palin promoted the
development of oil and natural-gas resources in Alaska, including drilling in
the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR). Proposals to drill for oil in ANWR
have occasioned national debate. In 2006, Palin obtained a passport and in 2007
traveled for the first time outside of North America on a trip to Kuwait. There
she visited the Khabari Alawazem Crossing at the KuwaitâIraq border and met
with members of the Alaska National Guard at several bases. On her return
journey she visited injured soldiers in Germany. Budget, spending, and federal
funds. In June 2007, Palin signed a record $6.6Â billion operating budget into
law. At the same time, she used her veto power to make the second-largest cuts
of the capital budget in state history. The $237Â million in cuts represented
over 300 local projects, and reduced the capital budget to $1.6Â billion. In
2008, Palin vetoed $286 million, cutting or reducing funding for 350 projects
from the FY09 capital budget. Palin followed through on a campaign promise to
sell the Westwind II jet, a purchase made by the Murkowski administration for
$2.7Â million in 2005 against the wishes of the legislature. In August 2007,
the jet was listed on eBay, but the sale fell through, and the plane later sold
for $2.1Â million through a private brokerage firm. Gubernatorial expenditures.
Palin lived in Juneau during the legislative session and lived in Wasilla and
worked out of offices in Anchorage the rest of the year. Since the office in
Anchorage is 565 miles from Juneau, while she worked there, state officials
said she was permitted to claim a $58 "per diem" travel allowance, which she
took (a total of $16,951), and to reimbursement for hotels, which she did not,
choosing instead to drive about 50Â miles to her home in Wasilla. She also
chose not to use the former governor's private chef. Republicans and Democrats
have criticized Palin for taking the "per diem" and $43,490 in travel expenses
for the times her family accompanied her on state business. In response,
Palin's staffers said that these practices were in line with state policy, that
her gubernatorial expenses are 80% below those of Murkowski, her predecessor,
and that "many of the hundreds of invitations Palin receives include requests
for her to bring her family, placing the definition of 'state business' with
the party extending the invitation." In February 2009, the State of Alaska,
reversing a policy that had treated the payments as legitimate business
expenses under the Internal Revenue Code, decided that per diems paid to state
employees for stays in their own homes will be treated as taxable income and
will be included in employees' gross income on their W-2 forms. Palin herself
had ordered the review of the tax policy. In December 2008, an Alaska state
commission recommended increasing the Governor's annual salary from $125,000 to
$150,000. Palin stated that she would not accept the pay raise. In response,
the commission dropped the recommendation. Federal funding. In her State of the
State address on January 17, 2008, Palin declared that the people of Alaska
"can and must continue to develop our economy, because we cannot and must not
rely so heavily on federal government ." Alaska's federal congressional
representatives cut back on pork-barrel project requests during Palin's time as
governor; despite this, in 2008 Alaska was still the largest per-capita
recipient of federal earmarks, requesting nearly $750 million in special
federal spending over a period of two years. While there is no state sales tax
or income tax in Alaska, royalty revenues from the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field
(consisting mostly of state-owned lands) have funded large state budgets since
1980, with the exact amounts largely dependent upon the prevailing price of
petroleum. As a result, state revenues doubled to $10 billion in 2008. For the
2009 budget, Palin gave a list of 31 proposed federal earmarks or requests for
funding, totaling $197 million, to Alaska's senior U.S. Senator Ted Stevens.
Palin has stated that her decreasing support for federal funding was a source
of friction between her and the state's congressional delegation; Palin
requested less in federal funding each year than her predecessor Frank
Murkowski requested in his last year. Bridge to Nowhere. In 2005, before Palin
was elected governor, Congress passed an omnibus spending bill that contained a
$442-million earmark for constructing two Alaska bridges. The Gravina Island
Bridge, intended to provide a link between the Ketchikan airport on Gravina
Island and the city of Ketchikan at a cost of $233 million in Federal grant
money, received nationwide attention as a symbol of pork-barrel spending. As
the island only has a population of 50, the bridge became known as the "Bridge
to Nowhere." The public furor led to Congress removing the earmarks, but
retaining the allotted funds to Alaska as part of its general transportation
fund. In 2006, Palin ran for governor with a "build-the-bridge" plank in her
platform, saying she would "not allow the spinmeisters to turn this project ...
into something that's so negative." Palin criticized the use of the word
"nowhere" as insulting to local residents and urged speedy work on building the
infrastructure "while our congressional delegation is in a strong position to
assist." As governor, Palin canceled the Gravina Island Bridge in September
2007, saying that Congress had "little interest in spending any more money" due
to "inaccurate portrayals of the projects." Alaska did not return the $442
million in federal transportation funds. In 2008, as a vice-presidential
candidate, Palin characterized her position as having told Congress "thanks,
but no thanks, on that bridge to nowhere." A number of Ketchikan residents said
that the claim was false and a betrayal of Palin's previous support for their
community. Some critics said that her statement was misleading, as she had
expressed support for the spending project and kept the federal money after the
project was canceled. Palin was criticized for allowing construction of a 3-
mile access road, built with $25 million in federal transportation funds set
aside as part of the original bridge project, to continue. A spokesman for
Alaska's Department of Transportation said that it was within Palin's power to
cancel the road project, but noted that the state was still considering cheaper
designs to complete the bridge project, and that in any case, the road would
open up the surrounding lands for development. Gas pipeline. In August 2008,
Palin signed a bill authorizing the State of Alaska to award TransCanada
Pipelines â the sole bidder to meet the state's requirements â a license to
build and operate a pipeline to transport natural gas from the Alaska North
Slope to the continental United States through Canada. The governor also
pledged $500 million in seed money to support the project. It is estimated that
the project will cost $26 billion. "Newsweek" described the project as "the
principal achievement of Sarah Palin's term as Alaska's governor." The pipeline
faces legal challenges from Canadian First Nations. Predator control. In 2007,
Palin supported a 2003 Alaska Department of Fish and Game policy allowing the
hunting of wolves from the air as part of a predator control program intended
to increase moose and caribou populations for subsistence-food gatherers and
other hunters. In March 2007, Palin's office announced that a bounty of $150
per wolf would be paid to the 180 volunteer pilots and gunners, to offset fuel
costs, in five areas of Alaska. 607 wolves had been killed in the prior four
years. State biologists wanted 382 to 664 wolves to be killed by the end of the
predator-control season in April 2007. Wildlife activists sued the state, and a
state judge declared the bounty illegal on the basis that a bounty would have
to be offered by the Board of Game and not by the Department of Fish and Game.
On August 26, 2008, Alaskans voted against ending the state's predator control
program. Public Safety Commissioner dismissal. Palin dismissed Public Safety
Commissioner Walt Monegan on July 11, 2008, citing performance-related issues,
such as not being "a team player on budgeting issues" and "egregious rogue
behavior." Palin attorney Thomas Van Flein said that the "last straw" was
Monegan's planned trip to Washington, D.C., to seek funding for a new,
multimillion-dollar sexual assault initiative the governor hadn't yet approved.
Monegan said that he had resisted persistent pressure from Palin, her husband,
and her staff, including state Attorney General Talis J. Colberg, to fire
Palinâs ex-brother-in-law, Alaska State Trooper Mike Wooten; Wooten was
involved in a child custody battle with Palinâs sister after a bitter divorce
that included an alleged death threat against Palin's father. At one point
Sarah and Todd Palin hired a private investigator to gather information,
seeking to have Wooten officially disciplined. Monegan stated that he learned
an internal investigation had found all but two of the allegations to be
unsubstantiated, and Wooten had been disciplined for the others â an illegal
moose killing and the tasering of his 11-year-old stepson, who had reportedly
asked to be tasered. He told the Palins that there was nothing he could do
because the matter was closed. When contacted by the press for comment, Monegan
first acknowledged pressure to fire Wooten but said that he could not be
certain that his own firing was connected to that issue; he later asserted that
the dispute over Wooten was a major reason for his firing. Palin stated on July
17 that Monegan was not pressured to fire Wooten, nor dismissed for not doing
so. Monegan said the subject of Wooten came up when he invited Palin to a
birthday party for his cousin, state senator Lyman Hoffman, in February 2007
during the legislative session in Juneau. "As we were walking down the stairs
in the capitol building she wanted to talk to me about her former brother-in-
law," Monegan said. "I said, 'Ma'am, I need to keep you at arm's length with
this. I can't deal about him with you. She said, 'OK, that's a good idea.'"
Palin said there was "absolutely no pressure ever put on Commissioner Monegan
to hire or fire anybody, at any time. I did not abuse my office powers. And I
don't know how to be more blunt and candid and honest, but to tell you that
truth. To tell you that no pressure was ever put on anybody to fire anybody."
Todd Palin gave a similar account. On August 13 she acknowledged that a half
dozen members of her administration had made more than two dozen calls on the
matter to various state officials. "I do now have to tell Alaskans that such
pressure could have been perceived to exist, although I have only now become
aware of it," she said. Palin said, "Many of these inquiries were completely
appropriate. However, the serial nature of the contacts could be perceived as
some kind of pressure, presumably at my direction." Chuck Kopp, whom Palin had
appointed to replace Monegan as public safety commissioner, received a $10,000
state severance package after he resigned following just two weeks on the job.
Kopp, the former Kenai chief of police, resigned July 25 following disclosure
of a 2005 sexual harassment complaint and letter of reprimand against him.
Monegan said that he did not receive a severance package from the state.
Legislative investigation. On August 1, 2008, the Alaska Legislature hired an
investigator, Stephen Branchflower, to review the Monegan dismissal.
Legislators stated that Palin had the legal authority to fire Monegan, but they
wanted to know whether her action had been motivated by anger at Monegan for
not firing Wooten. The atmosphere was bipartisan and Palin pledged to
cooperate. Wooten remained employed as a state trooper. She placed an aide on
paid leave due to a tape-recorded phone conversation that she deemed improper,
in which the aide, appearing to act on her behalf, complained to a trooper that
Wooten had not been fired. Several weeks after the start of what the media
referred to as "troopergate", Palin was chosen as John McCain's running mate.
On September 1, Palin asked the legislature to drop its investigation, saying
that the state Personnel Board had jurisdiction over ethics issues. The
Personnel Board's three members were first appointed by Palinâs predecessor,
and Palin reappointed one member in 2008. On September 19, Todd Palin and
several state employees refused to honor subpoenas, the validity of which were
disputed by Talis Colberg, Palin's appointee as Alaska's Attorney General. On
October 2, a court rejected Colberg's challenge to the subpoenas, and seven of
the witnesses, not including Todd Palin, eventually testified. Branchflower
Report. On October 10, 2008, the Alaska Legislative Council unanimously voted
to release, without endorsing, the Branchflower Report, in which investigator
Stephen Branchflower found that firing Monegan "was a proper and lawful
exercise of her constitutional and statutory authority," but that Palin abused
her power as governor and violated the state's Executive Branch Ethics Act when
her office pressured Monegan to fire Wooten. The report stated that "Governor
Palin knowingly permitted a situation to continue where impermissible pressure
was placed on several subordinates to advance a personal agenda, to wit: to get
Trooper Michael Wooten fired." The report also said that Palin "permitted Todd
Palin to use the Governor's office [...] to continue to contact subordinate
state employees in an effort to find some way to get Trooper Wooten fired." On
October 11, Palin's attorneys responded, condemning the Branchflower Report as
"misleading and wrong on the law." One of Palin's attorneys, Thomas Van Flein,
said that it was an attempt to "smear the governor by innuendo." Later that
day, Palin did a conference call interview with various Alaskan reporters,
where she stated, "Well, Iâm very, very pleased to be cleared of any legal
wrongdoing... Any hint of any kind of unethical activity there. Very pleased to
be cleared of any of that." Alaska Personnel Board investigation and report.
The bipartisan State of Alaska Personnel Board reviewed the matter at Palin's
request. On September 15, the Anchorage law firm of Clapp, Peterson, Van Flein,
Tiemessen & Thorsness filed arguments of "no probable cause" with the Personnel
Board on behalf of Palin. The Personnel Board retained independent counsel
Timothy Petumenos, a Democrat, as an investigator. On October 24, Palin gave
three hours of depositions with the Personnel Board in St. Louis, Missouri. On
November 3, 2008, the State of Alaska Personnel Board reported that there was
no probable cause to believe Palin or any other state official had violated
state ethical standards. The report further stated that the Branchflower Report
used the wrong statute in reaching its conclusions, misconstrued the available
evidence and did not consider or obtain all of the material evidence required
to properly reach findings in the matter. Job approval ratings. As governor of
Alaska, Palin's job approval rating ranged from a high of 93% in May 2007 to
54% in May 2009. In November 2006, the month before Palin took office, Alaska
Governor Frank Murkowskiâs job approval rating was 19%. Resignation. On July
3, 2009, Palin announced that she would not run for re-election in the 2010
Alaska gubernatorial election and would resign before the end of July. In her
announcement, Palin stated that both she and the state had been expending an
"insane" amount of time and money ($2.5 million) to address "frivolous" ethics
complaints filed against her, and that her decision not to seek reelection
would make her a lame duck governor. A Palin aide said Palin was "no longer
able to do the job she had been elected to do. Essentially, the taxpayers were
paying for Sarah to go to work every day and defend herself." Palin and her
husband Todd had personally incurred more than $500,000 in legal fees defending
against ethics charges brought against her as governor. Palin transferred the
office of governor to Sean Parnell in Fairbanks on July 26, 2009. In December
2010, new rules governing Alaska executive branch ethics, stemming from Sarah
Palin's tenure as governor, took effect. "These include allowing for the state
to pay legal costs for officials cleared of ethics violations; (and) allowing
for a family member of the governor or lieutenant governor to travel at state
cost in certain circumstances . . ." 2008 vice-presidential campaign. Several
conservative commentators met Palin in the summer of 2007. Some of them, such
as Bill Kristol, later urged McCain to pick Palin as his vice presidential
running mate, arguing that her presence on the ticket would provide a boost in
enthusiasm among the Religious Right wing of the Republican party, while her
status as an unknown on the national scene would also be a positive factor. On
August 24, 2008, during a general strategy meeting, Steve Schmidt, and a few
other senior advisers to the McCain Campaign, discussed potential vice
presidential picks with the consensus settling around Palin. The following day,
the strategists advised McCain of their conclusions and he personally called
Palin, who was at the Alaska State Fair. On August 27, she visited McCain's
vacation home near Sedona, Arizona, where she was offered the position of vice-
presidential candidate. According to Jill Hazelbaker, a spokeswoman for McCain,
he had previously met Palin at the National Governors Association meeting in
Washington in February 2008 and had come away "extraordinarily impressed."
Palin was the only prospective running mate who had a face-to-face interview
with McCain to discuss joining the ticket that week. Nonetheless, Palin's
selection was a surprise to many because a main criticism he had of Obama was
his lack of experience, and speculation had centered on other candidates, such
as Minnesota Governor Tim Pawlenty, Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal, former
Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, U.S. Senator Joe Lieberman of Connecticut,
and former Pennsylvania Governor Tom Ridge. On August 29, in Dayton, Ohio,
McCain announced that he had chosen Palin as his running mate. Palin was the
first Alaskan and the second woman to run on a major U.S. party ticket. Since
Palin was largely unknown outside Alaska before her selection by McCain, her
personal life, policy positions, and political record drew intense media
scrutiny. On September 1, 2008, Palin announced that her daughter Bristol was
pregnant and that she would marry the father, Levi Johnston. During this
period, some Republicans felt that Palin was being unfairly attacked by the
media. Timothy Noah of "Slate" magazine predicted that Palin's acceptance
speech would be "wildly overpraised" and might end speculation that she was
unqualified for the job of vice president because the press had been beating
her up for "various trivial shortcomings" and had lowered the expectations for
her speech. On September 3, 2008, Palin delivered a 40-minute acceptance speech
at the Republican National Convention that was well received and watched by
more than 40 million people. A Rasmussen poll taken immediately after the
Convention found that 51% of Americans believed that the media was "trying to
hurt" Palin with negative coverage, and 40% believed Palin to be ready for the
Presidency. During the campaign, controversy erupted over alleged differences
between Palin's positions as a gubernatorial candidate and her position as a
vice-presidential candidate. After McCain announced Palin as his running mate,
"Newsweek" and "Time" put Palin on their magazine covers, as some of the media
alleged that McCain's campaign was restricting press access to Palin by
allowing only three one-on-one interviews and no press conferences with her.
Palin's first major interview, with Charles Gibson of ABC News, met with mixed
reviews. Her interview five days later with Fox News Channel's Sean Hannity
went more smoothly and focused on many of the same questions from Gibson's
interview. Palin's performance in her third interview with Katie Couric, of CBS
News, was widely criticized; her poll numbers declined, Republicans expressed
concern that she was becoming a political liability, and some conservative
commentators called for Palin to resign from the Presidential ticket. Other
conservatives remained ardent in their support for Palin, accusing the
columnists of elitism. Following this interview, some Republicans, including
Mitt Romney and Bill Kristol, questioned the McCain campaign's strategy of
sheltering Palin from unscripted encounters with the press. Palin reportedly
prepared intensively for the October 2 vice-presidential debate with Democratic
vice-presidential nominee Joe Biden at Washington University in St. Louis. Some
Republicans suggested that Palin's performance in the interviews would improve
public perceptions of her debate performance by lowering expectations. Polling
from CNN, Fox and CBS found that while Palin exceeded most voters'
expectations, they felt that Biden had won the debate. Upon returning to the
campaign trail after her debate preparation, Palin stepped up her attacks on
the Democratic candidate for President, Illinois Senator Barack Obama. At a
fundraising event, Palin explained her new aggressiveness, saying, "There does
come a time when you have to take the gloves off and that time is right now."
Palin said that her first amendment right to "call Obama out on his
associations" was threatened by "attacks by the mainstream media." Palin
appeared on "Saturday Night Live"s "Weekend Update" segment on October 18.
Prior to her appearance, she had been parodied several times by Tina Fey, who
was noted for her physical resemblance to the candidate. In the weeks leading
up to the election, Palin was also the subject of amateur parodies posted on
YouTube. Controversy arose after it was reported that the Republican National
Committee (RNC) spent $150,000 of campaign contributions on clothing, hair
styling, and makeup for Palin and her family in September 2008. Campaign
spokespersons stated the clothing would be going to charity after the election.
Palin and some media outlets blamed gender bias for the controversy. At the end
of the campaign, Palin returned the clothes to the RNC. The election took place
on November 4, and Obama was projected as the winner at 11:00 PM EST. In his
concession speech McCain thanked Palin, calling her "one of the best
campaigners I've ever seen, and an impressive new voice in our party for reform
and the principles that have always been our greatest strength." While aides
were preparing the teleprompter for McCain's speech, they found a concession
speech written for Palin by George W. Bush speechwriter Matthew Scully. Two
members of McCain's staff, Steve Schmidt and Mark Salter, told Palin that there
was no tradition of Election Night speeches by running mates, and that she
would not be speaking. Palin appealed to McCain, who agreed with his staff.
After the 2008 election. Palin was the first guest on commentator Glenn Beck's
Fox News television show on January 19, 2009, commenting on Barack Obama that
he would be her president and that she would assist in any way to bring
progress to the nation without abandoning her conservative views. On January
27, 2009, Palin formed the political action committee, SarahPAC. The
organization, which describes itself as an advocate of energy independence,
supports candidates for federal and state office. Following her resignation as
Governor, Palin announced her intention to campaign "on behalf of candidates
who believe in the right things, regardless of their party label or
affiliation." It was reported that SarahPAC had raised nearly $1,000,000. A
legal defense fund was set up to help Palin challenge ethics complaints, and it
had collected approximately $250,000 by mid-July 2009. In June 2010, Palin's
defense fund was ruled illegal and will have to pay back $386,856 it collected
in donations because it used Palin's position as governor to raise money for
her personal gain. Palin subsequently set up a new defense fund. In March 2010,
Palin started a show to be aired on TLC called "Sarah Palin's Alaska". The show
was produced by Mark Burnett. Five million viewers tuned in for the premiere
episode, a record for TLC. Palin also has secured a segment on Fox News. Two
guests that she was shown to have interviewed claimed to have never met her.
Guests LL Cool J and Toby Keith stated that footage shown on the segment was
actually taken from another interview with someone else, but was used in
Palin's segment. On December 8, 2010, it was reported that SarahPAC and Palin's
personal credit card information were compromised through cyber attacks.
Palin's team believed the attack was executed by Anonymous during Operation
Payback. The report was met with skepticism in the blogosphere. Palin's email
had been hacked once before in 2008. In August 2009, she coined the phrase
"death panel", to describe health care reform. She stated that it would require
Americans such as her parents or her child with Down syndrome, "to stand in
front of Obama's 'death panel' so his bureaucrats can decide, based on a
subjective judgment of their 'level of productivity in society,' whether they
are worthy of health care." The phrase was criticized by many on both sides of
the political aisle and Politifact named it the "Lie of the Year of 2009" Palin
will not be a speaker at the Republican National Convention in August 2012 in
Tampa, Florida. She didn't say whether she will attend the convention. "Going
Rogue" and "America by Heart". In November 2009, Palin released her memoir,
"Going Rogue: An American Life", in which she details her private and political
career, including her resignation as Governor of Alaska. Palin said she took
the title from the phrase 'gone rogue' used by McCain staffers to describe her
behavior when she spoke her mind on the issues during the campaign. The
subtitle, "An American Life," mirrors the title of President Ronald Reagan's
1990 autobiography. Less than two weeks after its release, sales of the book
exceeded the one million mark, with 300,000 copies sold the first day. Its
bestseller rankings were comparable to memoirs by Bill Clinton, Hillary Clinton
and Barack Obama. Palin traveled to 11 states in a bus, with her family
accompanying her, to promote the book. She made a number of media appearances
as well, including a widely publicized interview on November 16, 2009, with
Oprah Winfrey. In November 2010 HarperCollins released Palin's second book,
titled "America by Heart". The book contains excerpts from Palin's favorite
speeches, sermons and literature as well as portraits of people Palin admires,
including some she met in rural America on her first book tour. Tea Party
movement. On February 6, 2010, Palin appeared as the keynote speaker at the
inaugural Tea Party convention in Nashville, Tennessee. Palin said the Tea
Party movement is "the future of politics in America." She criticized Obama for
rising deficits, and for "apologizing for Americaâ in speeches in other
countries. Palin said Obama was weak on the War on Terror for allowing the so-
called Christmas bomber to board a plane headed for the United States.
Palinâs speaking fee was reported to be $100,000. Judson Phillips, the
founder of Tea Party Nation, the social networking site that sponsored the
convention, did not confirm the amount paid to Palin saying he was
contractually obligated not to speak about it. On Labor Day, September 5, 2011,
Palin was the featured speaker at a Tea Party Express rally in Manchester, New
Hampshire's Victory Park. New Hampshire is traditionally the host of the
nation's first Presidential primary. She addressed an enthusiastic crowd that
the "Los Angeles Times" estimated to number 1,000 but which the local "New
Hampshire Union-Leader" newspaper reported as "at least 500". Many in the crowd
chanted "Run, Sarah, run!" during her speech. Palin told the rally attendees
that it was time to grow the Tea Party movement and it was important for them
to avoid internal bickering with Establishment Republicans. She told the crowd,
âThe Tea Party movement is bigger than any one person and is not about any
one candidate.â "Pink Elephant" movement and 2010 endorsements. In the middle
of 2010, Palin flagged the launch of a new "Pink Elephant Movement." She set
about endorsing a number of female GOP candidates. Her endorsement helped
Georgia Gubernatorial candidate Karen Handel to take the lead in the campaign
for the Republican nomination, though ultimately Handel lost the primary. Palin
has endorsed several female candidates nationally. Ryan Rudominer, a spokesman
for the House Democratic campaign operation has called her involvement in
various U.S. House campaigns a "great thing across the board." She spoke at a
May 2010 fundraiser for the Susan B. Anthony List, a pro-life political
advocacy group and political action committee that supports pro-life women in
politics, in which she coined the term "mama grizzly." In the months ahead of
the November 2010 elections, Palin selectively endorsed Republican candidates,
and was a significant fundraising asset to those she campaigned for during the
primary season. According to "Politico", Palin's criteria for endorsing
candidates was whether they had the support of the Tea Party movement and the
support of the Susan B. Anthony List. In terms of success, Palin was 7-2 for
Senate endorsements; 7-6 for House endorsements; and 6-3 in endorsements of
gubernatorial candidates Palin's endorsement of Joe Miller in the August 24
Alaska primary election for U.S. Senator was identified as a possible pivotal
moment in Miller's upset of the incumbent Republican Senator Lisa Murkowski.
According to Daily Beast reporter Shushannah Walshe, Christine O'Donnell's
prospects of upsetting establishment Republican candidate Mike Castle "changed
overnight" due to Palin's endorsement. O'Donnell defeated Castle in the
September 14 primary for Joe Biden's former Senate seat in Delaware. Her
O'Donnell endorsement further increased tensions between Palin and the
Republican establishment: leading conservative commentator Charles Krauthammer
described the endorsement as "reckless and irresponsible"; party strategist
Karl Rove argued that her endorsement may have cost the GOP the Delaware Senate
seat; and commentators including Politico's Ben Smith posited that Palin's
support of O'Donnell contributed to dashing Republican hopes of regaining
control of the U.S. Senate. Palin's influence over the primaries nonetheless
further increased speculation that she would seek to be the party's nominee for
President in 2012, with political pundits Paul Mirengoff, David Frum, and
Jonathan Chait identifying Palin as the front-runner. Possible 2012
presidential and Senate campaign. Beginning in November 2008, following Palin's
high profile in the presidential campaign, there was an active "Draft Palin"
movement. On February 6, 2010, when Fox News asked her if she would be running
for president in 2012, she replied, "I would be willing to if I believe that
it's right for the country." She added, "I won't close the door that perhaps
could be open for me in the future." In November 2010, Palin confirmed that she
was considering running for the Presidency, and was "having that discussion
with my family." She said she realised her level of experience could cause
problems with winning the nomination, and criticized the "lamestream media" for
focusing attention on her personal life. During March 2011, Palin and her
husband toured India at the invitation of Indian newsmagazine "India Today",
subsequently visiting Israel. During the tour she was asked about her future
candidacy; she said, "I don't think there needs to be a rush to get out there
as a declared candidate. It's a life-changing decision". In response to another
question, she said "Itâs time that a woman is president of the United States
of America." In 2011, Palin said the home she had recently purchased in
Scottsdale was not a full-time residence, and denied that she was planning to
run for Senate from Arizona. On October 5, 2011, Palin said she had decided not
to seek the Republican nomination for President. Personal life. Sarah and Todd
Palin have five children: sons Track (born 1989) and Trig Paxson Van (born
2008), and daughters Bristol Sheeran Marie (born 1990), Willow (born 1994), and
Piper (born 2001). Palin's youngest child, Trig, was prenatally diagnosed with
Down syndrome. Palin has two grandchildren, a boy named Tripp Easton Mitchell
Johnston, who was born to her eldest daughter, Bristol, and her then-fiancee,
Levi Johnston, in 2008, and a girl named Kyla Grace Palin, who was born to son
Track and his wife, Britta, in 2011. Her husband Todd worked for the British
oil company BP as an oil-field production operator, retiring in 2009, and owns
a commercial fishing business. Palin was born into a Roman Catholic family.
Later, her family joined the Wasilla Assembly of God, a Pentecostal church,
which she attended until 2002. Palin then switched to the Wasilla Bible Church.
When in Juneau, she attends the Juneau Christian Center. Palin described
herself in an interview as a "Bible-believing Christian." Public image. Prior
to the 2008 Republican National Convention, a Gallup poll found that most
voters were unfamiliar with Sarah Palin. During her campaign to become vice
president, 39% said Palin was ready to serve as president if needed, 33% said
Palin was not, and 29% had no opinion. This was "the lowest vote of confidence
in a running mate since the elder George Bush chose then-Indiana senator Dan
Quayle to join his ticket in 1988." Following the Convention, her image came
under close media scrutiny, particularly with regard to her religious
perspective on public life, her socially conservative views, and her perceived
lack of experience. Palin's experience in foreign and domestic politics came
under criticism among conservatives as well as liberals following her
nomination. At the same time, Palin became more popular than John McCain among
Republicans. One month after McCain announced Palin as his running mate, she
was viewed both more favorably and unfavorably among voters than her opponent,
Delaware Senator Joe Biden. A plurality of the television audience rated
Biden's performance higher at the 2008 vice-presidential debate. Media outlets
repeated Palin's statement that she "stood up to Big Oil" when she resigned
after 11 months as the head of the Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission,
due to abuses she witnessed involving other Republican commissioners and their
ties to energy companies and energy lobbyists, and again when she raised taxes
on oil companies as governor. In turn, others have said that Palin is a "friend
of Big Oil" due to her advocacy of oil exploration and development including
drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and the de-listing of the polar
bear as an endangered species. The National Organization for Women did not
endorse McCain/Palin, endorsing Barack Obama instead. Palin was selected as one
of Americaâs "10 Most Fascinating People of 2008" by Barbara Walters for an
ABC special on December 4, 2008. In April 2010, she was selected as one of the
world's 100 most influential people by "TIME Magazine". In the wake of the
January 8, 2011 shooting of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, Palin faced criticism for
her SarahPAC website's inclusion of a common political graphic that included a
crosshair over Giffords's district. Palin responded on her Facebook page to the
criticism, saying that "Acts of monstrous criminality stand on their own. They
begin and end with the criminals who commit them," controversially equating the
accusations of her role in the shooting to a "blood libel". Her response
sparked a fiery debate attracting support and criticism. While a ABC News-
"Washington Post" poll found that 46% of respondents viewed Palin's response
unfavorably, 30% approved and 24% had no opinion, other polls indicated an
increase in Palin's favorable popularity.
