Silesia Silesia ( or ; ; ; Silesian German: "SchlÃ¤sing"; ; Silesian:
"ÅšlÅ¯nsk" ; ) is a historical region of Central Europe located mostly in
Poland, with smaller parts in the Czech Republic, and Germany. Silesia is rich
in mineral and natural resources and includes several important industrial
areas. Silesia's largest city and historical capital is WrocÅ‚aw (). Other
large cities are Opole ("Oppeln"), Gliwice ("Gleiwitz"), Katowice ("Kattowitz")
in Poland; Ostrava; Opava in the Czech Republic; and GÃ¶rlitz () in Germany.
Its main river is the Oder ("Odra"). Silesia's borders and national affiliation
have changed radically over time, both when it was a hereditary possession of
noble houses and after the rise of modern nation-states. The first known states
to hold power there were those of Greater Moravia at end of 9th century and
Bohemia early in the 10th century. In the 10th century Silesia was incorporated
into the early Polish state, but it later broke into independent duchies,
coming under increasing Czech and German influence. It came under the rule of
the Crown of Bohemia, which passed to the Austrian Habsburg Monarchy in 1526.
Most of Silesia was conquered by Prussia in 1742, later becoming part of the
German Empire, the Weimar Republic and Nazi Germany up to 1945. After World War
I the easternmost part of this region was awarded to Poland by the victorious
Allies after rebellions by Silesian Polish people and a plebiscite. After World
War II the bulk of Silesia was transferred to Polish jurisdiction and became
part of Poland. The remaining parts of Silesia mostly went to Czechoslovakia
after World War I, and are part of the Czech Republic. Most inhabitants of
Silesia today speak the national languages of their respective countries
(Polish, Czech, German). There is an ongoing debate whether a local Silesian
speech should be considered a Polish dialect or a separate language. There also
exists a Silesian German or Lower Silesian language, although this form of
German is almost extinct. Etymology. The names of Silesia in the different
languages most likely share their etymologyâ€”Latin and English: "Silesia";
Polish: "ÅšlÄ…sk"; Old Polish: "ÅšlÄ…Å¼sk"; Silesian: "ÅšlÅ¯nsk"; German:
"Schlesien"; Silesian German: "SchlÃ¤sing"; Czech: "Slezsko"; Slovak:
"Sliezsko"; Kashubian: "SlÄ…sk"; Upper Sorbian: "Å leska"; Lower Sorbian:
"Å lazyÅ„ska". The names all relate to the name of a river (now ÅšlÄ™za) and
mountain (Mount ÅšlÄ™Å¼a) in mid-southern Silesia. The mountain served as a
holy place in prehistoric times. "ÅšlÄ™Å¼a" is listed as one of the numerous
Pre-Indo-European topographic names in the region (see old European hydronymy).
According to some Polish Slavists the name â€˜ÅšlÄ™Å¼aâ€™ or â€˜ÅšlÄ™Å¼â€™ is
directly related to the Old Slavic words "Å›lÄ™g" or "Å›lÄ…g" , which means
dampness, moisture or humidity. They disagree with the hypothesis of an origin
for the name "ÅšlÄ…sk" from the name of the Silings tribe, an etymology
preferred by some German authors. History. Silesia has historically been an
ethnically diverse region. In the fourth century BC Celts entered Silesia
settling around the Mount ÅšlÄ™Å¼a near the modern WrocÅ‚aw, OÅ‚awa and
Strzelin. Germanic tribes were first recorded within Silesia in the first
century. Slavic peoples arrived in this territory around the Seventh century.
In the early ninth century the Slavic settlement stabilized. Local Slavs
started to erect boundary structures like the Silesian Przesieka and the
Silesia Walls. In those days the eastern border of Silesian settlement was
situated to the west of the Bytom, and east from RacibÃ³rz and Cieszyn. East
from this line dwelled a closely related Slav tribe, the Vistulans. Their
northern border was in the valley of the Barycz river, north of which dwelled
Polans. The first known states in Silesia were Greater Moravia and Bohemia. In
the tenth century, the Polish ruler Mieszko I of the Piast dynasty incorporated
Silesia into the Polish state. During the Fragmentation of Poland, Silesia, as
well as the rest of the country, was divided among many independent duchies
ruled by various Silesian dukes. During this time, German cultural and ethnic
influence increased as a result of immigration from German-speaking parts of
the Holy Roman Empire. In 1178, parts of the Duchy of KrakÃ³w around Bytom,
OÅ›wiÄ™cim, ChrzanÃ³w and Siewierz were transferred to the Silesian Piasts, yet
their population was of Vistulan and not of Silesian descent. Between 1289 and
1292, Bohemian king Wenceslaus II became suzerain of some Upper Silesian
duchies. It wasn't however until 1335 when Polish kings renounced their
hereditary rights to Silesia. The province became part of the Bohemian Crown
under the Holy Roman Empire, and passed with that crown to the Habsburg
Monarchy of Austria in 1526. In the 15th century there were several border
changes of the province. First of all parts of the territories that were
transferred to the Silesian Piasts in 1178, were bought by the Polish kings in
the second half of the 15th century (the Duchy of OÅ›wiÄ™cim in 1457 and the
Duchy of Zator in 1494). The Bytom area however remained in the possession of
the Silesian Piasts, even though it was a part of the Diocese of KrakÃ³w.
Secondly the Duchy of Crossen was inherited by Margraviate of Brandenburg in
1476 and, with the renunciation by King Ferdinand I and estates of Bohemia in
1538, it became an integral part of Brandenburg. In 1742, most of Silesia was
seized by King Frederick the Great of Prussia in the War of the Austrian
Succession and subsequently made the Prussian Province of Silesia.
Consequently, Silesia became part of the German Empire when it was proclaimed
in 1871. After World War I, Upper Silesia was contested by Germany and the
newly-independent Second Polish Republic. The League of Nations organized a
plebiscite to decide the issue in 1921. It resulted in 60% votes being cast for
Germany and 40% for Poland. Following the third Silesian Uprising (1921),
however, the easternmost portion of Upper Silesia (including Katowice), with a
majority ethnic Polish population, was awarded to Poland, where it was formed
into the Silesian Voivodeship. The Prussian Province of Silesia within Germany
was then divided into the provinces of Lower Silesia and Upper Silesia.
Meanwhile Austrian Silesia, the small portion of Silesia retained by Austria
after the Silesian Wars, was mostly awarded to the new Czechoslovakia (becoming
known as Czech Silesia), although most of Cieszyn and territory to the east of
it went to Poland (see Zaolzie). Polish Silesia was among the first regions
invaded during Germany's 1939 attack on Poland. One of the goals of Nazi
occupation, particularly the occupation of Upper Silesia, was to expel the
Polish Silesian population. German repatriation of Poles in Upper Silesia was
made a priority for two crucial reasons. First, Nazi Germany was resentful over
the loss of Silesia after the uprisings of the early 1920s and wished to regain
the region for its natural resource wealth and strategically important
locomotive network. Second, the Nazi war machine needed more members. Those
repatriated as German were immediately subject to military service, thus
bolstering the German Army's numbers. As for the non-German speaking Polish
population of Silesia, they were reduced to a lower worker class status and
were oftentimes severely mistreated by their new German overlords. This
treatment would be addressed by the Poles years later. In 1945, Silesia and its
population went through another traumatic change. The German expulsion of Poles
from Silesia was echoed by Polish expulsion of Germans. The Potsdam Conference
of 1945 concluded that the Oder-Neisse would be the official border between
Germany and Poland. Millions of German Silesians were evicted from their homes
and replaced by Poles from the East. Furthermore, the newly formed Polish
United Workers' Party created a Ministry of the Recovered Territories that
claimed half of the available arable land for state-run collectivized farms.
Many Silesian residents not only resented the Germans for their invasion in
1939, but now also the newly formed Polish communist government for their
population shifting and interference in agricultural, as well as industrial,
affairs. The administrative division of Silesia within Poland has changed
several times since 1945. Since 1999 it has been divided between Lower Silesian
Voivodeship, Opole Voivodeship, Silesian Voivodeship and Lubusz Voivodeship.
Czech Silesia is now part of the Czech Republic, forming the Moravian-Silesian
Region and the northern part of the Olomouc Region. Germany retains the
Silesia-Lusatia region ("Niederschlesien-Oberlausitz" or "Schlesische
Oberlausitz") west of the Neisse, which is part of the federal state of Saxony.
Geography. Most of Silesia is relatively flat, although its southern border is
generally mountainous. It is primarily located in a swath running along both
banks of the upper and middle Oder (Odra) river, but it extends eastwards to
the upper Vistula river. The region also includes many tributaries of the Oder,
including the BÃ³br (and its tributary the Kwisa), the Barycz and the Nysa
KÅ‚odzka. The Sudeten mountains run along most of the southern edge of the
region, though at its south-eastern extreme it reaches the Silesian Beskids and
Moravian-Silesian Beskids, which belong to the Carpathian range. Historically,
Silesia was bounded to the west by the Kwisa and BÃ³br rivers, while the
territory west of the Kwisa was in Upper Lusatia (earlier "Milsko"). However,
because part of Upper Lusatia was included in the Province of Silesia in 1815,
in Germany GÃ¶rlitz, Niederschlesischer Oberlausitzkreis and neighbouring areas
are considered parts of historical Silesia. Those districts, along with
Poland's Lower Silesian Voivodeship and parts of Lubusz Voivodeship, make up
the geographic region of Lower Silesia. Silesia has undergone a similar
notional extension at its eastern extreme. Historically it extended only as far
as the Brynica river, which separates it from ZagÅ‚Ä™bie DÄ…browskie in the
Lesser Poland region. However to many Poles today, Silesia ("ÅšlÄ…sk") is
understood to cover all of the area around Katowice, including ZagÅ‚Ä™bie. This
interpretation is given official sanction in the use of the name Silesian
Voivodeship ("wojewÃ³dztwo Å›lÄ…skie") for the province covering this area. In
fact the word "ÅšlÄ…sk" in Polish (when used without qualification) now
commonly refers exclusively to this area (also called "GÃ³rny ÅšlÄ…sk" or Upper
Silesia). As well as the Katowice area, historical Upper Silesia also includes
the Opole region (Poland's Opole Voivodeship) and Czech Silesia. Czech Silesia
consists of a part of the Moravian-Silesian Region and the JesenÃ­k District in
the Olomouc Region. Natural resources. Silesia is a resource-rich and populous
region. Since the middle of the 18th century, coal has been mined. The industry
grew during German rule and peaked in the 1970s under the People's Republic of
Poland. During this period Silesia became one of the world's largest producers
of coal, with a record tonnage in 1979. Coal mining declined during the next
two decades but has increased again following the end of Communist rule. There
are 41 coal mines in Silesia, most forming part of the Gornoslaskie Zaglebie
Weglowe coalfield which lies in the Silesian Upland. The field has an area of
about 4,500Â km2. Deposits in Lower Silesia have proven to be difficult to
exploit and the area's unprofitable mines were closed in 2000. In 2008 an
estimated 35 billion tonnes of lignite reserves was found near Legnica, making
them some of the largest in the world. From the fourth century BC iron ore has
been mined in the upland areas of Silesia. The same period saw lead, copper,
silver and gold mining. Zinc, cadmium, arsenic, and uranium have also been
mined in the region. Lower Silesia features large copper mining and processing
between the cities of Legnica, GÅ‚ogÃ³w, Lubin and Polkowice. The region is
known for stone quarrying specifically in the Swietokrzyskie Mountains and in
the Lublin Upland primarily to produce limestone, marl, marble, and basalt. The
region also has a thriving agricultural sector, which produces cereals (wheat,
rye, barley, oats, corn), potatoes, rapeseed, sugar beets and others. Milk
production is well developed. The Opole Silesia has for decades occupied the
top spot in Poland for their indices of effectiveness of agricultural land use.
Mountainous parts of southern Silesia feature many significant and attractive
tourism destinations (e.g., Karpacz, Szczyrk, WisÅ‚a). Silesia is generally
well forested. This is because greenness is generally highly desirable by the
local population, particularly in the highly industrialized parts of Silesia.
Demographics. Modern Silesia is inhabited by Poles, Germans, Czechs and
Silesians. The last Polish census of 2002 showed that the Silesians are the
largest national minority in Poland, Germans being the second; both groups are
located mostly in Upper Silesia. The Czech part of Silesia is inhabited by
Czechs, Moravians, Silesians and Poles. Before the Second World War, Silesia
was inhabited mostly by Germans and Poles, with a Czech and Jewish minority. In
1905, a census showed that 75% of the population were Germans and 25% Poles.
The German population tended to be based in the urban centres and in the rural
areas to the north and west, whilst the Polish population was generally rural
and in the east. Silesia's Jewish community, who were concentrated around
Breslau and Upper Silesia, numbered 48,003 (1.1% of the population) in 1890,
decreasing to 44,985 persons (0.9%) by 1910. In Polish East Upper Silesia the
number of Jews was around 90,000-100,000. After the German invasion of Poland
in 1939, the Jewish population of Silesia was either placed in ghettos or
expelled to the General Government. Those sent to ghettos would from 1942 be
expelled to concentration and work camps. In August 1942 10,000 to 13,000
Silesian Jews were killed at Auschwitz. There were seventy thousand Jews in
Lower Silesia at the end of the war. The majority of Germans fled or were
expelled from the present-day Polish and Czech parts of Silesia during and
after World War II. From June 1945 to January 1947, 1.77 million Germans were
expelled from Lower Silesia, and 310,000 from Upper Silesia. Today, most German
Silesians and their descendants live in the territory of the Federal Republic
of Germany, many of them in the Ruhr area working as miners, like their
ancestors in Silesia. In order to smooth their integration into West German
society after 1945, they were placed into officially recognized organizations,
like the Landsmannschaft Schlesien, with financing from the federal Western
German budget. One of its most notable but controversial spokesmen was the CDU
politician Herbert Hupka. Prevailing public opinion in Germany is that these
organisations will achieve reconciliation with the Polish Silesians, which is
gradually occurring. The expulsion of Germans led to widespread
underpopulation. The population of the town of Glogau fell from 33,500 to
5,000, and from 1939 to 1966 the population of WrocÅ‚aw fell by 25%. Attempts
to repopulate Silesia proved unsuccessful in the 1940s and 1950s, and it was
not until the late 1970s that Silesia's population reached pre-war levels.
Cities. The following table lists the cities in Silesia with a population
greater than 100,000 (2006)
