Copyright Term Extension Act The Copyright Term Extension Act (CTEA) of 1998
extended copyright terms in the United States by 20 years. Since the Copyright
Act of 1976, copyright would last for the life of the author plus 50 years, or
75 years for a work of corporate authorship. The Act extended these terms to
life of the author plus 70 years and for works of corporate authorship to 120
years after creation or 95 years after publication, whichever endpoint is
earlier. Copyright protection for works published prior to January 1, 1978, was
increased by 20 years to a total of 95 years from their publication date. This
law, also known as the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act, Sonny Bono Act,
or as the Mickey Mouse Protection Act, effectively "froze" the advancement date
of the public domain in the United States for works covered by the older fixed
term copyright rules. Under this Act, additional works made in 1923 or
afterwards that were still protected by copyright in 1998 will not enter the
public domain until 2019 or afterward (depending on the date of the product)
unless the owner of the copyright releases them into the public domain prior to
that. Unlike copyright extension legislation in the European Union, the Sonny
Bono Act did not revive copyrights that had already expired. The Act did extend
the terms of protection set for works that were already copyrighted, and is
retroactive in that sense. However, works created before January 1, 1978, but
not published or registered for copyright until recently, are addressed in a
special section () and may remain protected until the end of 2047. The Act
became on October 27, 1998. Background. Under the Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, the signatory states are required to
provide copyright protection for a minimum term of the life of the author plus
fifty years, but they are permitted to provide for a longer term of protection.
Following the 1993 Directive on harmonising the term of copyright protection,
member states of the European Union implemented protection for a term of the
author's life plus seventy years. The United States did not become a Berne
signatory until 1988, but had previously provided for the minimum copyright
term the convention required in the Copyright Act of 1976. After the United
States' accession to the Berne convention, a number of copyright owners
successfully lobbied the U.S. Congress for another extension of the term of
copyright, to provide for the same term of protection that exists in Europe.
The act was named in memory of the late Congressman Sonny Bono, who died nine
months before the act became law: he had previously been one of twelve sponsors
of a similar bill. The US legislators ignored the spirit of the European
legislation, which added 15 years to the term to account for the two world
wars. America's war experience was substantially different than Europe's. This
15 years was intended to be temporary in Europe, but became permanent in the
US. House members sympathetic to restaurant and bar owners, who were upset over
ASCAP and BMI licensing practices, almost derailed the Act. As a result, the
bill was amended to include the Fairness in Music Licensing Act, which exempted
smaller establishments from needing a public performance license to play music.
Both houses of the United States Congress passed the act as Public Law 105-298
with a voice vote. President Bill Clinton signed the Sonny Bono Copyright Term
Extension Act of 1998 on October 27, 1998. Political climate. Senate Report
104-315. The Senate Report gave the official reasons for passing copyright
extension laws and was originally written in the context of the Copyright Term
Extension Act of 1995, . The authors of the report believed that extending
copyright protection would help the United States by providing more protection
for their works in foreign countries and by giving more incentive to digitize
and preserve works since there was an exclusive right in them. The report also
included minority opinions by Herb Kohl and Hank Brown, who believed that the
term extensions were a financial windfall to current owners of copyrighted
material at the expense of the public's use of the material. Support.
Proponents of the Bono Act argue that it is necessary given that the life
expectancy of humans has risen dramatically since Congress passed the original
Copyright Act of 1790, that a difference in copyright terms between the United
States and Europe would negatively affect the international operations of the
entertainment industry, and that some works would be created under a longer
copyright that would never be created under the existing copyright. They also
claim that copyrighted works are an important source of income to the US and
that media such as VHS, DVD, Cable and Satellite have increased the value and
commercial life of movies and television series. Proponents contend that
Congress has the power to pass whatever copyright term it wants because the
language "To promote the progress of science and useful arts" in the United
States Constitution is not a substantive limitation on the powers of Congress,
leaving the sole restriction that copyrights must only last for "limited
times." However, in what respect the granted time must be limited has never
been determined, thus arguably even an absurdly long, yet finite, duration
would still be a valid "limited time" according to the letter of the
Constitution as long as Congress was ostensibly setting this limit to promote
the progress of science and useful arts. This was one of the arguments that
prevailed in the "Eldred v. Ashcroft" case, when the Supreme Court upheld the
constitutionality of the CTEA. It is also pointed out by proponents that the
extension did not prevent all works from going in the public domain. They note
that the 1976 Copyright Act established that unpublished works created before
1978 would still begin entering the public domain January 1, 2003 (Known
author: life of the author plus 70 years; anonymous/pseudoanonymous/unknown
author/works-for-hire: 120 years from creation), and that the provision
remained unaffected by the 1998 extension. They also claim that Congress has
actually increased the scope of the public domain since, for the first time,
unpublished works will enter the public domain. Proponents believe that
copyright encourages progress in the arts. With an extension of copyright,
future artists have to create something original, rather than reuse old work,
however, had the act been in place in the 1960's, it is unlikely that Andy
Warhol would have been able to sell or even exhibit any of his work, since it
all incorporated previously copyrighted material. Proponents contend that it is
more important to encourage all creators to make new works instead of just
copyright holders. Proponents say that copyright better preserves intellectual
property like movies, music and television shows. One example given is the case
of the classic film "It's a Wonderful Life". Before Republic Pictures and
Spelling Entertainment (who owned the motion picture rights to the short story
and the music even after the film itself became public domain) began to assert
their rights to the film, various local TV stations and cable networks
broadcast the film endlessly. As New York Times reporter Bill Carter put it:
"the film's currency was being devalued." Many different versions of the film
were made and most if not all were in horrible condition. After underlying
rights to the film were enforced, it was given a high quality restoration that
was hailed by critics. In addition, proponents note that once a work falls into
the public domain there is no guarantee that the work will be more widely
available or cheaper. Suggesting that quality copies of public domain works are
not widely available, they argue that one reason for a lack of availability may
be due to publishers' reluctance to publish a work that is in the public domain
for fear that they will not be able to recoup their investment or earn enough
profit. Proponents reject the idea that only works in the public domain can
provide artistic inspiration. They note that opponents fail to take into
account that copyright applies only to expressions of ideas and not the ideas
themselves. Thus artists are free to get ideas from copyrighted works as long
as they don't infringe. Borrowing ideas and such are common in film, TV and
music even with copyrighted works (see Sc√®nes √  faire, Idea-expression divide
and stock character). Works such as parody benefit from fair use. Proponents
also question the idea that extended copyright is "corporate welfare." They
state that many opponents also have a stake in the case, claiming that those
arguing against copyright term extension are mostly businesses that depend on
distributing films and videos that have lost their copyright. Opposition.
Dennis S. Karjala, a law professor, led an effort to try to prevent the CTEA
from being passed. He testified before the Committees on the Judiciary arguing
"that extending the term of copyright protection would impose substantial costs
on the United States general public without supplying any public benefit. The
extension bills represent a fundamental departure from the United States
philosophy that intellectual property legislation serve a public purpose." An
Editorial in the New York Times argued against the copyright extension on
February 21, 1998. The article stated "When Senator Hatch laments that George
Gershwin's 'Rhapsody in Blue' will soon 'fall into the public domain,' he makes
the public domain sound like a dark abyss where songs go, never to be heard
again. In fact, when a work enters the public domain it means the public can
afford to use it freely, to give it new currency." Opponents of the "Bono Act"
consider the legislation to be corporate welfare and have tried (but failed) to
have it declared unconstitutional, claiming that such an act is not "necessary
and proper" to accomplishing the Constitution's stated purpose of "promot the
progress of science and useful arts". They argue that most works bring most of
the profits during the first few years and are pushed off the market by the
publishers thereafter. Thus there is little economic incentive in extending the
terms of copyrights except for the few owners of franchises that are wildly
successful, such as Disney. They also point out that the Tenth Amendment can be
construed as placing limits on the powers that Congress can gain from a treaty.
More directly, they see two successive terms of approximately 20 years each
(the Copyright Act of 1976 and the Bono Act) as the beginning of a "slippery
slope" toward a perpetual copyright term that nullifies the intended effect and
violates the spirit of the "for limited times" language of the United States
Constitution, Article I, section 8, clause 8. They question the proponents'
life expectancy argument, making the comparison between the growth of copyright
terms and the term of patents in relation to the growth of life expectancies.
Life expectancies have risen from about 35 years in 1800 to 77.6 years in 2002.
Considering the increase in life expectancies during that period of time was a
bit more than double but the copyright terms have increased threefold from only
28 years total (under the Copyright Act of 1790) presents an apparent
discrepancy. While copyright terms have increased significantly since the 1790
act, terms of patents have not been extended in parallel; patents adequately
reward investment in the field with their mere 20-year term. Moreover, life
expectancy statistics are skewed due to historically high infant mortality
rates. Correcting for infant mortality, life expectancy has only increased by
fifteen years between 1850 and 2000. Opponents also argue that the Act
encourages "offshore production." For example, derivative works could be
created outside the United States in areas where copyright would have expired,
such works advancing science or the useful arts, and that US law would prohibit
these works to US residents. For example, a movie of Mickey Mouse playing with
a computer could be legally created in Russia and children worldwide could
possibly benefit from watching it, but the movie would be refused admission for
importation by US Customs because of copyright, resulting in a deprivation to
American children. Similarly, the first Winnie-the-Pooh book was published in
1926 and would have been public domain in 2001. Opponents identify another
possible harm from copyright extension: loss of productive value of private
collections of copyrighted works. A person who collected copyrighted works that
would soon "go out of copyright," intending to re-release them on copyright
expiration, lost the use of his capital expenditures for an additional 20 years
when the Bono Act passed. This is part of the underlying argument in Eldred v.
Ashcroft. The Bono Act is thus perceived to add an instability to commerce and
investment, areas which have a better legal theoretical basis than intellectual
property, whose theory is of quite recent development and is often criticized
as being a corporate chimera. Conceivably, if one had made such an investment
and then produced a derivative work (or perhaps even re-released the work "in
ipse"), he could counter a suit made by the copyright holder by declaring that
Congress had unconstitutionally made, ex post facto, a restriction on the
previously unrestricted. Opponents also question the proponents' "new works
would not be created" argument: the hidden presumption that the goal is to make
the creation of new works possible. However, the authors of the United States
Constitution evidently thought that unnecessary, instead restricting the goal
of copyright to merely "promotthe progress of science and useful arts". In
fact, some works created under time-limited copyright would not be created
under perpetual copyright because the creator of a distantly derivative work
does not have the money and resources to find the owner of copyright in the
original work and purchase a license, or the individual or privately held owner
of copyright in the original work might refuse to license a use at any price
(though a refusal to license may trigger a fair use safety valve). Thus they
argue that a rich, continually replenished, public domain is necessary for
continued artistic creation. March 25th, 1998 House Debate. The House debated
the Copyright Term Extension Act (House Resolution 390) on March 25, 1998. The
term extension was almost completely supported, with only the mild criticism by
Jim Sensenbrenner (Wisconsin) of "H.R. 2589 provides a very generous windfall
to the entertainment industry by extending the term of copyright for an
additional 20 years." He suggested that it could be balanced by adding
provisions from the Fairness in Music Licensing Act (H.R. 789). Lloyd Doggett
(Texas) called the 'Fairness in Music Licensing Act' the 'Music Theft Act' and
claimed that it was a mechanism to "steal the intellectual property of
thousands of small businesspeople who are song writers in this land." The
majority of subsequent debate was over Sensenbrenner's House Amendment 532 to
the CTEA. This amendment was over details of allowing music from radio and
television broadcasts in small businesses to be played without licensing fees.
An amendment to Sensenbrenner's amendment was proposed by Bill McCollum. The
key differences between Sensenbrenner's proposal and McCollum's amendment were
1) local arbitration versus court lawsuits in rate disagreements, 2) all retail
businesses versus only restaurants and bars, 3) 3500 square feet of general
public area versus of gross area, 4) which music licensing societies it applied
to (all versus ASCAP and BMI), and 5) freedom from vicarious liability for
landlords and others leasing space versus no such provision. After debate (and
the first verse of American Pie) the McCollum Amendment was rejected in by 259
to 150 and the Sensenbrenner amendment was passed by 297 to 112. The Copyright
Term Extension Act H.R. 2589 was passed. The term extension was supported for
two key reasons. First, "copyright industries give us [(the United States)] one
of our most significant trade surpluses." Second, the recently enacted
legislation in the European Union had extended copyright there for 20 years,
and so EU works would be protected for 20 years longer than US works if the US
did not enact similar term extensions. Howard Coble also stated that it was
good for consumers since "When works are protected by copyright, they attract
investors who can exploit the work for profit." The term extension portion was
supported by Songwriters Guild of America, National Academy of Songwriters, the
Motion Picture Association of America, the Intellectual Property Law Section of
the American Bar Association, the Recording Industry Association of America,
National Music Publishers Association, the Information Technology Association
of America and others. Challenges. Publishers and librarians, among others,
brought "Eldred v. Ashcroft" to obtain an injunction on enforcement of the act.
Oral arguments were heard by the U.S. Supreme Court on October 9, 2002, and on
January 15, 2003 the court held the CTEA constitutional by a 7-2 decision. The
plaintiffs in the "Eldred" case have begun to shift their effort toward the
U.S. Congress in support of a bill called the Public Domain Enhancement Act
that would make the provisions of the Bono Act apply only to copyrights that
had been registered with the Library of Congress.
