Valencian Valencian ( or ; endonym: "valenci√ ", ) is the historical and
official name for the Catalan language, spoken in the Valencian Country in
Spain. It is the traditional and co-official language of the Valencian
Community, alongside Spanish. Valecian belongs to the Western group of Catalan
dialects. Under the Valencian Statute of Autonomy, the Acad√®mia Valenciana de
la Llengua (AVL) has been established as its regulator. The AVL considers
"Catalan" and "Valencian" to be simply two names for the same language.
Valencian, like the closely related Occitan, has a long literary tradition,
especially Late Medieval and Renaissance. One of the most outstanding works of
all Catalan and Valencian literature is the romance "Tirant lo Blanch", written
by the Valencian knight and poet Joanot Martorell. Official status. The
official status of Valencian is regulated by the Spanish Constitution and the
Valencian Statute of Autonomy, together with the Law of Use and Education of
Valencian. The Law of Use and Education of Valencian develops this frame work,
providing for implementation of a bilingual educational system, and regulating
the use of Valencian in the public administration and judiciary system, where
citizens can freely use it when acting before both. Valencian is not one of the
recognized languages of the European Union (23 official and 26 minority
languages). Authors and literature. Middle Age. "Misteri d'Elx" (c. 1350).
Liturgical drama. Listed as Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of
Humanity by UNESCO. Renaissance. "Ausi√ s March" (Gandia, 1400 ‚Äì Valencia,
March 3, 1459). Poet, widely read in renaissance Europe. "Joanot Martorell"
(Gandia, 1413‚Äì1468). Knight and the author of the novel Tirant lo Blanch.
"Isabel de Villena" (Valencia, 1430‚Äì1490). Religious poetess. "Joan Ro√≠s de
Corella" (Gandia or Valencia, 1435 - Valencia, 1497). Knight and poet. "Obres e
trobes en lahors de la Verge Mar√≠a" (1474) The first book printed in Spain. It
is the compendium of a religious poetry contest held that year in the town of
Valencia. Distribution and usage. Distribution. Valencian is not spoken all
over the Valencian Community. Roughly a quarter of its territory, equivalent to
10% of the population (its inland part and areas in the extreme south as well),
is traditionally Spanish-speaking only, whereas Valencian is spoken to varying
degrees elsewhere. Additionally, it is also spoken by a reduced number of
people in Carche, a rural area in the Region of Murcia adjoining the Valencian
Community; nevertheless Valencian does not have any official recognition in
this area. Knowledge and usage. [[Image:Coneixement del valenci√  (domini
promig)-Cens del 2001.png|thumb|right|200px| Knowledge of Valencian according
to the 2001 census. Note that the light green areas inland and in the
southernmost part are not historically Valencian speaking ().]] The survey
shows that, although Valencian is still the common language in many areas in
the Land of Valencia, where slightly more than half of the Valencian population
are able to speak it, most Valencians do not usually speak in Valencian in
their social relations. The statistics hide the fact that in the areas where
the language is still strong, most people use Valencian in preference to
Castilian in all everyday situations. Moreover, according to a survey in 2008,
there is a downward trend in everyday Valencian users. The lowest numbers are
in the major cities of Valencia and Alicante, where the percentage of everyday
speakers is in single figures. All in all, in the 1993-2006 period, the number
of speakers fell by 10 per cent. One of the factors cited is the increase in
the numbers of immigrants from other countries, who tend to favour using
Spanish over local languages; accordingly, the number of residents who claim no
understanding of Valencian sharply increased. One curiosity in the heartlands
mentioned above, is that most of the children of immigrants go to public school
and are therefore taught in Valencian and are far more comfortable speaking
this with their friends. However, some children of Valencian speakers go to
private schools run by the church where the curriculum is in Castilian and
consequently this becomes their preferred language. Features of Valencian. Note
that this is a list of features of the main forms of Valencian as a group of
dialectal varieties that differ from those of other Catalan dialects,
particularly from the Central variety of the language. For more general
information on the features of Valencian, see Catalan language. Note also that
there is a great deal of variety within the Valencian Community, and by no
means do the features below apply to every local version. Vocabulary. Some
other features, such as the use of "molt de" or the lack of "hom" or geminate
l, are often given as examples of differences between Valencian varieties and
other forms of the language. However, these are actually differences between
colloquial and literary language and, again, may not apply to specific sub-
dialects. Northern and southern variants of Valencian share more features with
western Catalan (Lower Ebro river area for instance) than with central
Valencian. Thus, some of the features listed previously do not apply to them.
Linguistic controversy. The position of the Valencian Academy. The Acad√®mia
Valenciana de la Llengua (AVL) is the institution (language regulator) whose
primary function is to determine and elaborate an official standard for the
Valencian language as used in Valencia and to foster its use. In 2005 the
"Acad√®mia Valenciana de la Llengua" passed a declaration asserting that
Valencian,
