Valencian nationalism Valencian nationalism (; ) or Valencianism () is a
political movement in the Valencian Community, one of the Autonomous
Communities of Spain. It advocates to reach the highest level of self-
government, or independence itself, for the Valencian Country. Rival types. So-
called Valencianism has been historically split in two opposed movements
bitterly divided over the very nature of the Valencian identity, something
which is best reflected in the debate over the philological filiation of
Valencian. For some, the Valencian language is a language by itself, no more
related to Catalan than it is to other Romance languages. These are
characterised by their opposition to Catalan nationalism, regarded as an
expansionist movement that tries to impose Catalan language and culture in
Valencia. In particular, it is nuclear to this kind of Valencianism a complete
rejection of the idea of "Pa√Øsos Catalans". This group is mostly (but not
exclusively) conservative leaning and pejoratively referred to by their rivals
as "blavers". This mostly conservative Valencianist group tends to demand
further self-government rather than political independence from Spain.
"Catalanistes" (see below) typically accuse this group of not being genuinely
interested in Valencian matters, but representing a revamped Spanish
nationalism. Reversely, the other part of Valencianism stresses the proven
linguistic identity between Valencian and Catalan, then inferring a political
project closely connected to Catalan nationalism which is more or less
identified with nation building within a "Pa√Øsos Catalans" frame. This group
is mostly (but not exclusively) left leaning and is pejoratively referred to as
"catalanistes" by the aforementioned. Political independence from Spain is most
quoted among this left leaning group. "Blavers" typically accuse this group of
not being genuinely interested in Valencian matters, but working as a fifth
column of Catalan nationalism in Valencia. In between these arch-rival types of
Valencianism, there are a number of even smaller splinters and minority groups
which may adopt more or less eclectic Valencianist positions, but, overall,
both movements are deeply opposed and point at each other as their main rival.
Discrepancies go to the extent of not even agreeing on the name of the
Valencian Region. Conservative valencianists still may refer to designate the
territory as "Regne de Valencia" or Kingdom of Valencia, stressing its medieval
roots (even though this term has diminished over time, having been slowly
replaced by the official neologism "Valencian Community"). Reversely, left-
leaning Valencianists prefer the traditional term "Pa√≠s Valenci√ " or
"Valencian Country" (see Names of the Valencian Community). The Valencian
Nationalist Bloc ( or "BNV"; ) is the largest Valencian nationalist party in
the Valencian Country, Spain. The Bloc's main aim is, as stated in their
guidelines, "to achieve full national sovereignty for the Valencian people, and
make it legally declared by a Valencian sovereign Constitution allowing the
possibility of association with the countries which share the same language,
history and culture". For the 2011 Valencian Regional elections, they stood in
an electoral new coalition called Coalici√≥ Comprom√≠s and won six seats in the
regional parliament. For the local election of the same year they mantain the
coalition and reach more than 300 seats and at the 2011 Spanish General
Election this coalition won historically a seat in the spanish parliament.
Development of valencianism. In its origins in the second half of the twentieth
century, valencianism was a popularist and heterogeneous movement, which
grouped together regionalists and supporters of Valencian foral civil law.
Support for valencianism has been strongest in the city of Valencia and in the
areas immediately surrounding it. The early Valencianists. It is widely
considered that the first valencianist movement is born in 1907, at the
Regionalist Assembly, promoted by Lo rat penat. Based in the exposition of
Faust√≠ Barber√  on its 1902 speech, "de regionalisme i valentinicultura", many
regionalist and independentist think-thank groups were born. Basically, the
early valencianism had the Land of Valencia as their only national mark, but
also worked together with the nationalists of the lands of Catalonia and the
Balearic Islands promoting closest ties with those nationalities who shared
language and culture with Valencia. Fuster and his critics. The ideas expressed
by Joan Fuster in his 1962 essay "Nosaltres, els valencians" ("We, the
Valencians") were very influential among Catalan nationalists during the 1960s
and early 1970s. Fuster's thesis was that the Valencians and the Catalans form
part of the same nationality. In his words, The Catalanist type of Valencianism
originally stems from this analysis, even though it acknowledges it has been
mostly overridden by the current political scenario, very different to that of
the Spanish transition to democracy, when Fuster's ideas had its controversial
popularity peak. Conservative Valencianism not only rejects the thesis of a
common nationality (flag, language, culture, etc.) but also promotes symbols of
a distinct Valencian nationality from the Catalan one. The democratic
transition. Some observers warned as early as in 1976 that the transition to
democracy, and particularly the economic problems of the time, could radicalize
the conservative positions of a part of the right. The first public attacks
against a perceived pancatalanism of the left-wing parties occurred in the run
up to the first democratic elections, in June 1977, and there were a number of
violent attacks on left-wing activists and bookshops from this time on. In
terms of democratic politics, the party which most closely espoused the
valencianist cause was the centre-right Uni√≥n de Centro Democr√°tico (UCD),
which was in power nationally (under Adolfo Su√°rez) but which trailed the
socialists in Valencia and Alicante. The first speech attacking pancatalanism
came in December 1977 from Emilio Attard, its leader in the province of
Valencia. Manuel Broseta, another leading member of the UCD, published an
influential essay ""Paella and the Catalan Countries"" a few months later, the
first in a substantial series of anticatalanist articles to appear in the
newspaper "Las Provincias". The UCD would defend, with some success, a
staunchly valencianist position throughout the negotiations leading up to the
first Statute of Autonomy. Valencian autonomy. The "Consell del Pa√≠s
Valenci√ " was established by Royal Decree on 17 March 1978 and held its first
meeting at the Monastery of El Puig on 10 April. All four main parties‚Äîthe
UCD, the postfranquists of the Alianza Popular, the socialists of the PSOE and
the communists (PCE)‚Äîwere represented, and all signed a call for Valencian
autonomy on 8 October, the eve of the Valencian national day. After the
approval of the Spanish Constitution in December 1978, the "Consell" approved
the first draft of a Statute of Autonomy at its meeting in Morella on 9 January
1979: this draft has become known as the "Statute of Morella". The political
climate degraded significantly after the elections of March and April
1979‚Äîwith some hyperbole, the period has become known as the "Battle of
Valencia". The elections gave the left another majority in the parliamentary
deputation (PCE, 3; PSOE, 19; UCD, 19) but gave the UCD the majority of seats
on the "Consell del Pa√≠s Valenci√ " (PCE, 1; PSOE, 7; UCD, 10), which were
attributed under a different voting system. It was initially agreed that
socialist Josep-Llu√≠s Albinyana should rest as President of the "Consell" but
the tensions between left and right were such that Albinyana was ousted after a
vote of censure on 22 December 1979. The UCD accused Albinyana of using his
position as President of the "Consell" to bounce through a Statute of Autonomy
without consensus, while the socialists accused the UCD of wanting to reopen
the consensus reached at Morella. There were elements of truth in both
positions, and the close balance of electoral strength made the arguments
particularly virulent. As a result of the tensions in regional politics and of
a certain number of developments at the national level, the Statute of Autonomy
remained deadlocked throughout 1980, despite petitions in favour of Valencian
autonomy from 529 of the 542 municipalities. The Valencian parliamentarians
took the matter in hand after the failed military coup of 23 February 1981
(during which the city of Valencia suffered several hours of military
occupation), producing a compromise draft Statute known as the "Statute of
Benic√ ssim". It is this draft, along with a set of amendments proposed by the
UCD and the communists, which was submitted for approval to the Cortes
Generales in Madrid. The Statute of Benic√ ssim was modified in favour of
valencianist held positions by the Constitutional Committee of the Congress of
Deputies, where the UCD held a majority. However Article¬ 1 of the modified
text, which named the autonomous community as the "Kingdom of Valencia", was
rejected by the full Chamber (for, 151; against, 161; abstentions, 9) on 9
March 1982 and the text returned to the Constitutional Committee. A final
compromise resulted in the name "Valencian Community": the Statute of Autonomy
entered into force on 1 July 1982. Valencianist positions. The positions
associated with valencianism have varied somewhat since the return to
democracy, depending on the direction of the supposed "threat". Some
valencianists positions have become mainstream (e.g., the flag), some have lost
their association with valencianism (e.g., role of the autonomous institutions)
while some have become more associated with valencianism, and more hotly
debated (e.g., the Valencian language). Flag of the autonomous community. The
question of which flag should be used to represent the Valencian Community is
at the origin of the name "valencianism", which is derived from the Valencian
""blava"", meaning "blue". The origin of the dispute can be traced to Fuster's
""Nosaltres els valencians"", where he claims that Valencians and Catalans have
always shared the same flag (the "Senyera") and that Valencian groups who had
used different flags in the years before Franco "knew not what they did" ("no
sabien el que es feien", p.¬ 26). The "Senyera" in its simplest
form‚Äîsometimes referred to as the "quatribarrada"‚Äîgained a certain (but not
overwhelming) support in valencianist circles, and was on view at the march in
favour of autonomy of 9 October 1977. The Statute of Morella proposed that the
flag of the autonomous community be the "Senyera" with the royal coat of arms
at the centre (those of Peter III of Aragon (1336‚Äì87), who did much to
formalize the autonomy of the Kingdom of Valencia within the Crown of Aragon).
This was adopted as the flag of the "Consell del Pa√≠s Valenci√ " on 24 April
1979: however the decision was seen as a provocation by the UCD, coming as it
did after elections which would have given the centre-right a majority on the
"Consell" but before the new "Consell" could be constituted. The more
valencianist groups seized the opportunity provided by the tense political
climate: the flags of the Valencia Town Hall were burnt by demonstrators on 9
October 1979, far from the only act of political violence that year. The
socialist representative left the "Consell" on 22 December 1979 and the choice
of flag was reversed on 14 January 1980. The valencianists continued to insist
that the flag of the new autonomous community be recognisably different from
that of any other, and particularly that of Catalonia (the "Senyera" in its
simplest form). The Statute of Benic√ ssim proposed a new design, but the UCD
representative on the Constitutional Committee of the Congress of Deputies
managed to impose an amendment making the flag of the autonomous community the
same as that of the city of Valencia (for, 17; against, 16; abstention, 1)
which includes the blue fringe (the "Senyera Coronada"). Since the adoption of
the first Statute of Autonomy, the issue has lost much of its controversy. The
use of the "Senyera coronada" has a wide acceptance within the Valencian
Community, although some small groups on the left of the political spectrum
(e.g. Els Verds, ERPV) continue to refer to it as the ""blavera"" and the
"Senyera quatribarrada" can be seen from time to time, particularly in the
districts furthest from the capital. Name of the autonomous community. The
question of the name of the autonomous community was initially seen as fairly
minor compared to the debates over the flag and the powers which would be
granted to the Generalitat Valenciana. However it became the issue which almost
caused the rejection of the Statute of Autonomy by the Congress of Deputies in
1982. At the start of the democratic transition Valencian: "Pa√≠s Valenci√ ",
(roughly translated as "Valencian Country") seemed to enjoy a wide consensus.
It was under this name that the "Consell del Pa√≠s Valenci√ " was established,
and it was this name which was used in the Call for Autonomy of 8 October 1978,
signed by both the UCD and by the postfranquists of the Alianza Popular. The
valencianist view, minority even on the right at first, was that the term
"Pa√≠s Valenci√ " implied an identification with the "Pa√Øsos Catalans", an
anathema to the valencianists. In the context of the political tensions of
1979‚Äì80, they called ever more loudly for the alternative name "Regne de
Valencia" ("Kingdom of Valencia").
