Valencian people The Valencians are an ethnic group or nationality whose
homeland is the Valencian Community, which is a historical region in eastern
Spain. The official languages of Valencia are Valencian (also denominated
"Catalan") and Spanish (also denominated "Castilian"). The Valencian Community
is politically divided in three provinces, from South to North: Alicante,
Valencia and Castell√≥n. The current version of the Valencian Statute of
Autonomy declares the Valencian Community a nationality, and its capital is the
city of Valencia. Historical background. In 1237, the Moorish taifa of Valencia
was taken by king James I the Conqueror of the Crown of Aragon. The population
of the new kingdom was by far mostly Muslim, so the crown started a campaign of
repopulation of the lands with Christians, as usual in the Reconquista. The new
Christian arrivals came from Catalonia and Aragon. Aragonese presence was most
dominant in the interior parts of the kingdom (as can be assumed by
geaographical factors); it should be noted that those Aragonese from the
eastern shires of Aragon (Matarranya, Caspe, Bajo Cinca, Llitera and Ribagorza)
would have brought with them Catalan language varieties, whereas the rest of
Aragonese settlers would've brought eastern Spanish and Aragonese varieties
which would mix into Churro Spanish, which in much of the interior is the
traditional language, as Valencian is in the coast, where most of the new
inhabitants had Catalan or, less usual, Occitan origins. The Baix Segura and
Vinalop√≥ "comarcas" were a territory disputed between the crowns of Castile
and Aragon since the Reconquista, this being because they were conquered by
Aragon but reserved for Castille under a treaty, hence they were repopulated by
people from both crowns at different times, and the Alto Vinalop√≥ was actually
part of Murcia (Albacete province) until the nineteenth century. Following the
Black Death and later the Expulsion of the Moriscos, the then valencian-
speaking Baix Segura (to which Orihuela and Torrevieja belong) is said to have
been resettled mostly by people from the Murcia region, eventually defining the
language border there (see Panocho Spanish). The Requena shire was, like the
Alto Vinalop√≥, part of Castille (Cuenca Province) until the mid-nineteenth
century (1851). Moorish presence in the Kingdom of Valencia was very high,
making one third of the entire population at the time of the expulsion (the
highest proportion in all of Spain). The coexistence between the Christian and
Muslim was mostly good, despite some chapters of religious intolerance like the
massive Baptism of Muslims during the first Revolt of the Brotherhoods;
however, Valencian moors never ceased to speak Arabic. The Christian Valencian
elites disapproved the King Philip plans of Expulsion of the Moriscos in 1609,
because the sudden lack of the traditional workforce would lead to the
kingdom's ruin. Demographics. The Valencian population traditionally
concentrated in localities with fertile cultivation and growing lowlands by the
most important rivers (J√∫car, Turia, Segura, Vinalop√≥), also in harbor cities
important to the agricultural trade. The most important population centers used
to be, during the Roman times, Sagunt or D√©nia; later on in history, Valencia,
Alicante, X√ tiva, Orihuela, Elx, Gandia, or Vila-real and, more recently
recently, Alzira and Castell√≥n de la Plana. The population density which is
higher in the central and southern regions and minor in the northern and inner
ones, is derived from the traditional distribution of people which originated
in the orographic characteristics of the Valencian territory and the
possibility to obtain irrigated land agriculture. Demographics were also
affected by (being perhaps the exception to the mentioned distribution) the
great industrial activity and the commerce of agriculturally derived products
during the 20th century of noncoastal cities like Alcoi, Elda, Ontinyent,
Petrer, Villena, and La Vall d'Uix√≥. In the last years, concentration in the
great capitals and its metropolitan areas has augmented considerably (e.g.
Torrent, Mislata, Paterna, Burjassot, Sant Vicent del Raspeig, etc.) especially
in all the coastal cities and towns. Thus, traditionally small populations such
as Benidorm or Torrevieja have undergone a considerable population increase
(still more remarkable during summertime) due to the seasonal migration of
tourists. Traditional dishes. Paella is a rice dish which originated in the
Spanish Autonomous Community of Valencia near lake Albufera, a lagoon in
eastern Spain. Valencians consider paella their main national dish. Other
famous Valencian dishes are the orxata drink, and the bunyols: the sweet pastry
eaten in falles.
