War on Terror The War on Terror (also known as the Global War on Terror and War
on Terrorism) is a term commonly applied to an international military campaign
begun in 2001 by the United States and the United Kingdom, with support from
other countries. The campaign's official purpose was to eliminate al-Qaeda and
other militant organizations. The phrase 'War on Terror' was first used by US
President George W. Bush on 20 September 2001. The Bush administration and the
Western media have since used the term to denote a global military, political,
legal and ideological struggle—targeting both organizations designated as
terrorist and regimes accused of supporting them. It was typically used with a
particular focus on militant Islamists and al-Qaeda. Although the term is not
officially used by the administration of US President Barack Obama (which
instead uses the term Overseas Contingency Operation), it is still commonly
used by politicians, in the media and officially by some aspects of government,
such as the United States' Global War on Terrorism Service Medal Terminology.
In 1984 the Reagan Administration used the term "war against terrorism" as part
of an effort to pass legislation that was designed to freeze assets of
terrorist groups and marshal the forces of government against them. Author
Shane Harris asserts this was a reaction to the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing.
The concept of America at war with terrorism may have begun on 11 September
2001 when Tom Brokaw, having just witnessed the collapse of one the towers of
the World Trade Center, declared "Terrorists have declared war on ." On 16
September 2001, at Camp David, President George W. Bush used the phrase "war on
terrorism" in an unscripted and controversial comment when he said, "This
crusade – this war on terrorism – is going to take a while, ... " Bush
later apologized for this remark due to the negative connotations the term
"crusade" has to people of Muslim faith. The word "crusade" was not used again.
On 20 September 2001, during a televised address to a joint session of
congress, Bush stated that, "(o)ur 'war on terror' begins with al-Qaeda, but it
does not end there. It will not end until every terrorist group of global reach
has been found, stopped and defeated." Bush did not say when he expected this
would be achieved. US President Barack Obama has rarely used the term, but in
his inaugural address on 20 January 2009, he stated "Our nation is at war,
against a far-reaching network of violence and hatred." In March 2009 the
Defense Department officially changed the name of operations from "Global War
on Terror" to "Overseas Contingency Operation" (OCO). In March 2009, the Obama
administration requested that Pentagon staff members avoid use of the term,
instead using "Overseas Contingency Operation". In April 2007 the British
government announced publicly that it was abandoning the use of the phrase "War
on Terror" as they found it to be less than helpful. This was explained more
recently by Lady Eliza Manningham-Buller. In her 2011 Reith lecture, the former
head of MI5 said that the 9/11 attacks were "a crime, not an act of war.", "So
I never felt it helpful to refer to a war on terror". Both the term and the
policies it denotes have been a source of ongoing controversy, as critics argue
it has been used to justify unilateral preventive war, human rights abuses and
other violations of international law. Precursor to the 9/11 attacks. The
origins of al-Qaeda as a network inspiring terrorism around the world and
training operatives can be traced to the Soviet war in Afghanistan (December
1979 – February 1989). The United States supported the Islamist mujahadeen
guerillas against the military forces of the Soviet Union and the Democratic
Republic of Afghanistan. In May 1996 the group World Islamic Front for Jihad
Against Jews and Crusaders (WIFJAJC), sponsored by Osama bin Laden and later
reformed as al-Qaeda, started forming a large base of operations in
Afghanistan, where the Islamist extremist regime of the Taliban had seized
power that same year. In February 1998, Osama bin Laden signed a fatwā, as the
head of al-Qaeda, declaring war on the West and Israel, later in May of that
same year al-Qaeda released a video declaring war on the US and the West.
Following the bombings of US embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, US President Bill
Clinton launched Operation Infinite Reach, a bombing campaign in Sudan and
Afghanistan against targets the US asserted were associated with WIFJAJC,
although others have questioned whether a pharmaceutical plant in Sudan was
used as a chemical warfare plant. The plant produced much of the region's
antimalarial drugs and around 50% of Sudan's pharmaceutical needs. The strikes
failed to kill any leaders of WIFJAJC or the Taliban. Next came the 2000
millennium attack plots which included an attempted bombing of Los Angeles
International Airport. In October 2000 the USS Cole bombing occurred, followed
in 2001 by the September 11 attacks. US objectives. [[Image:Battlefields in The
Global War on Terror.svg|thumb|350px| "1. 1998 United States embassy bombings
• 2. 11 September attacks 2001 • 3. Bali bombings 2002• 4. Madrid
bombings 2004 • 5. London bombings 2005 • 6. Mumbai attacks 2008"]] US and
NATO-led military operations. Operation Active Endeavour. Operation Active
Endeavour is a naval operation of NATO started in October 2001 in response to
the 11 September attacks. It operates in the Mediterranean Sea and is designed
to prevent the movement of militants or weapons of mass destruction and to
enhance the security of shipping in general. The operation has also assisted
Greece with its prevention of illegal immigration. Operation Enduring Freedom.
Operation Enduring Freedom is the official name used by the Bush administration
for the War in Afghanistan, together with three smaller military actions, under
the umbrella of the Global War on Terror. These global operations are intended
to seek out and destroy any al-Qaeda fighters or affiliates. Operation Enduring
Freedom – Afghanistan. On 20 September 2001, in the wake of the 11 September
attacks, George W. Bush delivered an ultimatum to the Taliban government of
Afghanistan to turn over Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda leaders operating in the
country or face attack. The Taliban demanded evidence of bin Laden's link to
the 11 September attacks and, if such evidence warranted a trial, they offered
to handle such a trial in an Islamic Court. The US refused to provide any
evidence. Subsequently, in October 2001, US forces (with UK and coalition
allies) invaded Afghanistan to oust the Taliban regime. On 7 October 2001, the
official invasion began with British and US forces conducting airstrike
campaigns over enemy targets. Kabul, the capital city of Afghanistan, fell by
mid-November. The remaining al-Qaeda and Taliban remnants fell back to the
rugged mountains of eastern Afghanistan, mainly Tora Bora. In December,
Coalition forces (the US and its allies) fought within that region. It is
believed that Osama bin Laden escaped into Pakistan during the battle. In March
2002, the US and other NATO and non-NATO forces launched Operation Anaconda
with the goal of destroying any remaining al-Qaeda and Taliban forces in the
Shah-i-Kot Valley and Arma Mountains of Afghanistan. The Taliban suffered heavy
casualties and evacuated the region. The Taliban regrouped in western Pakistan
and began to unleash an insurgent-style offensive against Coalition forces in
late 2002. Throughout southern and eastern Afghanistan, firefights broke out
between the surging Taliban and Coalition forces. Coalition forces responded
with a series of military offensives and an increase in the amount of troops in
Afghanistan. In February 2010, Coalition forces launched Operation Moshtarak in
southern Afghanistan along with other military offensives in the hopes that
they would destroy the Taliban insurgency once and for all. Peace talks are
also underway between Taliban affiliated fighters and Coalition forces. The
United States and other NATO and non-NATO forces are planning to withdraw from
Afghanistan by the end of 2014. Operation Enduring Freedom – Philippines. In
January 2002, the United States Special Operations Command, Pacific deployed to
the Philippines to advise and assist the Armed Forces of the Philippines in
combating Filipino Islamist groups. The operations were mainly focused on
removing the Abu Sayyaf group and Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) from their stronghold
on the island of Basilan. The second portion of the operation was conducted as
a humanitarian program called "Operation Smiles." The goal of the program was
to provide medical care and services to the region of Basilan as part of a
"Hearts and Minds" program. Operation Enduring Freedom – Horn of Africa. This
extension of Operation Enduring Freedom was titled OEF-HOA. Unlike other
operations contained in Operation Enduring Freedom, OEF-HOA does not have a
specific organization as a target. OEF-HOA instead focuses its efforts to
disrupt and detect militant activities in the region and to work with willing
governments to prevent the reemergence of militant cells and activities. In
October 2002, the Combined Joint Task Force - Horn of Africa (CJTF-HOA) was
established in Djibouti at Camp Lemonnier. It contains approximately 2,000
personnel including US military and special operations forces (SOF) and
coalition force members, Combined Task Force 150 (CTF-150). Task Force 150
consists of ships from a shifting group of nations, including Australia,
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Pakistan, New Zealand and the
United Kingdom. The primary goal of the coalition forces is to monitor,
inspect, board and stop suspected shipments from entering the Horn of Africa
region and affecting the US' Operation Iraqi Freedom. Included in the operation
is the training of selected armed forces units of the countries of Djibouti,
Kenya and Ethiopia in counter-terrorism and counter-insurgency tactics.
Humanitarian efforts conducted by CJTF-HOA include rebuilding of schools and
medical clinics and providing medical services to those countries whose forces
are being trained. The program expands as part of the Trans-Saharan
Counterterrorism Initiative as CJTF personnel also assist in training the armed
forces of Chad, Niger, Mauritania and Mali. However, the War on Terror does not
include Sudan, where over 400,000 have died in an ongoing civil war. On 1 July
2006, a Web-posted message purportedly written by Osama bin Laden urged Somalis
to build an Islamic state in the country and warned western governments that
the al-Qaeda network would fight against them if they intervened there. Somalia
has been considered a "failed state" because its official central government
was weak, dominated by warlords and unable to exert effective control over the
country. Beginning in mid-2006, the Islamic Courts Union (ICU), an Islamist
faction campaigning on a restoration of "law and order" through Sharia law, had
rapidly taken control of much of southern Somalia. On 14 December 2006, the US
Assistant Secretary of State Jendayi Frazer claimed al-Qaeda cell operatives
were controlling the Islamic Courts Union, a claim denied by the ICU. By late
2006, the UN-backed Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia had seen
its power effectively limited to Baidoa, while the Islamic Courts Union
controlled the majority of southern Somalia, including the capital of
Mogadishu. On 20 December 2006, the Islamic Courts Union launched an offensive
on the government stronghold of Baidoa, and saw early gains before Ethiopia
intervened in favor of the government. By 26 December, the Islamic Courts Union
retreated towards Mogadishu, before again retreating as TFG/Ethiopian troops
neared, leaving them to take Mogadishu with no resistance. The ICU then fled to
Kismayo, where they fought Ethiopian/TFG forces in the Battle of Jilib. The
Prime Minister of Somalia claimed that three "terror suspects" from the 1998
United States embassy bombings are being sheltered in Kismayo. On 30 December
2006, al-Qaeda deputy leader Ayman al-Zawahiri called upon Muslims worldwide to
fight against Ethiopia and the TFG in Somalia. On 8 January 2007, the US
launched the Battle of Ras Kamboni by bombing Ras Kamboni using AC-130
gunships. On 14 September 2009, US Special Forces killed two men and wounded
and captured two others near the Somali village of Baarawe. Witnesses claim
that helicopters used for the operation launched from French-flagged warships,
but that could not be confirmed. A Somali based al-Qaida affiliated group, the
Al-Shabaab, has confirmed the death of "sheik commander" Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan
along with an unspecified number of militants. Nabhan, a Kenyan, was wanted in
connection with the 2002 Mombasa attacks. Operation Enduring Freedom – Trans
Sahara. Operation Enduring Freedom – Trans Sahara (OEF-TS) is the name of the
military operation conducted by the US and partner nations in the Sahara/Sahel
region of Africa, consisting of counter-terrorism efforts and policing of arms
and drug trafficking across central Africa. Iraq. Iraq had been listed as a
State sponsor of terrorism by the US since 1990, when Saddam Hussein invaded
Kuwait. Iraq was also on the list from 1979 to 1982; it was removed so that the
US could provide material support to Iraq in its war with Iran. Hussein's
regime proved a continuing problem for the UN and Iraq’s neighbors due to its
use of chemical weapons against Iranians and Kurds. Iraqi no-fly zones. After
the Gulf War, the US, French and British militaries instituted and began
patrolling Iraqi no-fly zones, to protect Iraq's Kurdish minority and Shi'a
Arab population—both of which suffered attacks from the Hussein regime before
and after the Gulf War—in Iraq's northern and southern regions, respectively.
US forces continued in combat zone deployments through November 1995 and
launched Operation Desert Fox against Iraq in 1998 after it failed to meet US
demands of "unconditional cooperation" in weapons inspections. Prior to
Operation Desert Fox, US president Bill Clinton predicted "And mark my words,
he will develop weapons of mass destruction. He will deploy them, and he will
use them." Clinton also declared a desire to remove Hussein from power and in
the same speech said, "The hard fact is that so long as Saddam remains in
power, he threatens the well-being of his people, the peace of his region, the
security of the world." In the aftermath of Operation Desert Fox, during
December 1998, Iraq announced that it would no longer respect the no-fly zones
and resumed its attempts to shoot down US aircraft. Air strikes by the British
and US against Iraqi anti-aircraft and military targets continued over the next
few years. Also in 1998, Clinton signed the Iraq Liberation Act, which called
for regime change in Iraq on the basis of its alleged possession of weapons of
mass destruction, oppression of Iraqi citizens, and attacks on other Middle
Eastern countries. The George W. Bush administration called for the United
Nations Security Council (UNSC) to again send weapons inspectors to Iraq to
find and destroy the alleged weapons of mass destruction and called for a UNSC
resolution. UNSC Resolution 1441 was passed unanimously, which offered Iraq "a
final opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations" or face "serious
consequences." Resolution 1441 did not authorize the use of force by member
states. The Iraqi government subsequently allowed UN inspectors some access to
Iraqi sites, while the US government continued to assert that Iraq was being
obstructionist. In October 2002, a large bipartisan majority in the United
States Congress authorized the president to use force if necessary to disarm
Iraq in order to "prosecute the war on terrorism." After failing to overcome
opposition from France, Russia, and China against a UNSC resolution that would
sanction the use of force against Iraq, and before the UN weapons inspectors
had completed their inspections (which were claimed to be fruitless by the US
because of Iraq's alleged deception), the US assembled a "Coalition of the
Willing" composed of nations who pledged support for its policy of regime
change in Iraq. Operation Iraqi Freedom. The Iraq War began in March 2003 with
an air campaign, which was immediately followed by a U.S.-led ground invasion.
The Bush administration stated the invasion was the "serious consequences"
spoken of in the UNSC Resolution 1441. The Bush administration also stated the
Iraq war was part of the War on Terror, something later questioned or
contested. Baghdad, Iraq’s capital city, fell in April 2003 and Saddam
Hussein’s government quickly dissolved. On 1 May 2003, Bush announced that
major combat operations in Iraq had ended. However, an insurgency arose against
the U.S.-led coalition and the newly developing Iraqi military and post-Saddam
government. The insurgency, which included al-Qaeda affiliated groups, led to
far more coalition casualties than the invasion. Other elements of the
insurgency were led by fugitive members of President Hussein's Ba'ath regime,
which included Iraqi nationalists and pan-Arabists. Many insurgency leaders are
Islamists and claim to be fighting a religious war to reestablish the Islamic
Caliphate of centuries past. Iraq’s former president, Saddam Hussein was
captured by U.S. forces in December 2003. He was executed in 2006. In 2004, the
insurgent forces grew stronger. The US conducted attacks on insurgent
strongholds in cities like Najaf and Fallujah. In January 2007, President Bush
presented a new strategy for Operation Iraqi Freedom based upon counter-
insurgency theories and tactics developed by General David Petraeus. The Iraq
War troop surge of 2007 was part of this "new way forward" and, along with US
backing of Sunni groups it had previously sought to defeat, has been credited
with a widely recognized dramatic decrease in violence by up to 80%. Operation
New Dawn. The war entered a new phase on 1 September 2010, with the official
end of US combat operations. The last U.S. troops exited Iraq on 18 December
2011. Other military operations. Fighting in Pakistan. Following the 11
September 2001 attacks, former President of Pakistan Pervez Musharraf sided
with the US against the Taliban government in Afghanistan after an ultimatum by
former US President George W. Bush. Musharraf agreed to give the US the use of
three airbases for Operation Enduring Freedom. United States Secretary of State
Colin Powell and other US administration officials met with Musharraf. On 19
September 2001, Musharraf addressed the people of Pakistan and stated that,
while he opposed military tactics against the Taliban, Pakistan risked being
endangered by an alliance of India and the US if it did not cooperate. In 2006,
Musharraf testified that this stance was pressured by threats from the US, and
revealed in his memoirs that he had "war-gamed" the United States as an
adversary and decided that it would end in a loss for Pakistan. On 12 January
2002, Musharraf gave a speech against Islamic extremism. He unequivocally
condemned all acts of terrorism and pledged to combat Islamic extremism and
lawlessness within Pakistan itself. He stated that his government was committed
to rooting out extremism and made it clear that the banned militant
organizations would not be allowed to resurface under any new name. He said,
"the recent decision to ban extremist groups promoting militancy was taken in
the national interest after thorough consultations. It was not taken under any
foreign influence". In 2002, the Musharraf-led government took a firm stand
against the jihadi organizations and groups promoting extremism, and arrested
Maulana Masood Azhar, head of the Jaish-e-Mohammed, and Hafiz Muhammad Saeed,
chief of the Lashkar-e-Taiba, and took dozens of activists into custody. An
official ban was imposed on the groups on 12 January. Later that year, the
Saudi born Zayn al-Abidn Muhammed Hasayn Abu Zubaydah was arrested by Pakistani
officials during a series of joint US-Pakistan raids. Zubaydah is said to have
been a high-ranking al-Qaeda official with the title of operations chief and in
charge of running al-Qaeda training camps. Other prominent al-Qaeda members
were arrested in the following two years, namely Ramzi bin al-Shibh, who is
known to have been a financial backer of al-Qaeda operations, and Khalid Sheikh
Mohammed, who at the time of his capture was the third highest-ranking official
in al-Qaeda and had been directly in charge of the planning for the 11
September attacks. In 2004, the Pakistan Army launched a campaign in the
Federally Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan's Waziristan region, sending in
80,000 troops. The goal of the conflict was to remove the al-Qaeda and Taliban
forces in the region. After the fall of the Taliban regime many members of the
Taliban resistance fled to the Northern border region of Afghanistan and
Pakistan where the Pakistani army had previously little control. With the
logistics and air support of the United States, the Pakistani Army captured or
killed numerous al-Qaeda operatives such as Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, wanted for
his involvement in the USS Cole bombing, the Bojinka plot, and the killing of
"Wall Street Journal" reporter Daniel Pearl. The United States has carried out
a campaign of Drone attacks on targets all over the Federally Administered
Tribal Areas. However, the Pakistani Taliban still operates there. To this day
it’s estimated that 15 US soldiers were killed while fighting al-Qaeda and
Taliban remnants in Pakistan since the War on Terror began. Osama bin Laden,
the founder of al-Qaeda, was killed on 2 May 2011, during a raid conducted by
the United States special operations forces in Abbottabad, Pakistan. Fighting
in Yemen. The United States has also conducted a series of military strikes on
al-Qaeda militants in Yemen since the War on Terror began. Yemen has a weak
central government and a powerful tribal system that leaves large lawless areas
open for militant training and operations. Al-Qaida has a strong presence in
the country. The US, in an effort to support Yemeni counter-terrorism efforts,
has increased their military aid package to Yemen from less than $11 million in
2006 to more than $70 million in 2009, as well as providing up to $121 million
for development over the next three years. Fighting in Kashmir. In a 'Letter to
American People' written by Osama bin Laden in 2002, he stated that one of the
reasons he was fighting America is because of its support of India on the
Kashmir issue. While on a trip to Delhi in 2002, U.S. Secretary of Defense
Donald Rumsfeld suggested that Al-Qaeda was active in Kashmir, though he did
not have any hard evidence. An investigation in 2002 unearthed evidence that
Al-Qaeda and its affiliates were prospering in Pakistan-administered Kashmir
with tacit approval of Pakistan's National Intelligence agency Inter-Services
Intelligence. A team of Special Air Service and Delta Force was sent into
Indian-administered Kashmir in 2002 to hunt for Osama bin Laden after reports
that he was being sheltered by the Kashmiri militant group Harkat-ul-
Mujahideen. U.S. officials believed that Al-Qaeda was helping organize a
campaign of terror in Kashmir in order to provoke conflict between India and
Pakistan. Fazlur Rehman Khalil, the leader of the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, signed
al-Qaeda's 1998 declaration of holy war, which called on Muslims to attack all
Americans and their allies. In 2006, Al-Qaeda claim they have established a
wing in Kashmir; this worried the Indian government. Al-Qaeda has strong ties
with the Kashmir militant groups Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed in
Pakistan. While on a visit to Pakistan in January 2010, U.S. Defense secretary
Robert Gates stated that Al-Qaeda was seeking to destabilize the region and
planning to provoke a nuclear war between India and Pakistan. In September
2009, a U.S. Drone strike reportedly killed Ilyas Kashmiri, who was the chief
of Harkat-ul-Jihad al-Islami, a Kashmiri militant group associated with Al-
Qaeda. Kashmiri was described by Bruce Riedel as a 'prominent' Al-Qaeda member,
while others described him as the head of military operations for Al-Qaeda.
Waziristan had now become the new battlefield for Kashmiri militants, who were
now fighting NATO in support of Al-Qaeda. On 8 July 2012, Al-Badar Mujahideen,
a breakaway faction of Kashmir centric terror group Hizbul Mujahideen, on
conclusion of their two day Shuhada Conference called for mobilisation of
resources for continuation of jihad in Kashmir. International military support.
The invasion of Afghanistan is seen to have been the first action of this war,
and initially involved forces from the United States, the United Kingdom, and
the Afghan Northern Alliance. Since the initial invasion period, these forces
were augmented by troops and aircraft from Australia, Canada, Denmark, France,
Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand and Norway amongst others. In 2006, there were
about 33,000 troops in Afghanistan. On 12 September 2001, less than 24 hours
after the 11 September attacks in New York City and Washington, D.C., NATO
invoked Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty and declared the attacks to be
an attack against all 19 NATO member countries. Australian Prime Minister John
Howard also declared that Australia would invoke the ANZUS Treaty along similar
lines. In the following months, NATO took a wide range of measures to respond
to the threat of terrorism. On 22 November 2002, the member states of the Euro-
Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC) decided on a Partnership Action Plan
against Terrorism which explicitly states that "EAPC States are committed to
the protection and promotion of fundamental freedoms and human rights, as well
as the rule of law, in combating terrorism." NATO started naval operations in
the Mediterranean Sea designed to prevent the movement of terrorists or weapons
of mass destruction as well as to enhance the security of shipping in general
called Operation Active Endeavour. Support for the US cooled when America made
clear its determination to invade Iraq in late 2002. Even so, many of the
"coalition of the willing" countries that unconditionally supported the US-led
military action have sent troops to Afghanistan, particular neighboring
Pakistan, which has disowned its earlier support for the Taliban and
contributed tens of thousands of soldiers to the conflict. Pakistan was also
engaged in the War in North-West Pakistan (Waziristan War). Supported by US
intelligence, Pakistan was attempting to remove the Taliban insurgency and al-
Qaeda element from the northern tribal areas. International Security Assistance
Force. December 2001 saw the creation of the NATO-led International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) to assist the Afghan Transitional Administration and
the first post-Taliban elected government. With a renewed Taliban insurgency,
it was announced in 2006 that ISAF would replace the US troops in the province
as part of Operation Enduring Freedom. The British 16th Air Assault Brigade
(later reinforced by Royal Marines) formed the core of the force in southern
Afghanistan, along with troops and helicopters from Australia, Canada and the
Netherlands. The initial force consisted of roughly 3,300 British, 2,000
Canadian, 1,400 from the Netherlands and 240 from Australia, along with special
forces from Denmark and Estonia and small contingents from other nations. The
monthly supply of cargo containers through Pakistani route to ISAF in
Afghanistan is over 4,000 costing around 12 billion in Pakistani Rupees. Al-
Qaeda attacks. Since 9/11, al-Qaeda and other affiliated radical Islamist
groups have executed major attacks in several parts of the world. There may
also have been several additional planned attacks that were not successful.
U.S. Military aid to other countries. In the three years before the attacks of
11 September, Pakistan received approximately US$9 million in American military
aid. In the three years after, the number increased to US$4.2 billion, making
it the country with the maximum funding post 9/11. Such a huge inflow of funds
has raised concerns in the Indian press that these funds were given without any
accountability, as the end uses not being documented, and that large portions
were used to suppress civilians' human rights and to purchase weapons to
contain domestic problems like the Balochistan unrest. Pakistan has stated that
India has been supporting terror groups within the Federally Administered
Tribal Areas and Balochistan with the aim of creating unrest within the
country. On 20 May 2007, a conflict began in north Lebanon after fighting broke
out between Fatah al-Islam, an Islamist militant organization, and the Lebanese
Armed Forces in Nahr al-Bared, a Palestinian refugee camp near Tripoli. The
conflict evolved mostly around the Siege of Nahr el-Bared, but minor clashes
also occurred in the Ain al-Hilweh refugee camp in southern Lebanon and several
bombings took place in and around Lebanon's capital, Beirut. Fatah-al-Islam has
been described as a militant mujahid movement that draws inspiration from al-
Qaeda. The US provided military aid to the Lebanese government during the
conflict. On 7 September 2007, Lebanese government forces captured the camp and
declared victory. Post 9/11 events inside the United States. In addition to
military efforts abroad, in the aftermath of 9/11 the Bush Administration
increased domestic efforts to prevent future attacks. Various government
bureaucracies which handled security and military functions were reorganized. A
new cabinet level agency called the United States Department of Homeland
Security was created in November 2002 to lead and coordinate the largest
reorganization of the US federal government since the consolidation of the
armed forces into the Department of Defense. The Justice Department launched
the National Security Entry-Exit Registration System for certain male non-
citizens in the US, requiring them to register in person at offices of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service. The USA PATRIOT Act of October 2001
dramatically reduces restrictions on law enforcement agencies' ability to
search telephone, e-mail communications, medical, financial, and other records;
eases restrictions on foreign intelligence gathering within the United States;
expands the Secretary of the Treasury’s authority to regulate financial
transactions, particularly those involving foreign individuals and entities;
and broadens the discretion of law enforcement and immigration authorities in
detaining and deporting immigrants suspected of terrorism-related acts. The act
also expanded the definition of terrorism to include domestic terrorism, thus
enlarging the number of activities to which the USA PATRIOT Act's expanded law
enforcement powers could be applied. A new Terrorist Finance Tracking Program
monitored the movements of terrorists' financial resources (discontinued after
being revealed by The New York Times newspaper). Telecommunication usage by
known and suspected terrorists was studied through the NSA electronic
surveillance program. The Patriot Act is still in effect. Political interest
groups have stated that these laws remove important restrictions on
governmental authority, and are a dangerous encroachment on civil liberties,
possible unconstitutional violations of the Fourth Amendment. On 30 July 2003,
the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) filed the first legal challenge
against Section 215 of the Patriot Act, claiming that it allows the FBI to
violate a citizen's First Amendment rights, Fourth Amendment rights, and right
to due process, by granting the government the right to search a person's
business, bookstore, and library records in a terrorist investigation, without
disclosing to the individual that records were being searched. Also, governing
bodies in a number of communities have passed symbolic resolutions against the
act. In a speech on 9 June 2005, Bush said that the USA PATRIOT Act had been
used to bring charges against more than 400 suspects, more than half of whom
had been convicted. Meanwhile the ACLU quoted Justice Department figures
showing that 7,000 people have complained of abuse of the Act. The Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) began an initiative in early 2002
with the creation of the Total Information Awareness program, designed to
promote information technologies that could be used in counter-terrorism. This
program, facing criticism, has since been defunded by Congress. By 2003, 12
major conventions and protocols were designed to combat terrorism. These were
adopted and ratified by a number of states. These conventions require states to
co-operate on principal issues regarding unlawful seizure of aircraft, the
physical protection of nuclear materials, and the freezing of assets of
militant networks. In 2005, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1624
concerning incitement to commit acts of terrorism and the obligations of
countries to comply with international human rights laws. Although both
resolutions require mandatory annual reports on counter-terrorism activities by
adopting nations, the United States and Israel have both declined to submit
reports. In the same year, the United States Department of Defense and the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff issued a planning document, by the name
"National Military Strategic Plan for the War on Terrorism" which stated that
it constituted the "comprehensive military plan to prosecute the Global War on
Terror for the Armed Forces of the United States...including the findings and
recommendations of the 9/11 Commission and a rigorous examination with the
Department of Defense". On 9 January 2007, the House of Representatives passed
a bill, by a vote of 299–128, enacting many of the recommendations of the 9/
11 Commission The bill passed in the US Senate, by a vote of 60–38, on 13
March 2007 and it was signed into law on 3 August 2007 by President Bush. It
became Public Law 110-53. In July 2012, US Senate passed a resolution urging
that the Haqqani Network be designated a foreign terrorist organisation. The
Office of Strategic Influence was secretly created after 9/11 for the purpose
of coordinating propaganda efforts, but was closed soon after being discovered.
The Bush administration implemented the Continuity of Operations Plan (or
Continuity of Government) to ensure that US government would be able to
continue in catastrophic circumstances. Since 9/11, extremists made various
attempts to attack the US homeland, with varying levels of organization and
skill. For example, vigilant passengers aboard a transatlantic flight prevented
Richard Reid, in 2001, and Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, in 2009, from detonating
an explosive device. Other terrorist plots have been stopped by federal
agencies using new legal powers and investigative tools, sometimes in
cooperation with foreign governments. The Obama administration has promised the
closing of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp, increased the number of troops in
Afghanistan, and promised the withdrawal of its troops from Iraq. Casualties.
The Global War of Terror has seen fewer war deaths than any other decade in the
past century. Costs. A March 2011 Congressional report estimated spending
related to the war through fiscal year 2011 at $1.2 trillion, and that spending
through 2021 assuming a reduction to 45,000 troops would be $1.8 trillion. A
June 2011 academic report covering additional areas of spending related to the
war estimated it through 2011 at $2.7 trillion, and long term spending at $5.4
trillion including interest. Criticism. Criticism of the War on Terror
addresses the issues, morals, ethics, efficiency, economics, and other
questions surrounding the War on Terror and made against the phrase itself,
calling it a misnomer. The notion of a "war" against "terrorism" has proven
highly contentious, with critics charging that it has been exploited by
participating governments to pursue long-standing policy / military objectives,
reduce civil liberties, and infringe upon human rights. It is argued that the
term war is not appropriate in this context (as in War on Drugs), since there
is no identifiable enemy, and that it is unlikely international terrorism can
be brought to an end by military means. Other critics, such as Francis
Fukuyama, note that "terrorism" is not an enemy, but a tactic; calling it a
"war on terror", obscures differences between conflicts such as anti-occupation
insurgents and international mujahideen. With a military presence in Iraq and
Afghanistan and its associated collateral damage Shirley Williams maintains
this increases resentment and terrorist threats against the West. There is also
perceived U.S. hypocrisy, media induced hysteria, and that differences in
foreign and security policy have damaged America's image in most of the world.
