Womyn "Womyn" is one of a number of alternative spellings of the word "women"
used by some feminist writers. There are many alternative spellings, including
"wimmin", "womban", "wom!n". Writers who use alternative spellings see them as
an expression of female independence and a repudiation of traditions that
define females by reference to a male norm. Background. In Old English sources,
the word "man" was gender-neutral, with a meaning similar to the modern English
usage of "one" as an indefinite pronoun. The words "wer" and "wyf" were used to
specify a man or woman where necessary, respectively. Combining them into "wer-
man" or "wyf-man" expressed the concept of "any man" or "any woman." Some
feminist authors have suggested that against the background of a patriarchal
social and legal system, "wer-man" was simplified to "man" while "wyf-man"
developed into "woman". Feminist writers have suggested that the less
prejudicial usage of the Old English sources reflects more egalitarian notions
of gender at the time. Variants. Womon/womyn. "Womyn" appeared as a regular
spelling of "woman" in the Scots poetry of James Hogg. Its usage as a feminist
spelling of "women" (with "womon" as the singular form) first appeared in print
in 1975 referring to the first Michigan Womyn's Music Festival, an annual art
festival that admits only womyn-born womyn. Womon/wimmin. "Wimmin" appeared in
19th century renderings of African American English, without any feminist
significance. Z. Budapest promoted the use of "wimmin" (singular "womon") in
the 1970s as part of her Dianic Wicca movement, which claims that present-day
patriarchy represents a fall from a matriarchal golden age. "Wimmin" was also a
regular section of Private Eye Magazine during the 1980s, featuring quotes from
feminist writing deemed to be ridiculous. The fictional character Millie Tant,
a parody of a radical feminist who appears in Viz comic, always uses the
spelling "wimmin" for women.
