World Trade Center site The World Trade Center site (ZIP code: 10048),
previously known as "Ground Zero" after the September 11 attacks, sits on in
Lower Manhattan in New York City. The previous World Trade Center complex stood
on the site until it was destroyed in the September 11 attacks; Studio Daniel
Libeskind, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, Silverstein
Properties, and the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation oversee the
reconstruction of the site. The site is bounded by Vesey Street to the north,
the West Side Highway to the west, Liberty Street to the south, and Church
Street to the east. The Port Authority owns the site's land (except for 7 World
Trade Center). Developer Larry Silverstein holds the lease to retail and office
space in four of the site's buildings. While the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey is often identified as the owner of the WTC site, the ownership
situation is actually somewhat complex and ambiguous. The Port Authority indeed
owns a "significant" internal portion of the site of , but has acknowledged
"ambiguities over ownership of miscellaneous strips of property at the World
Trade Center site" going back to the 1960s. It is unclear who owns of the site,
being land where streets had been before the World Trade Center was built.
Before the World Trade Center. The western portion of the World Trade Center
site was originally under the Hudson River, with the shoreline in the vicinity
of Greenwich Street. It was on this shoreline close to the intersection of
Greenwich and the former Dey Street that Dutch explorer Adriaen Block's ship,
the "Tyger", burned to the waterline in November 1613, stranding Block and his
crew and forcing them to overwinter on the island. They built the first
European settlement, in Manhattan. The remains of the ship were buried under
landfill when the shoreline was extended starting in 1797, and were discovered
during excavation work in 1916. The remains of a second ship from the
eighteenth century were discovered in 2010 during excavation work at the site.
The ship believed to be a Hudson River sloop was found just south of where the
Twin Towers used to stand, about 20 feet below the surface. The area that was
cleared for construction of the original World Trade Center complex was
previously occupied by various electronics stores in what was called Radio Row.
These streets and stores were demolished in the 1960s to make way for the World
Trade Center. Debris and clean-up. The collapse of the towers spread dust
across New York City and left hundreds of thousands of tons of debris at the
site. To organize the cleanup and search for survivors and for human remains,
the New York City Fire Department divided the disaster site into four sectors,
each headed by its own chief. Early estimates suggested that debris removal
would take a year, but cleanup ended in May 2002, under budget and without a
single serious injury. Three years later, in February 2005, the New York City
Medical Examiner's office ended its process of identifying human remains at the
site. According to NIST, when WTC 1 (the North Tower) collapsed, falling debris
struck 7 World Trade Center and ignited fires on multiple floors. The
uncontrolled fires ultimately led to the progressive collapse of the structure.
Portions of the South Tower also damaged the nearby Deutsche Bank Building,
which soon became filled with toxic dust. By 2002, Deutsche Bank determined
that its building was unsalvageable. By January 2011, the Deutsche Bank
Building was finally completely demolished. Cleanup workers trucked most of the
building materials and debris from Ground Zero to Fresh Kills Landfill in
Staten Island. Some people, such as those affiliated with World Trade Center
Families for Proper Burial, were worried that human remains might also have
been (inadvertently) transported to the landfill. In August 2008, New York City
firefighters donated a cross made of steel from the World Trade Center to the
Shanksville Volunteer Fire Company. The beam, mounted atop a platform shaped
like the Pentagon, was erected outside the Shanksville firehouse near the crash
site of United Airlines Flight 93. In December 2001, a temporary viewing
platform at Fulton Street, between Church Street and Broadway, opened to the
public. On March 11, 2002, 88 searchlights were installed and arranged to form
two beams of light shooting straight up into the sky. This is called the
Tribute in Light, and was originally lit every day at dusk until April 14,
2002. After that, the lights were lit on the two-year anniversary of the attack
and have been lit on each subsequent September 11 since then. Archaeology. In
July 2010 a team of archaeologists at the site discovered the remains of a -
long boat over 200 years old; it was probably made in the 18th century and
dumped there along with wooden beams and trash in about 1810 to make up the
land. The boat had been weighted to make it sink as part of foundations for a
new pier. Samples of its wood have been taken for dendrochronology. Rebuilding.
Soon after the September 11 attacks, Mayor Rudy Giuliani, Governor George
Pataki, and President George W. Bush vowed to rebuild the World Trade Center
site. On the day of the attacks, Giuliani proclaimed, "We will rebuild. We're
going to come out of this stronger than before, politically stronger,
economically stronger. The skyline will be made whole again." During a visit to
the site on September 14, 2001, Bush spoke to a crowd of cleanup workers
through a megaphone. An individual in the crowd shouted, "I can't hear you," to
which Bush replied, "I can hear you. The rest of the world hears you. And the
people who knocked these buildings down will hear all of us soon." In a later
address before Congress, the president declared, "As a symbol of America's
resolve, my administration will work with Congress, and these two leaders, to
show the world that we will rebuild New York City." The immediate response from
World Trade Center leaseholder Larry Silverstein was that "it would be the
tragedy of tragedies not to rebuild this part of New York. It would give the
terrorists the victory they seek." However, ten years after the attacks, only
one building, 7 World Trade Center, has been rebuilt. Two buildings are in the
construction phase currently, One World Trade Center and 150 Greenwich Street
(known as Four World Trade Center). The original twin towers took less than
three years from start of construction to be finished, and 5 years from the
beginning planning stages. However, given the complexity and highly political
nature of the rebuilding efforts, they are often cited as an example of a
successful public-private collaboration and are taught as a case study in
successful negotiations. Lower Manhattan Development Corporation. Governor
Pataki established the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation (LMDC) in
November 2001, as an official commission to oversee the rebuilding process. The
LMDC coordinates federal assistance in the rebuilding process, and works with
the Port Authority, Larry Silverstein, and Studio Daniel Libeskind, the master
plan architect for the site's redesign. The corporation also handles
communication with the local community, businesses, the city of New York, and
relatives of victims of the September 11 attacks. A 16-member board of
directors, half appointed by the governor and half by the mayor of New York,
governs the LMDC. The LMDC had questionable legal status regarding the
restoration of the World Trade Center site, because the Port Authority owns
most of the property and Larry Silverstein leased the World Trade Center's
office space in July 2001. But the LMDC, in an April 2002 articulation of its
principles for action, asserted its role in revitalizing lower Manhattan. Early
proposals for redesign. In the months following the attacks, architects and
urban planning experts held meetings and forums to discuss ideas for rebuilding
the site. In January 2002, New York City art dealer Max Protetch solicited 50
concepts and renderings from artists and architects, which were put on exhibit
in his Chelsea art gallery. In April 2002, the LMDC sent out requests for
proposals to redesign the World Trade Center site to 24 Manhattan architecture
firms, but then soon withdrew them. The following month, the LMDC selected
Beyer Blinder Belle as planner for the redesign of the World Trade Center site.
On July 16, 2002, Beyer Blinder Belle unveiled six concepts for redesigning the
World Trade Center site. All six designs were voted "poor" by the roughly 5,000
New Yorkers that submitted feedback, so the LDMC announced a new,
international, open-design study. 2002 World Trade Center site design
competition. Peterson Littenberg, a small New York architecture firm, had been
enlisted by the LMDC earlier that summer as a consultant, and was invited to
participate as the seventh semifinalist. The seven semifinalists presented
their entries to the public on December 18, 2002 at the Winter Garden of the
World Financial Center. In the following weeks, Skidmore, Owings & Merrill
withdrew its entry from the competition. Days before the announcement of the
two finalists in February 2003, Larry Silverstein wrote to LMDC Chair John
Whitehead to express his disapproval of all of the semifinalists' designs. As
the Twin Towers' insurance money recipient, Silverstein claimed that he had the
sole right to decide what would be built. He announced that he had already
picked Skidmore, Owings & Merrill as his master planner for the site. On
February 1, 2003, the LMDC selected two finalists, the THINK Team and Studio
Daniel Libeskind, and planned on picking a single winner by the end of the
month. Rafael Vi√±oly of the THINK Team and Studio Daniel Libeskind presented
their designs to the LMDC, which selected the THINK design. Earlier the same
day, however, Roland Betts, a member of the LMDC, had called a meeting and the
corporation had agreed to vote for the THINK design before hearing the final
presentations. Governor Pataki, who had originally commissioned the LMDC,
intervened and overruled the LMDC's decision. On February 27, 2003, Studio
Daniel Libeskind officially won the competition to be the master planner for
the World Trade Center redesign. Libeskind's original proposal, which is titled
Memory Foundations, underwent extensive revisions during collaboration with
Larry Silverstein, and Skidmore, Owings and Merrill, whom Silverstein hired.
Though Libeskind designed the site, the individual buildings have been designed
by different architects. Detailed information about Libeskind's Memory
Foundations site plan can be accessed at LMDC's website. While not all of
Liebeskind's ideas were incorporated into the final design, his design and the
public support it garnered did solidify the principle that the original
footprints of the Twin Towers should be turned into a memorial and not be used
for commercial purposes. As a result, Liebeskind's lawyers at the New York firm
of Wachtell Lipton embarked on the multi-year negotiation process to frame a
master plan for the rebuilding. The first step in this process, completed in
2003, was the "swap" in which Silverstein gave up his rights to the footprints
of the Twin Towers so that they could become a memorial, and in exchange
received the right to build five new office towers around the memorial. The
"swap" and the ensuing negotiations, which lasted for many years, have been
referred to as the most complex real estate transaction in human history
because of the complexity of the issues involved, the many stakeholders, and
the difficulty of reaching consensus.  Childs acted as the design architect and
project manager for the tower, and Daniel Libeskind collaborated on the concept
and schematic design. According to a NY1 article on March 8, 2011, a plan to
build a restaurant on top of One World Trade Center (to duplicate the Windows
on the World restaurant of old) was scrapped entirely because of potential risk
of rising costs to build and maintain the establishment over the benefits of
having one at all. Also, one of the main tenants of this tower to be confirmed
is the Cond√© Nast Publications company, once it officially opens. British
architect Norman Foster designed Tower Two, also known as 200 Greenwich Street.
The building's distinctive slanted, diamond-shaped roof echoes Libeskind's
original sketches for the building. Richard Rogers Partnership designed Tower
Three, or 175 Greenwich Street, which stands across Greenwich Street from the
Memorial's two reflecting pools. Maki and Associates designed Tower Four, also
known as 150 Greenwich Street. Tower 5 was designed by Kohn Pedersen Fox and
will stand where the Deutsche Bank Building once stood. On June 22, 2007, the
Port Authority announced that JP Morgan Chase will lease the 42-story building
for its investment banking headquarters.; however, JPMorgan's March 2008
acquisition of Bear Stearns had put the future of the 130 Liberty Street site
in question, as the company is now planning to relocate its headquarters to 383
Madison Avenue. Construction began on September 9, 2011. 7 World Trade Center
stands off of Port Authority property. David Childs of Skidmore, Owings and
Merrill designed the tower, which opened in May 2006. The project company also
announced that all of the towers will be completed even with the effects of the
late 2000s recession at the worst case before 2020. Memorial. A memorial called
"Reflecting Absence" honors the victims of the September 11 attacks and the
1993 World Trade Center bombing. The memorial, designed by Peter Walker and
Israeli-American architect Michael Arad, consists of a field of trees
interrupted by the footprints of the twin towers. Pools of water fill the
footprints, underneath which sits a memorial space whose walls bear the names
of the victims. The slurry wall, which holds back the Hudson River in the west
and was an integral part of Libeskind's proposal, remains exposed. Walker and
Arad were selected from more than 5,000 entrants in the World Trade Center Site
Memorial Competition in January 2004. Construction of the memorial was
completed before September 11, 2011. Museum. On October 12, 2004, the LMDC
announced that Gehry Partners LLP and Sn√∏hetta, a Norwegian architectural
firm, would design the site's performing arts and museum complexes,
respectively. The Sn√∏hetta-designed museum will now act as a memorial museum
and visitors' center, after family members of 9/11 victims objected to the
building's original occupant, the International Freedom Center. Gehry's
performing arts complex will now house only the Joyce Theater, because the
Signature Theater Company dropped out due to space constraints and cost
limitations. Transportation Hub. Santiago Calatrava designed the World Trade
Center Transportation Hub (its main asset being the PATH station ) to replace
the old World Trade Center station. The Transport Hub will connect the PATH
station and 1 New York City Transit Authority subway train to the ferry
terminal, the World Financial Center and One World Trade Center on the west and
the New York City Transit Authority subway trains through the Fulton Center on
the East. One will be able to walk most of the way across lower Manhattan. The
Port Authority will cool the new station, as well as the September 11 Memorial
and Museum, via a heat exchanger fed by four pipes carrying water from the
Hudson River. The cost for the transportation hub is estimated at $3.44
billion. Other buildings. St. Nicholas Greek Orthodox Church. Government
officials have backed down from a July 2008 deal to relocate the St. Nicholas
Greek Orthodox Church, the only church destroyed in the September 11 attacks. A
deal has been reached between church officials, Governor Andrew Cuomo, and the
Port Authority to have the church rebuilt on the same site, but three times the
original size on October 14, 2011, according to NY1. Criticism of progress. An
episode of CBS's "60 Minutes" in 2010 focused on the lack of progress at Ground
Zero, particularly on the lack of completion dates for a majority of the
buildings, the main tower, 1 World Trade Center (previously known as the
Freedom Tower) having gone through three different designs, and the delays and
monetary expense involved. Investor Larry Silverstein said that the Port
Authority's estimated completion date for the entire site was 2037, and that
billions of dollars had already been spent on the project, even though Ground
Zero "is still a hole in the ground." During an interview for the episode,
Larry Silverstein said "I am the most frustrated person in the world...I'm
seventy-eight years of age; I want to see this thing done in my lifetime.".
However, it was noted that in early 2011, all 5 office towers of the World
Trade Center are under construction with significant progress being made. All
of the towers will be opened between 2012‚Äì2016, with the National September
11 Memorial & Museum already completed on the tenth anniversary of the attacks,
on September 11, 2011. Criticism of progress and calls for redesigns were
mostly made in 2008 and 2009, when progress at the site was clearly not being
made.
