20th-century music 20th-century music is defined by the sudden emergence of
advanced technology for recording and distributing music as well as dramatic
innovations in musical forms and styles. Because music was no longer limited to
concerts, opera-houses, clubs, and domestic music-making, it became possible
for music artists to quickly gain global recognition and influence. Twentieth-
century music brought new freedom and wide experimentation with new musical
styles and forms that challenged the accepted rules of music of earlier
periods. Faster modes of transportation allowed musicians and fans to travel
more widely to perform or listen. Amplification permitted giant concerts to be
heard by those with the least expensive tickets, and the inexpensive
reproduction and transmission or broadcast of music gave rich and poor alike
nearly equal access to high-quality music performances. Classical. Modernism.
In the early 20th century, many composers, including Rachmaninoff, Richard
Strauss, Giacomo Puccini, and Edward Elgar, continued to work in forms and in a
musical language that derived from the 19th century. However, modernism in
music became increasingly prominent and important; among the most important
modernists were Alexander Scriabin, Claude Debussy, and post-Wagnerian
composers such as Gustav Mahler and Richard Strauss, who experimented with
form, tonality and orchestration. Busoni, Stravinsky, Schoenberg, and Schreker
were already recognized before 1914 as modernists, and Ives was retrospectively
also included in this category for his challenges to the uses of tonality.
Composers such as Ravel, Milhaud, and Gershwin combined classical and jazz
idioms. Nationalism. Late-Romantic and modernist nationalism was found also in
British, American, and Latin-American music of the early 20th century.
Composers such as Ralph Vaughan Williams, Aaron Copland, Carlos ChÃ¡vez, and
Heitor Villa-Lobos used folk themes collected by themselves or others in many
of their major compositions. Microtonal music. In the early decades of the 20th
century composers such as JuliÃ¡n Carrillo, Mildred Couper, Alois HÃ¡ba,
Charles Ives, Erwin Schulhoff, Ivan Wyschnegradsky turned their attention to
quarter tones (24 equal pitches per octave), and other finer divisions. In the
middle of the century composers such as Harry Partch and Ben Johnston explored
just intonation. In the second half of the century, prominent composers
employing microtonality included Easley Blackwood, Jr., Wendy Carlos, Adriaan
Fokker, Terry Riley, Ezra Sims, Karlheinz Stockhausen, La Monte Young, and
Iannis Xenakis. Neoclassicism. A dominant trend in music composed from 1923 to
1950 was neoclassicism, a reaction against the exaggerated gestures and
formlessness of late Romanticism which revived the balanced forms and clearly
perceptible thematic processes of earlier styles. There were three distinct
"schools" of neoclassicism, associated with Igor Stravinsky, Paul Hindemith,
and Arnold Schoenberg. Similar sympathies in the second half of the century are
generally subsumed under the heading "postmodernism". Experimental music. A
compositional tradition arose in the mid-20th centuryâ€”particularly in North
Americaâ€”called "experimental music". Its most famous and influential exponent
was John Cage. According to Cage, "an experimental action is one the outcome of
which is not foreseen", and he was specifically interested in completed works
that performed an unpredictable action. Minimalism. Minimalist music, involving
a simplification of materials and intensive repetition of motives began in the
late 1950s with the composers Terry Riley, Steve Reich, and Philip Glass.
Later, minimalism was adapted to a more traditional symphonic setting by
composers including Reich, Glass, and John Adams. Minimalism was practiced
heavily throughout the latter half of the century and has carried over into the
21st century, as well as composers like Arvo PÃ¤rt, Henryk GÃ³recki and John
Tavener working in the "holy minimalism" variant. For more examples see "List
of 20th-century classical composers". Contemporary classical music. In the
broadest sense, contemporary music is any music being written in the present
day. In the context of classical music the term is informally applied to music
written in the last half century or so, particularly works post-1960, though
standard reference works do not consistently follow this definition. Since it
is a word that describes a movable time frame, rather than a particular style
or unifying idea, there are no universally agreed on criteria for making these
distinctions. Many composers working in the early 21st century were prominent
figures in the 20th century. Some younger composers such as Oliver Knussen,
Thomas AdÃ¨s, and Michael Daugherty did not rise to prominence until late in
the 20th century. For more examples see "List of 21st-century classical
composers". Electronic music. For centuries, instrumental music had either been
created by singing, drawing a bow across or plucking taught gut or metal
strings (string instruments), constricting vibrating air (woodwinds and brass)
or hitting or stroking something (percussion). In the early twentieth century,
devices were invented that were capable of generating sound electronically,
without an initial mechanical source of vibration. As early as the 1930s,
composers such as Olivier Messiaen incorporated electronic instruments into
live performance. Recording technology was used to produce art music, as well.
The musique concrÃ¨te of the late 1940s and 1950s was produced by editing
together natural and industrial sounds. In the years following World War II,
some composers were quick to adopt developing electronic technology. Electronic
music was embraced by composers such as Edgard VarÃ¨se, Karlheinz Stockhausen,
Milton Babbitt, Pierre Boulez, Luigi Nono, Herbert BrÃ¼n, and Iannis Xenakis.
In the 1950s the film industry also began to make extensive use of electronic
soundtracks. From the late 1960s onward, much popular music was developed on
synthesizers by pioneering groups like Heaven 17, The Human League, Art of
Noise, and New Order. Folk music. Folk music, in the original sense of the term
as coined in the 18th century by Johann Gottfried Herder, is music produced by
communal composition and possessing dignity, though by the late 19th century
the concept of â€˜folkâ€™ had become a synonym for â€˜nationâ€™, usually
identified as peasants and rural artisans, as in the Merrie England movement
and the Irish and Scottish Gaelic Revivals of the 1880s. Folk music was
normally shared and performed by the entire community (not by a special class
of expert or professional performers, possibly excluding the idea of amateurs),
and was transmitted by word of mouth (oral tradition). In addition, folk music
was also borrowed by composers in other genres. Some of the work of Aaron
Copland clearly draws on American folk music. Popular music. Popular music,
sometimes abbreviated pop music (although the term "pop" is used in some
contexts as a more specific musical genre), is music belonging to any of a
number of musical styles that are broadly popular or intended for mass
consumption and wide commercial distributionâ€”in other words, music that forms
part of popular culture. Popular music includes Broadway tunes, ballads and
singers such as Frank Sinatra. The relationship (particularly, the relative
value) of classical music and popular music is a controversial question.
Richard Middleton writes:Middleton 1990. Moreover, composers such as Scott
Joplin, George Gershwin and Andrew Lloyd Webber tried to cater to both popular
and high brow tastes. Country music. Country music, once known as "Country and
Western music", is a popular musical form developed in the southern United
States, with roots in traditional folk music, spirituals, and the blues. Disco.
Disco is an up-tempo style of dance music that originated in the early 1970s,
mainly from funk, salsa, and soul music, popular originally with gay and black
audiences in large U.S. cities, and derives its name from the French word
discothÃ¨que. Hip hop. Subgenres/periods of history in hip hop include: Old
school hip hop, New school hip hop, Gangsta rap, Underground hip hop,
Alternative hip hop and Crunk/Snap music. Jazz. Jazz has evolved into many
sometimes contrasting subgenres including smooth jazz and free jazz. New Age
music. There are new-age compositions which sit equally comfortably in the
world music category. Polka. The polka, which first appeared in Prague in 1837,
continued to be a popular form of dance music through the 20th century,
especially in Czechoslovakia, Poland, and areas of the United States with a
large population of central-European descent. A particularly well-known 20th-
century example is JaromÃ­r Vejvodaâ€™s "ModÅ™anskÃ¡ polka" (1927), which
became popular during World War II in Czechoslovakia as "Å koda lÃ¡sky" ("A
Waste of Love"), in Germany as the "Rosamunde-Polka", and among the allied
armies as the "Beer Barrel Polka" (as a song, known as "Roll out the Barrel").
In the United States, the "Eastern style" Polish urban polka remained popular
until about 1965. Polka music rose in popularity in Chicago in the late 1940s
after Walter â€˜Liâ€™l Wallyâ€™ Wallace Jagiello created "honky" polka by
combining the Polish-American rural polka with elements of Polish folksong and
"krakowiak". A later, rock-influenced form is called "dyno" polka. Rock and
roll. See also rock musical and rock opera. Salsa. Salsa music is a diverse and
predominantly Caribbean rhythm that is popular in many Latin countries. World
music. The term is usually used for all music made in a traditional way and
outside of the Anglo-Saxon world, thus encompassing music from Africa, Latin
America, and parts of Europe, and music by non-native English speakers in
Anglo-Saxon countries, like Native Americans or Indigenous Australians.
