Adena culture The Adena culture was a Pre-Columbian Native American culture
that existed from 1000 to 200 BC, in a time known as the Early Woodland period.
The Adena culture refers to what were probably a number of related Native
American societies sharing a burial complex and ceremonial system. The Adena
lived in a variety of locations, including: Ohio, Indiana, West Virginia,
Kentucky, and parts of Pennsylvania and New York. Importance. Adena sites are
concentrated in a relatively small area - maybe 200 sites in the central Ohio
Valley, with perhaps another 200 scattered throughout Indiana, Kentucky, West
Virginia and Pennsylvania, although they may once have numbered in the
thousands. The importance of the Adena complex comes from its considerable
influence on other contemporary and succeeding cultures. The Adena culture is
seen as the precursor to the traditions of the Hopewell culture, which are
sometimes thought as an elaboration, or zenith, of Adena traditions. The Adena
were notable for their agricultural practices, pottery, artistic works and
extensive trading network, which supplied them with a variety of raw materials,
ranging from copper from the Great Lakes to shells from the Gulf Coast. The
Adena culture was named for the large mound on Thomas Worthington's early 19th-
century estate called "Adena", in Chillicothe, Ohio. Art and religion. Mounds.
Lasting traces of Adena culture are still seen in their substantial earthworks.
Once Adena mounds numbered in the hundreds, but only a number of Adena earthen
monuments still survive today. These mounds generally ranged in size from to in
diameter and served as burial structures, ceremonial sites, historical markers
and possibly gathering places. These mounds were built using hundreds of
thousands of baskets full of specially selected and graded earth. According to
archaeological investigations, Adena mounds were usually built as part of
burial ritual, in which the earth of the mound was piled immediately atop a
burned mortuary building. These mortuary buildings were intended to keep and
maintain the dead until their final burial was performed. Before the
construction of the mounds, some utilitarian and grave goods would be placed on
the floor of the structure, which was burned with the goods and honored dead
within. The mound would then be constructed, and often a new mortuary structure
would be placed atop the new mound. After a series of repetitions, mound/
mortuary/mound/mortuary, a quite prominent earthwork would remain. In the later
Adena period, circular ridges of unknown function were sometimes constructed
around the burial mounds. Adena mounds stood in isolation from domestic living
areas. Shamanism. Although the mounds are beautiful artistic achievements
themselves, Adena artists created smaller, more personal pieces of art. Art
motifs that became important to many later Native Americans began with the
Adena. Motifs such as the weeping eye and cross and circle design became
mainstays in many succeeding cultures. Many pieces of art seemed to revolve
around shamanic practices, and the transformation of humans into
animalsâ€”particularly birds, wolves, bears and deerâ€”and back to human form.
This may indicate a belief that the practice imparted the animals' qualities to
the wearer or holder of the objects. Deer antlers, both real and constructed of
copper, wolf, deer and mountain lion jawbones, and many other objects were
fashioned into costumes, necklaces and other forms of regalia by the Adena.
Distinctive tubular smoking pipes, with either flattened or blocked-end
mouthpieces, suggest the offering of smoke to the spirits. The objective of
pipe smoking may have been altered states of consciousness, achieved through
the use of the hallucinogenic plant Nicotiana rustica. All told, Adena was a
manifestation of a broad regional increase in the number and kind of artifacts
devoted to spiritual needs. Stone tablets. The Adena also carved small stone
tablets, usually 4 or 5Â inches by 3 or 4Â inches by .5Â inches thick. On one
or both flat sides were gracefully composed stylized zoomorphs or curvilinear
geometric designs in deep relief. Paint has been found on some Adena tablets,
leading archaeologists to propose that these stone tablets were probably used
to stamp designs on cloth or animal hides, or onto their own bodies. Its
possible they were used to outline designs for tattooing. Pottery. Unlike in
other cultures, Adena pottery was not buried with the dead or the remains of
the cremated, as were other artifacts. Usually tempered with grit or crushed
limestone, it was largely plain, cord-marked or fabric marked, although one
type bore a nested-diamond design incised into its surface. The vessel shapes
were sub-conoidal or flat-bottomed jars, sometimes with small foot-like
supports. Domestic life. Settlement patterns. The large and elaborate mound
sites served a nearby scattering of people. The population was dispersed in
small settlements of one to two structures. A typical house was built in a
circle form from 15 to 45 feet in diameter. The walls were made of paired posts
tilted outward, joined to other wood to form a cone shaped roof. The roof was
then covered with bark and the walls may have been bark and/or wickerwork. Food
sources. Their subsistence was acquired through foraging and the cultivation of
native plants. Tools. The Adena ground stone tools and axes. Somewhat rougher
slab-like stones with chipped edges were probably used as hoes. Bone and antler
were used in small tools but even more prominently in ornamental objects such
as beads, combs, and worked animal-jaw gorgets or paraphernalia. Spoons, beads
and other implements were made from the marine conch. A few copper axes have
been found, but otherwise the metal was hammered into ornamental forms, such as
bracelets, rings, beads, and reel-shaped pendants.
