Communist revolution A communist revolution is a proletarian revolution often,
but necessarily inspired by the ideas of Marxism that aims to replace
capitalism with communism, typically with socialism as an intermediate stage.
The idea that a proletarian revolution is needed is a cornerstone of Marxism;
Marxists believe that the workers of the world must unite and free themselves
from capitalist oppression to create a world run by and for the working class.
Thus, in the Marxist view, proletarian revolutions need to happen in countries
all over the world; see world revolution. Leninism argues that a communist
revolution must be led by a vanguard of 'professional revolutionaries'â€”that
is, men and women who are fully dedicated to the communist cause and who can
then form the nucleus of the revolutionary movement. Some Marxists disagree
with the idea of a vanguard as put forth by Lenin, especially left communists
but also including some who continue to consider themselves Marxist-Leninists
despite such a disagreement. These critics insist that the entire working class
- or at least a large part of it - must be deeply involved and equally
committed to the socialist or communist cause in order for a proletarian
revolution to be successful. To this end, they seek to build massive communist
parties with very large memberships. See the articles on "communism" and
"communist states" for further discussion regarding the goals and results of
some of these revolutions. Communist revolutions throughout history. The
following is a list of communist revolutions throughout history. The most
significant ones are marked in bold. Among the lesser known revolutions, a
number of borderline cases have been included which may or may not have been
communist revolutions. The nature of unsuccessful revolutions is particularly
contentious since one can only speculate as to the kinds of policies that would
have been implemented by the revolutionaries had they achieved victory.
