Cuban Revolution The Cuban Revolution was an armed revolt consolidated by Fidel
Castro's 26th of July Movement against the regime of Cuban dictator Fulgencio
Batista. The revolution began in July 1953, and finally ousted Batista on 1
January 1959, replacing his regime with Castro's revolutionary government.
Castro's government later reformed along communist lines, becoming the present
Communist Party of Cuba in October 1965. Early stages: 1953-1956. The first
phase of the Cuban Revolution began when Fidel Castro's armed rebels attacked
the Moncada Barracks in Santiago and the barracks in Bayamo on 26 July 1953.
The exact number of rebels killed in the battle is debatable; however, in his
autobiography, Castro claimed that nine were killed in the fighting, and an
additional 56 were killed later by the Batista regime. Among the dead was Abel
SantamarÃ­a, Castro's second-in-command, who was imprisoned, tortured, and
executed on the same day as the attack. The survivors, among them Fidel Castro
and his brother RaÃºl Castro Ruz, were captured shortly afterwards. In a highly
political trial, Fidel spoke for nearly four hours in his defense, ending with
the words; "Condemn me, it does not matter. History will absolve me." Fidel was
sentenced to 15 years in the Presidio Modelo prison, located on Isla de Pinos,
while RaÃºl was sentenced to 13 years. In 1955, under broad political pressure,
the Batista regime freed all political prisoners in CubaÂ â€“ including the
Moncada attackers. Batista was persuaded to include the Castro brothers in this
release in part by Fidel's Jesuit childhood teachers. Thereafter, the Castro
brothers joined with other exiles in Mexico to prepare a revolution to
overthrow Batista, receiving training from Alberto Bayo, a leader of Republican
forces in the Spanish Civil War. In June 1955, Fidel met and joined forces with
the Argentine revolutionary Ernesto "Che" Guevara. The revolutionaries named
themselves the "26th of July Movement", in reference to the date of their
attack on the Moncada Barracks in 1953. Guerrilla warfare: December 1956 to
mid-1958. The yacht "Granma" arrived in Cuba on 2 December 1956, carrying the
Castro brothers and 80 other members of the 26th of July Movement. It landed on
Playa Las Coloradas, in the municipality of Niquero, arriving two days later
than planned because the boat was heavily loaded, unlike during the practice
sailing runs. This dashed any hopes for a coordinated attack with the "llano"
wing of the movement. After arriving and exiting the ship, the band of rebels
began to make their way into the Sierra Maestra mountains, a range in
southeastern Cuba. Three days after the trek began, Batista's army attacked and
killed most of the "Granma" participantsÂ â€“ while the exact number is
disputed, no more than twenty of the original eighty-two men survived the
initial bloody encounters with the Cuban army and escaped into the Sierra
Maestra mountains. The group of survivors included Fidel and RaÃºl Castro, Che
Guevara and Camilo Cienfuegos. The dispersed survivors, alone or in small
groups, wandered through the mountains, looking for each other. Eventually, the
men would link up again â€“ with the help of peasant sympathizers â€“ and would
form the core leadership of the guerrilla army. Celia Sanchez and Haydee
Santamaria (the sister of Abel Santamaria) were among the female
revolutionaries who assisted Fidel Castro in the mountains. On 13 March 1957, a
separate group of revolutionariesÂ â€“ the anticommunist Revolutionary
Directorate (RD; "Directorio Revolucionario"), composed mostly of studentsÂ â€“
stormed the Presidential Palace in Havana, attempting to assassinate Batista
and decapitate the regime. The attack ended in utter failure. The RD's leader,
student Jose Antonio Echeverria, died in a shootout with Batista's forces at
the Havana radio station he had seized to spread the news of Batista's death.
The handful of survivors included Dr. Humberto Castello (who later became the
Inspector General in the Escambray), and Rolando Cubela and Faure Chomon (later
Commandantes of the 13 March Movement, centered in the Escambray Mountains of
Las Villas Province). Thereafter, the United States imposed an economic embargo
on the Cuban government and recalled its ambassador, weakening the government's
mandate further. Batista's support among Cubans began to fade, former
supporters either joining the revolutionaries or distancing themselves from
Batista. The Mafia and US businessmen continued their support. The regime
resorted to often brutal methods to keep Cuba's cities under government
control. However, in the Sierra Maestra mountains, Castro, aided by Frank
PaÃ­s, Ramos Latour, Huber Matos, and many others, staged successful attacks on
small garrisons of Batista's troops. Che Guevara and RaÃºl Castro helped Fidel
to consolidate his political control in the mountains, often through execution
of suspected Batista loyalists or other rivals of Castro's. In addition, poorly
armed irregulars known as "escopeteros" harassed Batista's forces in the
foothills and plains of Oriente Province. The "escopeteros" also provided
direct military support to Castro's main forces by protecting supply lines and
by sharing intelligence. Ultimately, the mountains came under Castro's control.
In addition to armed resistance, the rebels sought to use propaganda to their
advantage. A pirate radio station called Rebel Radio ("Radio Rebelde") was set
up in February 1958, allowing Castro and his forces to broadcast their message
nationwide within enemy territory. The radio broadcasts were made possible by
Carlos Franqui, a previous acquaintance of Castro who subsequently became a
Cuban exile in Puerto Rico. During this time, Castro's forces remained quite
small in numbers, sometimes fewer than 200 men, while the Cuban army and police
force numbered between 30,000 and 40,000 in strength. Yet, nearly every time
the Cuban military fought against the revolutionaries, the army was forced to
retreat. An arms embargo â€“ imposed on the Cuban government by the United
States on 14 March 1958 â€“ contributed significantly to the weakness of
Batista's forces. The Cuban air force rapidly deteriorated: it could not repair
its airplanes without importing parts from the United States. Batista finally
responded to Castro's efforts with an attack on the mountains called Operation
Verano, known to the rebels as "la Ofensiva". The army sent some 12,000
soldiers, half of them untrained recruits, into the mountains. In a series of
small skirmishes, Castro's determined guerrillas defeated the Cuban army. In
the Battle of La Plata, which lasted from 11 July to 21 July 1958, Castro's
forces defeated an entire battalion, capturing 240 men while losing just 3 of
their own. However, the tide nearly turned on 29 July 1958, when Batista's
troops almost destroyed Castro's small army of some 300 men at the Battle of
Las Mercedes. With his forces pinned down by superior numbers, Castro asked
for, and received, a temporary cease-fire on 1 August. Over the next seven
days, while fruitless negotiations took place, Castro's forces gradually
escaped from the trap. By 8 August, Castro's entire army had escaped back into
the mountains, and Operation Verano had effectively ended in failure for the
Batista government. Final offensive: Mid-1958 to January 1959. On 21 August
1958, after the defeat of Batista's "Ofensiva", Castro's forces began their own
offensive. In the Oriente province (in the area of the present-day provinces of
Santiago de Cuba, Granma, GuantÃ¡namo and HolguÃ­n), Fidel Castro, RaÃºl Castro
and Juan Almeida Bosque directed attacks on four fronts. Descending from the
mountains with new weapons captured during the "Ofensiva" and smuggled in by
plane, Castro's forces won a series of initial victories. Castro's major
victory at Guisa, and the successful capture of several towns including Maffo,
Contramaestre, and Central Oriente, brought the Cauto plains under his control.
Meanwhile, three rebel columns, under the command of Che Guevara, Camilo
Cienfuegos and Jaime Vega, proceeded westward toward Santa Clara, the capital
of Villa Clara Province. Batista's forces ambushed and destroyed Jaime Vega's
column, but the surviving two columns reached the central provinces, where they
joined efforts with several other resistance groups not under the command of
Castro. When Che Guevara's column passed through the province of Las Villas,
and specifically through the Escambray Mountains â€“ where the anticommunist
Revolutionary Directorate forces (who became known as the 13 March Movement)
had been fighting Batista's army for many months â€“ friction developed between
the two groups of rebels. Nonetheless, the combined rebel army continued the
offensive, and Cienfuegos won a key victory in the Battle of Yaguajay on 30
December 1958, earning him the nickname "The Hero of Yaguajay". On 31 December
1958, the Battle of Santa Clara took place in a scene of great confusion. The
city of Santa Clara fell to the combined forces of Che Guevara, Cienfuegos,
Revolutionary Directorate (RD) rebels led by Comandantes Rolando Cubela, Juan
("El Mejicano") Abrahantes, and William Alexander Morgan. News of these defeats
caused Batista to panic. He fled Cuba for the Dominican Republic just hours
later on 1 January 1959. Comandante William Alexander Morgan, leading RD rebel
forces, continued fighting as Batista departed, and had captured the city of
Cienfuegos by 2 January. Castro learned of Batista's flight in the morning and
immediately started negotiations to take over Santiago de Cuba. On 2 January,
the military commander in the city, Colonel Rubido, ordered his soldiers not to
fight, and Castro's forces took over the city. The forces of Guevara and
Cienfuegos entered Havana at about the same time. They had met no opposition on
their journey from Santa Clara to Cuba's capital. Castro himself arrived in
Havana on 8 January after a long victory march. His initial choice of
president, Manuel Urrutia LleÃ³, took office on January 3. Aftermath. In 1959,
Castro travelled to the United States to explain his revolution. He said, "I
know what the world thinks of us, we are Communists, and of course I have said
very clearly that we are not Communists; very clearly." Hundreds of Batista-era
agents, policemen and soldiers were put on public trial for human rights
abuses, war crimes, murder and torture. Most of the people accused were
convicted by revolutionary tribunals of political crimes, and were executed by
firing squad; others persons received long sentences of imprisonment. A notable
example of revolutionary justice was the execution of more than seventy Batista
PoWs, directed by RaÃºl Castro, after the revolutionariesâ€™ capture of
Santiago. For his part in taking Havana, Che Guevara was appointed supreme
prosecutor in La CabaÃ±a Fortress. This was part of a large-scale attempt by
Fidel Castro to cleanse the security forces of Batista loyalists and potential
opponents of the new revolutionary regime. Others were fortunate enough to be
dismissed from the army and police without prosecution, and some high-ranking
officials in the "ancien rÃ©gime" were exiled as military attachÃ©s. Reforms
and nationalization. During its first decade in power, the Communist government
introduced a wide range of progressive social reforms. Laws were introduced to
provide equality for black Cubans and greater rights for women, while there
were attempts to improve communications, medical facilities, health, housing,
and education. In addition, there were touring cinemas, art exhibitions,
concerts, and theatres. By the end of the 1960s, all Cuban children were
receiving some education (compared with less than half before 1959),
unemployment and corruption were reduced, and great improvements were made in
hygiene and sanitation. In 1961, the new Cuban government nationalized all
property held by religious organizations, including the dominant Roman Catholic
Church. Hundreds of members of the church, including a bishop, were permanently
expelled from the nation, with the new Cuban government being declared
officially atheist. Education also saw significant changes â€“ private schools
were banned and the progressively socialist state assumed greater
responsibility for children. According to geographer and Cuban Comandante
Antonio NÃºÃ±ez JimÃ©nez, 75% of Cubaâ€™s best arable land was owned by foreign
individuals or foreign (mostly American) companies at the time of the
revolution. One of the first policies of the newly formed Cuban government was
eliminating illiteracy and implementing land reforms. Land reform efforts
helped to raise living standards by subdividing larger holdings into
cooperatives. Comandante Sori Marin, nominally in charge of land reform,
objected and fled, but was eventually executed. Many other non-Marxist, anti-
Batista rebel leaders were forced into exile, purged in executions, or
eliminated in failed uprisings such as that of the Beaton brothers. Shortly
after taking power, Castro also created a revolutionary militia to expand his
power base among the former rebels and the supportive population. Castro also
created the informant Committees for the Defense of the Revolution (CDRs) in
late September 1960. CDRs were tasked with keeping "vigilance against counter-
revolutionary activity", with local CDRs keeping a detailed record of each
neighborhoodâ€™s inhabitants' spending habits, level of contact with
foreigners, work and education history, and any "suspicious" behavior. Among
the increasingly persecuted groups were homosexual men. The Cuban dissident and
exile Reinaldo Arenas wrote about such persecution in his autobiography, "Antes
Que Anochezca", the basis for the film "Before Night Falls". In February 1959,
the Ministry for the Recovery of Misappropriated Assets ("Ministerio de
RecuperaciÃ³n de Bienes Malversados") was created. Cuba began expropriating
land and private property under the auspices of the Agrarian Reform Law of 17
May 1959. Farms of any size could be and were seized by the government, while
land, businesses, and companies owned by upper- and middle-class Cubans were
nationalized (notably, including the plantations owned by Fidel Castro's
family). By the end of 1960, the revolutionary government had nationalized more
than $25Â billion worth of private property owned by Cubans. The Cuban
government formally nationalized all foreign-owned property, particularly
American holdings, in the nation on 6 August 1960. The United States responded
by freezing all Cuban assets on American soil, severing diplomatic ties, and
tightening its embargo on Cuba, which is still in place as of 2012. In response
to the acts of the Eisenhower administration, Cuba turned to the Soviet Union
for support. In July 1961, the Integrated Revolutionary Organizations (IRO) was
formed by the merger of Fidel Castroâ€™s 26th of July Movement, the People's
Socialist Party led by Blas Roca, and the Revolutionary Directorate of 13 March
led by Faure ChomÃ³n. On 26 March 1962, the IRO became the United Party of the
Cuban Socialist Revolution (PURSC) which, in turn, became the Communist Party
of Cuba on 3 October 1965, with Castro as First Secretary. Counterrevolutionary
rebels. In the wake of the revolution, thousands of disaffected anti-Batista
rebels, former Batista supporters, and "campesinos" (peasants) fled to Cuba's
Las Villas province, where an anticommunist underground had been forming since
early 1960. Operating out of the Escambray mountain range, these
counterrevolutionary rebels, also known as Alzados, made a number of
unsuccessful attempts to overthrow the Cuban government, including the
abortive, United States-backed Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961. In the aftermath
of the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, the United States promised not to invade
Cuba in the future; in compliance with this agreement, the U.S. withdrew all
support from the Alzados, effectively crippling the resource-starved
resistance. The counterrevolutionary conflict lasted until about 1965, and has
been branded the War Against the Bandits by the Castro regime. It is
alternately known as the Escambray Rebellion.
