Eighth Crusade The Eighth Crusade was a crusade launched by Louis IX, King of
France, in 1270. The Eighth Crusade is sometimes counted as the Seventh, if the
Fifth and Sixth Crusades of Frederick II are counted as a single crusade. The
Ninth Crusade is sometimes also counted as part of the Eighth. Louis was
disturbed by events in Syria, where the Mamluk sultan Baibars had been
attacking the remnant of the Crusader states. Baibars had seized the
opportunity after a war pitting the cities of Venice and Genoa against each
other (1256â€“1260) had exhausted the Syrian ports that the two cities
controlled. By 1265 Baibars had captured Nazareth, Haifa, Toron, and Arsuf.
Hugh III of Cyprus, nominal king of Jerusalem, landed in Acre to defend that
city, while Baibars marched as far north as Armenia, which was at that time
under Mongol control. These events led to Louis' call for a new crusade in
1267, although there was little support this time; Jean de Joinville, the
chronicler who accompanied Louis on the Seventh Crusade, refused to go. Louis
was soon convinced by his brother Charles of Anjou to attack Tunis first, which
would give them a strong base for attacking Egypt, the focus of Louis' previous
crusade as well as the Fifth Crusade before him, both of which had been
defeated there. Charles, as King of Sicily, also had his own interests in this
area of the Mediterranean. The Khalif of Tunis, Muhammad I al-Mustansir, also
had connections with Christian Spain and was considered a good candidate for
conversion. In 1270 Louis landed on the African coast in July, a very
unfavourable season for landing. Much of the army became sick because of poor
drinking water, his Damietta born son John Sorrow died on August 3 and on
August 25 Louis himself died from a "flux in the stomach", one day after the
arrival of Charles. His dying word was "Jerusalem." Charles proclaimed Louis'
son Philip III the new king, but because of his youth Charles became the actual
leader of the crusade. Because of further diseases the siege of Tunis was
abandoned on October 30 by an agreement with the sultan. In this agreement the
Christians gained free trade with Tunis, and residence for monks and priests in
the city was guaranteed, so the crusade could be regarded as a partial success.
After hearing of the death of Louis and the evacuation of the crusaders from
Tunis, Sultan Baibars of Egypt cancelled his plan to send Egyptian troops to
fight Louis in Tunis. Charles now allied himself with Prince Edward of England,
who had arrived in the meantime. When Charles called off the attack on Tunis,
Edward continued on to Acre, the last crusader outpost in Syria. His time spent
there is often called the Ninth Crusade. Attendant literature. Bertran
d'Alamanon, a diplomat in the service of Charles of Anjou, and Ricaut Bonomel,
a Templar in the Holy Land, both composed songs around 1265. Bertran criticised
the decline of Christianity in Outremer, while Bonomel criticised the Papal
policy of pursuing wars in Italy with money that should have gone overseas. The
failure of the Eighth Crusade, like those of its predecessors, caused a
response to be crafted in Occitan poetry by the troubadours. The death of Louis
of France especially sparked their creative output, notable considering the
hostility which the troubadours had had towards the French monarchy during the
Albigensian Crusade. Three "planhs", songs of lament, were composed for the
death of Louis IX. Guilhem d'Autpol composed "Fortz tristors es e salvaj'a
retraire" for Louis. Raimon Gaucelm de Bezers composed "Qui vol aver complida
amistansa" to celebrate the preparations of the Crusade in 1268, but in 1270 he
had to compose "Ab grans trebalhs et ab grans marrimens" in commemoration of
the French king. Austorc de Segret composed "No sai quim so, tan sui
desconoissens", a more general Crusading song, that laments Louis but also that
either God or Satan is misleading Christians. He also attacks Louis' brother
Charles, whom he calls the "caps e guitz" (head and guide) of the infidels,
because he convinced Louis to attack Tunis and not the Holy Land, and he
immediately negotiated a peace with the Muslims after Louis' death. After the
Crusade, the aged troubadour Peire Cardenal wrote a song, "Totz lo mons es
vestitiz et abrazatz", encouraging Louis' heir, Philip III, to go to the Holy
Land to aid Edward Longshanks. Satiric verses were composed in Tunis about
Louis' new plan to invade Tunis: "O Louis, Tunis is the sister of Egypt! thus
expect your ordeal! you will find your tomb here instead of the house of Ibn
Lokman; and the eunuch Sobih will be here replaced by Munkir and Nakir.".
