History of Haiti The recorded history of Haiti began on 5 December 1492 when
the European navigator Christopher Columbus happened upon a large island in the
region of the western Atlantic Ocean that later came to be known as the
Caribbean. It was inhabited by the Ta√≠no, an Arawakan people, who variously
called their island "Ayiti", "Bohio", or "Kiskeya". Columbus promptly claimed
the island for the Spanish Crown, naming it "La Isla Espa√±ola" ("the Spanish
Island"), later Latinized to "Hispaniola". Pre-Spanish History. Successive
waves of Arawak migrants, moving northward from the Orinoco delta in South
America, settled the islands of the Caribbean. Around AD 600, the Ta√≠no
Indians, an Arawak culture, arrived on the island, displacing the previous
inhabitants. They were organized into "cacicazgos" (chiefdoms), each led by a
"cacique" (chief). The Ta√≠no people called the island "Quisqueya" (mother of
all lands) and "Ayiti" (land of high mountains). At the time of Columbus
arrival in 1492, the island's territory consisted of five chiefdoms: Mari√©n,
Magu√°, Maguana, Jaragua, and Hig√ºey. Two of these chiefdoms, Marien and
Jaragua, were on the territory of present day Haiti. Marien was ruled by
Guacanagarix from his capital El Guarico near present day Cap Haitien, who met
Columbus and gave him permission to construct La Navidad. Jaragua was the
largest caique on the island and ruled by Bohech√≠o and his sister Anacaona,
who ruled from its capital Yaguana near present day Leogane, and later came
into conflict with the Spanish. Spanish Hispaniola (1492-1625). Christopher
Columbus established a small settlement called La Navidad, near the modern town
of Cap Haitien, built from the timbers of his wrecked ship Santa Mar√≠a, during
his first voyage in December 1492. When he returned in 1493 on his second
voyage he found the settlement had been destroyed and all 39 settlers killed.
Colombus continued east and founded a new settlement at La Isabela on the
territory of the present day Dominican Republic in 1493. The capital of the
colony was moved to Santo Domingo in 1496, on the south west coast of the
island also in the territory of the present day Dominican Republic. The Spanish
returned to western Hispaniola in 1502, establishing a settlement at Yaguana,
near modern day L√©ogane. A second settlement was established on the north
coast in 1504 called Puerto Real near modern Fort Liberte - which in 1578 was
relocated to a nearby site and renamed Bayaha. Following the arrival of
Europeans, La Hispaniola's indigenous population suffered near-extinction, in
possibly the worst case of depopulation in the Americas. A commonly accepted
hypothesis attributes the high mortality of this colony in part to Old World
diseases to which the natives had no immunity. A small number of Ta√≠nos were
able to survive and set up villages elsewhere. Spanish interest in Hispaniola
began to wane in the 1520s, as more lucrative gold and silver deposits were
found in Mexico and South America. Thereafter, the population of Spanish
Hispaniola grew at a slow pace. The settlement of Yacanagua was burnt to the
ground three times in its just over a century long existence as a Spanish
settlement, first by French pirates in 1543, again on 27 May 1592 by a 110
strong landing party from a 4 ship English naval squadron led by Christopher
Newport in his flagship Golden Dragon, who destroyed all 150 houses in the
settlement, and finally by the Spanish themselves in 1605, for reasons set out
below. In 1595 the Spanish, frustrated by the twenty year rebellion of their
Dutch subjects, closed their home ports to rebel shipping from the Netherlands,
cutting them off from the critical salt supplies necessary for their herring
industry. The Dutch responded by sourcing new salt supplies from Spanish
America where colonists were more than happy to trade. So large numbers of
Dutch traders/pirates joined their English and French brethren trading on the
remote coasts of Hispaniola. In 1605, Spain was infuriated that Spanish
settlements on the northern and western coasts of the island persisted in
carrying out large scale and illegal trade with the Dutch, who were at that
time fighting a war of independence against Spain in Europe, and the English, a
very recent enemy state, and so decided to forcibly resettle their inhabitants
closer to the city of Santo Domingo. This action, known as the "Devastaciones
de Osorio", proved disastrous; more than half of the resettled colonists died
of starvation or disease, over 100,000 cattle were abandoned, and many slaves
escaped. Five of the existing thirteen settlements on the island were brutally
razed by Spanish troops including the two settlements on the territory of
present day Haiti, La Yaguana, and Bayaja. Many of the inhabitants fought,
escaped to the jungle, or fled to the safety of passing Dutch ships This
Spanish action was counterproductive as English, Dutch, and French pirates were
now free to establish bases on the island's abandoned northern and western
coasts, where wild cattle were now plentiful and free. French Saint-Domingue
(1625-1789). The Foundation of a Colony (1625-1711). French buccaneers
established a settlement on the island of Tortuga in 1625, and were soon joined
by like minded English and Dutch privateers and pirates, who formed a lawless
international community that survived by preying on Spanish ships and hunting
wild cattle. Although the Spanish destroyed the buccaneers' settlements in
1629, 1635, 1638 and 1654, on each occasion they returned. In 1655 the newly
established English administration on Jamaica sponsored the re-occupation of
Tortuga under Elias Watts as Governor. In 1660 the English made the mistake of
replacing Watts as Governor by a Frenchman Jeremie Deschamps, on condition he
defended English interests. Deschamps on taking control of the island
proclaimed for the King of France, set up French colours, and defeated several
English attempts to reclaim the island. It is from this point in 1660 that
unbroken French rule in Haiti begins. In 1663 Deschamps founded a French
settlement Leogane on the western coast of the island on the abandoned site of
the former Spanish town of Yaguana. In 1664, the newly established French West
India Company took control of the new colony, and France formally claimed
control of the western portion of the island of Hispaniola. In 1665 they
established a French settlement on the mainland of Hispaniola opposite Tortuga
at Port-de-Paix. In 1670 the headland of Cap Fran√ßais, now Cap-Ha√Øtien, was
settled further to the east along the northern coast. In 1676 the colonial
capital was moved from Tortuga to Port-de-Paix. In 1684 the French and Spanish
signed the Treaty of Ratisbon that included provisions to suppress the actions
of the Caribbean privateers, which effectively ended the era of the buccaneers
on Tortuga, many being employed by the French Crown to hunt down any of their
former comrades who preferred to turn outright pirate. Under the 1697 Treaty of
Ryswick, Spain officially ceded the western third of Hispaniola to France which
renamed the colony Saint-Domingue. By that time, planters outnumbered
buccaneers and, with the encouragement of Louis XIV, they had begun to grow
tobacco, indigo, cotton, and cacao on the fertile northern plain, thus
prompting the importation of African slaves. Slave insurrections were frequent
and some slaves escaped to the mountains where they were met by what would be
one of the last generations of Ta√≠no natives. After the last Ta√≠no died, the
full-blooded Arawakan population on the island was extinct. The Pearl of the
Antilles (1711-1789). In 1711 the city of Cap-Fran√ßais was formerly
established by Louis XIV and took over as capital of the colony from Port-de-
Paix. In 1726 the city of Les Cayes was founded on the Southern coast which
became the biggest settlement in the south. In 1749 the city of Port-au-Prince
was established on the West coast, which in 1770 took over as the capital of
the colony from Cap-Fran√ßais, however that same year the 1770 Port-au-Prince
earthquake and tsunami destroyed the city killing 200 people immediately, and
30,000 later from famine and disease brought on by the natural disaster. This
was the second major earthquake to hit Saint-Domingue as it followed the 1751
Port-au-Prince earthquake which had left only a single stone built building
standing in the town. Prior to the Seven Years' War (1756‚Äì63), the economy of
Saint-Domingue gradually expanded, with sugar and, later, coffee becoming
important export crops. After the war, which disrupted maritime commerce, the
colony underwent rapid expansion. In 1767, it exported 72¬ million pounds of
raw sugar and 51¬ million pounds of refined sugar, one million pounds of
indigo, and two million pounds of cotton. Saint-Domingue became known as the
"Pearl of the Antilles" ‚Äì one of the richest colonies in the 18th century
French empire. By the 1780s, Saint-Domingue produced about 40 percent of all
the sugar and 60 percent of all the coffee consumed in Europe. This single
colony, roughly the size of Maryland or Belgium, produced more sugar and coffee
than all of Britain's West Indian colonies combined. The labor for these
plantations was provided by an estimated 790,000 African slaves (accounting in
1783-91 for a third of the entire Atlantic slave trade). Between 1764 and 1771,
the average importation of slaves varied between 10‚ÄØ000‚Äì15‚ÄØ000, by 1786
about 28‚ÄØ000, and, from 1787 onward, the colony received more than 40‚ÄØ000
slaves a year. However, the inability to maintain slave numbers without
constant resupply from Africa meant the slave population, by 1789, totaled
500‚ÄØ000, ruled over by a white population that, by 1789, numbered only
32‚ÄØ000. At all times, a majority of slaves in the colony were African-born,
as the brutal conditions of slavery prevented the population from experiencing
growth through natural increase [http://www.africanaonline.com/
slavery_colonial_era.htm]. African culture thus remained strong among slaves to
the end of French rule, in particular the folk-religion of Vodou, which
commingled Catholic liturgy and ritual with the beliefs and practices of
Guinea, Congo, and Dahomey. Slave traders scoured the Atlantic coast of Africa,
and the slaves who arrived came from hundreds of different tribes, their
languages often mutually incomprehensible. Thousands of slaves found freedom by
fleeing from their masters, forming communities of maroons and raiding isolated
plantations. The most famous was Mackandal, a one-armed slave, originally from
Guinea, who escaped in 1751. A Vodou Houngan (priest), he united many of the
different maroon bands. He spent the next six years staging successful raids
and evading capture by the French, reputedly killing over 6,000 people, while
preaching a fanatic vision of the destruction of white civilization in St.
Domingue. In 1758, after a failed plot to poison the drinking water of the
plantation owners, he was captured and burned alive at the public square in
Cap-Fran√ßais. Saint-Domingue also had the largest and wealthiest free
population of color in the Caribbean, the "gens de couleur" (French, "people of
color"). The mixed-race community in Saint-Domingue numbered 25,000 in 1789.
First-generation gens de couleur were typically the offspring of a male, French
slaveowner and an African slave chosen as a concubine. In the French colonies,
the semi-official institution of "pla√ßage" defined this practice. By this
system, the children were free people and could inherit property, thus
originating a class of "mulattos" with property and some with wealthy fathers.
This class occupied a middle status between African slaves and French
colonists. Some Africans also enjoyed status as gens de couleur. (See also
Mestizo). As numbers of gens de couleur grew, the French rulers enacted
discriminatory laws. Statutes forbade "gens de couleur" from taking up certain
professions, marrying whites, wearing European clothing, carrying swords or
firearms in public, or attending social functions where whites were present.
However, these regulations did not restrict their purchase of land, and many
accumulated substantial holdings and became slave-owners. By 1789, they owned
one-third of the plantation property and one-quarter of the slaves of Saint-
Domingue. Central to the rise of the "gens de couleur" planter class was the
growing importance of coffee, which thrived on the marginal hillside plots to
which they were often relegated. The largest concentration of "gens de couleur"
was in the southern peninsula, the last region of the colony to be settled,
owing to its distance from Atlantic shipping lanes and its formidable terrain,
with the highest mountain range in the Caribbean. Revolutionary period (1789-
1804). Og√©'s revolt (1789-1791). The outbreak of revolution in France in the
summer of 1789 had a powerful effect on the colony. While the French settlers
debated how new revolutionary laws would apply to Saint-Domingue, outright
civil war broke out in 1790 when the free men of color claimed they too were
French citizens under the terms of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of
the Citizen. Ten days before the fall of the Bastille, in July 1789, the French
National Assembly had voted to seat six delegates from Saint-Domingue. In
Paris, a group of wealthy mulattoes, led by Julien Raimond and Vincent Og√©,
unsuccessfully petitioned the white planter delegates to support mulatto claims
for full civil and political rights. Through the efforts of a group called
"Soci√©t√© d'Amis des Noirs", of which Raimond and Og√© were prominent leaders,
in March 1790 the National Assembly granted full civic rights to the "gens de
couleur.' Vincent Og√© traveled to St. Domingue to secure the promulgation and
implementation of this decree, landing near Cap-Fran√ßais (now Cap-Ha√Øtien) in
October 1790 and petitioning the royal governor, the Comte de Peynier. After
his demands were refused, he attempted to incite the "gens de couleur" to
revolt. Og√© and Jean-Baptiste Chavennes, a veteran of the Siege of Savannah
during the American Revolution, attempted to attack Cap-Fran√ßais. However, the
mulatto rebels refused to arm or free their slaves, or to challenge the status
of slavery, and their attack was defeated by a force of white militia and black
volunteers (including Henri Christophe). Afterwards, they fled across the
frontier to Hinche, at the time in the Spanish part of the island. However,
they were captured, returned to the French authorities, and both Og√© and
Chavennes were executed in February 1791. The rising of the slaves (1791-1793).
On August 22, 1791, slaves in the northern region of the colony staged a revolt
that began the Haitian Revolution. Tradition marks the beginning of the
revolution at a vodou ceremony at Bois Ca√Øman (Alligator Woods) near Cap-
Fran√ßais. The call to arms was issued by a Houngan (Vodou priest) named Dutty
Boukman. Within hours, the northern plantations were in flames. The rebellion
spread through the entire colony. Boukman was captured and executed, but the
rebellion continued to spread rapidly. In 1792, L√©ger-F√©licit√© Sonthonax was
sent to the colony by the French Legislative Assembly as part of the
Revolutionary Commission. His main goal was to maintain French control of
Saint-Domingue, stabilize the colony, and enforce the social equality recently
granted to free people of color by the National Convention of France. Toussaint
Louverture ascendant (1793-1802). On August 29, 1793, Sonthonax took the
radical step of proclaiming the freedom of the slaves in the north province
(with severe limits on their freedom). In September and October, emancipation
was extended throughout the colony. The French National Convention, the first
elected Assembly of the First Republic (1792‚Äì1804), on the 4th of February
1794, under the leadership of Maximilien Robespierre, abolished slavery by law
in France and all its colonies. The slaves did not immediately flock to
Sonthonax's banner, however. White colonists continued to fight Sonthonax, with
assistance from the British. They were joined by many of the free men of color
who opposed the abolition of slavery. It was not until word of France's
ratification of emancipation arrived back in the colony that Toussaint
Louverture and his corps of well-disciplined, battle-hardened former slaves
came over to the French Republican side in early May 1794. A change in the
political winds in France caused Sonthonax to be recalled in 1796, but not
before taking the step of arming the former slaves. With the colony facing a
full-scale invasion by Britain, the rebel slaves emerged as a powerful military
force, under the leadership of Toussaint Louverture, Jean-Jacques Dessalines,
and Henri Christophe. Louverture successfully drove back the British and by
1798 was the defacto ruler of the colony. In 1799, he defeated the mulatto
General Andr√© Rigaud, who controlled most of the south and west and refused to
acknowledge Toussaint's authority. By 1801, he was in control of all of
Hispaniola, after conquering Spanish Santo Domingo and proclaiming the
abolition of slavery there. He did not, however, proclaim full independence for
the country, nor did he seek reprisals against the country's former white
slaveholders, convinced that the French would not restore slavery and "that a
population of slaves recently landed from Africa could not attain to
civilization by 'going it alone.'" Napoleon defeated (1802-1804). Toussaint,
however, asserted enough independence that in 1802, Napoleon Bonaparte sent a
massive invasion force, under his brother-in-law Charles Leclerc, to increase
French control. For a time, Leclerc met with some success; he also brought the
eastern part of the island of Hispaniola under the direct control of France in
accordance with the terms of the 1795 Treaties of B√¢le with Spain. With a
large expedition that eventually included 40‚ÄØ000 European troops, and
receiving help from white colonists and mulatto forces commanded by Alexandre
P√©tion, a former lieutenant of Rigaud, the French won several victories after
severe fighting. Two of Toussaint's chief lieutenants, Dessalines and
Christophe, recognizing their untenable situation, held separate parleys with
the invaders, and agreed to transfer their allegiance. At this point, Leclerc
invited Toussaint to negotiate a settlement. It was a deception; Toussaint was
seized and deported to France, where he died of pneumonia while imprisoned at
Fort de Joux in the Jura Mountains in April 1803. On May 20, 1802, Napoleon
signed a law to maintain slavery where it had not yet disappeared, namely
Martinique, Tobago, and Saint Lucia. A confidential copy of this decree was
sent to Leclerc, who was authorized to restore slavery in Saint-Domingue when
the time was opportune. At the same time, further edicts stripped the "gens de
couleur" of their newly won civil rights. None of these decrees were published
or executed in St. Domingue, but, by midsummer, word began to reach the colony
of the French intention to restore slavery. The betrayal of Toussaint and news
of French actions in Martinique undermined the collaboration of leaders such as
Dessalines, Christophe, and P√©tion. Convinced that the same fate lay in store
for Saint-Domingue, these commanders and others once again battled Leclerc.
With the French intent on reconquest and re-enslavement of the colony's black
population, the war became a bloody struggle of atrocity and attrition. The
rainy season brought yellow fever and malaria, which took a heavy toll on the
invaders. By November, when Leclerc died of yellow fever, 24‚ÄØ000 French
soldiers were dead and 8,000 were hospitalized, the majority from disease.
Afterwards, Leclerc was replaced by Donatien-Marie-Joseph de Vimeur, vicomte de
Rochambeau. Rochambeau wrote to Napoleon that, to reclaim Saint-Domingue,
France must 'declare the negroes slaves, and destroy at least 30‚ÄØ000 negroes
and negresses.' In his desperation, he turned to increasingly wanton acts of
brutality; the French burned alive, hanged, drowned, and tortured black
prisoners, reviving such practices as burying blacks in piles of insects and
boiling them in cauldrons of molasses. One night, at Port-R√©publican, he held
a ball to which he invited the most prominent mulatto ladies and, at midnight,
announced the death of their husbands. However, each act of brutality was
repaid by the Haitian rebels. After one battle, Rochambeau buried 500 prisoners
alive; Dessalines responded by hanging 500 French prisoners. Rochambeau's
brutal tactics helped unite black, mulatto, and mestizo soldiers against the
French. As the tide of the war turned toward the former slaves, Napoleon
abandoned his dreams of restoring France's New World empire. In 1803, war
resumed between France and Britain, and with the Royal Navy firmly in control
of the seas, reinforcements and supplies for Rochambeau never arrived in
sufficient numbers. To concentrate on the war in Europe, Napoleon signed the
Louisiana Purchase in April, selling France's North American possessions to the
United States. The Haitian army, now led by Dessalines, devastated Rochembeau
and the French army at the Battle of Verti√®res on November 18, 1803. On
January 1, 1804 Dessalines then declared independence, reclaiming the
indigenous Ta√≠no name of Haiti ("Land of Mountains") for the new nation. Most
of the remaining French colonists fled ahead of the defeated French army, many
migrating to Louisiana or Cuba. Unlike Toussaint, Dessalines showed little
equanimity with regard to the whites. In a final act of retribution, the
remaining French were slaughtered by Haitian military forces. Some 2‚ÄØ000
Frenchmen were massacred at Cap-Fran√ßais, 900 in Port-au-Prince, and 400 at
J√©r√©mie. He issued a proclamation declaring, "we have repaid these cannibals,
war for war, crime for crime, outrage for outrage." One exception was a
military force of Poles from the Polish Legions that had fought in Napoleon's
army. Some of them refused to fight against blacks, supporting the principles
of liberty; also, a few Poles (around 100) actually joined the rebels
(W≈Çadys≈Çaw Franciszek Jab≈Çonowski was one of the Polish generals).
Therefore, Poles were allowed to stay and were spared the fate of other whites.
About 400 of the 5‚ÄØ280 Poles chose this option. Of the remainder, 700
returned to France and many were ‚Äì after capitulation ‚Äì forced to serve in
British units. 160 Poles were later given permission to leave Haiti and were
sent to France at Haitian expense. Today, descendants of those Poles who stayed
are living in Casale and Fond Des Blancs. Despite the Haitian victory, France
refused to recognize the newly independent country's sovereignty until 1825, in
exchange for 150¬ million gold francs. This fee, demanded as retribution for
the "lost property,"‚Äîslaves, land, equipment etc.‚Äîof the former
colonialists, was later reduced to 90¬ million. Haiti agreed to pay the price
to lift a crippling embargo imposed by France, Britain, and the United
States‚Äî but to do so, the Haitian government had to take out high interest
loans. The debt was not repaid in full until 1947. Independence: The early
years (1804-1843). Black Republic (1804). Haiti is the world's oldest black
republic and one of the oldest republics in the Western Hemisphere. Although
Haiti actively assisted the independence movements of many Latin American
countries ‚Äì and secured a promise from the great liberator, Sim√≥n Bol√≠var,
that he would free their slaves after winning independence from Spain ‚Äì the
nation of former slaves was excluded from the hemisphere's first regional
meeting of independent nations, held in Panama in 1826. Furthermore, owing to
entrenched opposition from Southern slave states, Haiti did not receive U.S.
diplomatic recognition until 1862 (after those states had seceded from the
Union) ‚Äì largely through the efforts of anti-slavery senator Charles Sumner
of Massachusetts. First Haitian Empire (1804-1806). On 22 September 1804,
Dessalines, preferring Napoleon's style rather than the more liberal yet
vulnerable type of political government of the French Republican Radicals (see
liberalism and radicalism in France), proclaimed himself Emperor Jacques I. Yet
two of his own advisers, Henri Christophe and Alexandre P√©tion, helped provoke
his assassination in 1806. The conspirators ambushed him north of Port-au-
Prince at Pont Larnage (now known as Pont-Rouge) on October 17, 1806 en route
to battle rebels to his regime. The struggle for unity (1806-1820). After the
Dessalines coup d'√©tat, the two main conspirators divided the country in two
rival regimes. Christophe created the authoritarian State of Haiti in the
north, and the Gens de couleur P√©tion helped establish the Republic of Haiti
in the south. Christophe attempted to maintain a strict system of labor and
agricultural production akin to the former plantations. Although, strictly
speaking, he did not establish slavery, he imposed a semi-feudal system,
fumage, in which every able man was required to work in plantations (similar to
Latifundios) to produce goods for the fledging country. His method, though
undoubtedly oppressive, produced the most revenues of the two governments. By
contrast, P√©tion broke up the former colonial estates and parceled out the
land into small holdings. In P√©tion's south, the gens de couleur minority led
the government and feared losing popular support, and thus, sought to assuage
class tensions with land redistribution. Because of the weak international
position and its labor policies (most peasants lived through a subsistence
economy), P√©tion's government was perpetually on the brink of bankruptcy. Yet,
for most of its time, it produced one of the most liberal and tolerant Haitian
governments ever. In 1815, at a key period of Bol√≠var's fight for Venezuelan
independence, he gave the Venezuelan leader asylum and provided him with
soldiers and substantial material support. It also had the least of internal
military skirmishes, despite its continuous conflicts with Christophe's
northern kingdom. In 1816, however, after finding the burden of the Senate
intolerable, he suspended the legislature and turned his post into President
for Life. Not long after, he died of yellow fever, and his assistant Jean
Pierre Boyer replaced him. In this period, the eastern part of the island rose
against the new powers following general Juan S√°nchez Ram√≠rez's claims of
independence from France, which broke the Treaties of B√¢le attacking Spain and
prohibited commerce with Haiti. In the Palo Hincado battle (November 7, 1808),
all the remaining French forces were defeated by Spanish-creole
insurrectionists. On July 9, 1809, Santo Domingo was born. The government put
itself under the control of Spain, earning it the nickname of "Espa√±a Boba"
(meaning "The Idiot Spain"). In 1811, Christophe proclaimed himself King Henri
I in the North and commissioned several extraordinary buildings. He even
created a nobility class in the fashion of European monarchies. Yet in 1820,
weakened by illness and with a decreasing support for his authoritarian regime,
he killed himself with a silver bullet rather than face a coup d'√©tat.
Immediately after, P√©tion's successor, Boyer, reunited Haiti through
diplomatic tactics, and ruled as president until his overthrow in 1843. Boyer's
domination of Hispaniola (1820-1843). Almost two years after Boyer had
consolidated power in the west, in 1821, Santo Domingo declared independence
from Spain and requested from Sim√≥n Bol√≠var inclusion in the Gran Colombia.
Boyer, however, responding to a party on the east that preferred Haiti over
Colombia, occupied the ex-Spanish colony in January 1822, encountering no
military resistance. In this way he accomplished the unity of the island, which
was only carried out for a short period of time by Toussaint Louverture in
1801. Boyer's occupation of the Spanish side also responded to internal
struggles among Christophe's generals, to which Boyer gave extensive powers and
lands in the east. This occupation, however, pitted the Spanish white elite
against the iron fisted Haitian administration, and stimulated the emigration
of many white wealthy families. Even today, the various memories and
interpretations of this occupation still fuel animosities between Haiti and the
Dominican Republic. The entire island remained under Haitian rule until 1844,
when in the east a nationalist group called La Trinitaria led a revolt that
helped convert the country into the Dominican Republic. From 1824 to 1826,
while the island was under one government, Boyer promoted the largest single
free-Black immigration from the United States in which more than 6000
immigrants settled in different parts of the island. Today remnants of these
immigrants live throughout the island, but the larger number reside in Saman√°,
a peninsula on the Dominican side of the island. From the government's
perspective, the intention of the immigration was to help establish commercial
and diplomatic relationships with the US, and to increase the number of skilled
and agricultural workers in Haiti. In exchange for diplomatic recognition from
France, Boyer was forced to pay a huge indemnity for the loss of French
property during the revolution. To pay for this, he had to float loans in
France, putting Haiti into a state of debt. Boyer attempted to enforce
production through the "Code Rural", enacted in 1826, but peasant freeholders,
mostly former revolutionary soldiers, had no intention of returning to the
forced labor they fought to escape. By 1840, Haiti had ceased to export sugar
entirely, although large amounts continued to be grown for local consumption as
"taffia"-a raw rum. However, Haiti continued to export coffee, which required
little cultivation and grew semi-wild. The 1842 Cap-Haitien earthquake
destroyed the city, and the Sans Souci Palace, killing 10,000 people. This was
the third major earthquake to hit Western Hispaniola following the 1751 and
1770 Port-au-Prince earthquakes, and the last until the devastating earthquake
of 2010. Political struggles (1843-1911). Instability and chaos (1843-1849). In
1843, a revolt, led by Charles Rivi√®re-H√©rard, overthrew Boyer and
established a brief parliamentary rule under the Constitution of 1843. Revolts
soon broke out and the country descended into near anarchy, with a series of
transient presidents until March 1847, when General Faustin Soulouque, a former
slave who had fought in the rebellion of 1791, became President. Second Haitian
Empire (1849-1859). In 1849, taking advantage of his popularity, President
Faustin Soulouque proclaimed himself Emperor Faustin I. His iron rule succeeded
in uniting Haiti for a time, but it came to an abrupt end in 1859 when he was
deposed by General Fabre Geffrard, styled the Duke of Tabara. Building a new
Republic (1859-1911). Geffrard's military government held office until 1867,
and he encouraged a successful policy of national reconciliation. In 1860, he
reached an agreement with the Vatican, reintroducing official Roman Catholic
institutions, including schools, to the nation. In 1867 an attempt was made to
establish a constitutional government, but successive presidents Sylvain
Salnave and Nissage Saget were overthrown in 1869 and 1874 respectively. A more
workable constitution was introduced under Michel Domingue in 1874, leading to
a long period of democratic peace and development for Haiti. The debt to France
was finally repaid in 1879, and Michel Domingue's government peacefully
transferred power to Lysius Salomon, one of Haiti's abler leaders. Monetary
reform and a cultural renaissance ensued with a flowering of Haitian art. The
last two decades of the 19th century were also marked by the development of a
Haitian intellectual culture. Major works of history were published in 1847 and
1865. Haitian intellectuals, led by Louis-Joseph Janvier and Ant√©nor Firmin,
engaged in a war of letters against a tide of racism and Social Darwinism that
emerged during this period. The Constitution of 1867 saw peaceful and
progressive transitions in government that did much to improve the economy and
stability of the Haitian nation and the condition of its people. Constitutional
government restored the faith of the Haitian people in legal institutions. The
development of industrial sugar and rum industries near Port-au-Prince made
Haiti, for a while, a model for economic growth in Latin American countries.
This period of relative stability and prosperity ended in 1911, when revolution
broke out and the country slid once again into disorder and debt. Failing State
(1911-1915). From 1911 to 1915, there were six different Presidents, each of
whom was killed or forced into exile. The revolutionary armies were formed by
"cacos", peasant brigands from the mountains of the north, along the porous
Dominican border, who were enlisted by rival political factions with promises
of money to be paid after a successful revolution and an opportunity to
plunder. The United States was particularly apprehensive about the role of the
German community in Haiti (approximately 200 in 1910), who wielded a
disproportionate amount of economic power. Germans controlled about 80% of the
country's international commerce; they also owned and operated utilities in Cap
Ha√Øtien and Port-au-Prince, the main wharf and a tramway in the capital, and a
railroad serving the Plaine de Cul-du-Sac. The German community proved more
willing to integrate into Haitian society than any other group of white
foreigners, including the French. A number married into the nation's most
prominent mulatto families, bypassing the constitutional prohibition against
foreign land-ownership. They also served as the principal financiers of the
nation's innumerable revolutions, floating innumerable loans-at high interest
rates-to competing political factions. In an effort to limit German influence,
in 1910-11, the US State Department backed a consortium of American investors,
assembled by the National City Bank of New York, in acquiring control of the
"Banque Nationale d'Ha√Øti", the nation's only commercial bank and the
government treasury. In February 1915, Vilbrun Guillaume Sam established a
dictatorship, but in July, facing a new revolt, he massacred 167 political
prisoners, all of whom were from elite families, and was lynched by a mob in
Port-au-Prince. United States Occupation (1915‚Äì1934). In 1915 the United
States, responding to complaints to President Woodrow Wilson from American
banks to which Haiti was deeply in debt, occupied the country. The occupation
of Haiti lasted until 1934. The US occupation was self-interested, sometimes
brutal, and caused problems that lasted past its lifetime. Reforms, though,
were carried out. Under the supervision of the United States Marines, the
Haitian National Assembly elected Philippe Sudr√© Dartiguenave President. He
signed a treaty that made Haiti a "de jure" US protectorate, with American
officials assuming control over the Financial Adviser, Customs Receivership,
the Constabulary, the Public Works Service, and the Public Health Service for a
period of ten years. The principal instrument of American authority was the
newly-created "Gendarmerie d'Ha√Øti", commanded by American officers. In 1917,
at the demand of US officials, the National Assembly was dissolved, and
officials were designated to write a new constitution, which was largely
dictated by officials in the US State Department and US Navy Department.
Franklin D Roosevelt, Under-Secretary for the Navy in the Wilson
administration, claimed to have personally written the new constitution. This
document abolished the prohibition on foreign ownership of land - the most
essential component of Haitian law. When the newly elected National Assembly
refused to pass this document and drafted one of their own preserving this
prohibition, it was forcibly dissolved by "Gendarmerie" commandant Smedley
Butler. This constitution was approved by a plebiscite in 1919, in which less
than 5% of the population voted. The US State Department authorized this
plebiscite presuming that "The people casting ballots would be 97% illiterate,
ignorant in most cases of what they were voting for." The Marines and
"Gendarmerie" initiated an extensive road-building program to enhance their
military effectiveness and open the country to US investment. Lacking any
source of adequate funds, they revived an 1864 Haitian law, discovered by
Butler, requiring peasants to perform labor on local roads in lieu of paying a
road tax. This system, known as the corv√©e, originated in the unpaid labor
that French peasants provided to their feudal lords. In 1915, Haiti had of road
usable by automobile outside the towns. By 1918, more than of road had been
built or repaired through the corv√©e system, including a road linking Port-au-
Prince to Cap-Ha√Øtien. However, Haitian peasants forced to work in the corv√©e
labor-gangs, frequently dragged from their homes and harassed by armed guards,
received few immediate benefits and saw this system of forced labor as a return
to slavery at the hands of white men. In 1919, a new "caco" uprising began, led
by Charlemagne P√©ralte, vowing to 'drive the invaders into the sea and free
Haiti.' The Cacos attacked Port-au-Prince in October, but were driven back with
heavy casualties. Afterwards, a Creole-speaking American "Gendarmerie" officer
infiltrated P√©ralte's camp, killing him and photographing his corpse in an
attempt to demoralize the rebels. Leadership of the rebellion passed to Beno√Æt
Batraville, a Caco chieftain from Artibonite. His death in 1920 marked the end
of hostilities. During Senate hearings in 1921, the commandant of the Marine
Corps reported that, in the twenty months of active resistance, 2‚ÄØ250
Haitians had been killed. However, in a report to the Secretary of the Navy he
reported the death toll as being 3‚ÄØ250. Haitian historians have estimated the
true number was much higher; one suggested, "the total number of battle victims
and casualties of repression and consequences of the war might have reached, by
the end of the pacification period, four or five times that - somewhere in the
neighborhood of 15,000 persons." In 1922, Dartiguenave was replaced by Louis
Borno, who ruled without a legislature until 1930. That same year, General John
H. Russell, Jr. was appointed High Commissioner. The Borno-Russel dictatorship
oversaw the expansion of the economy, building over of road, establishing an
automatic telephone exchange, modernizing the nation's port facilities, and
establishing a public health service. Sisal was introduced to Haiti, and sugar
and cotton became significant exports. However, efforts to develop commercial
agriculture had limited success, in part because much of Haiti's labor force
was employed as seasonal workers in the more-established sugar industries of
Cuba and the Dominican Republic. An estimated 30,000-40,000 Haitian laborers,
known as "braceros", went annually to the Oriente Province of Cuba between 1913
and 1931. Most Haitians continued to resent the loss of sovereignty. At the
forefront of opposition among the educated elite was "L'Union Patriotique,",
which established ties with opponents of the occupation in the US itself, in
particular the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP). The Great Depression decimated the prices of Haiti's exports, and
destroyed the tenuous gains of the previous decade. In December 1929, Marines
in Les Cayes killed ten Haitian peasants during a march to protest local
economic conditions. This led Herbert Hoover to appoint two commissions,
including one headed by a former US governor of the Philippines William Cameron
Forbes, which criticized the exclusion of Haitians from positions of authority
in the government and constabulary, now known as the "Garde d'Ha√Øti". In 1930,
St√©nio Vincent, a long-time critic of the occupation, was elected President,
and the US began to withdraw its forces. The withdrawal was completed under US
President Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR), in 1934, under his "Good Neighbor
policy". The US retained control of Haiti's external finances until 1947. All
three rulers during the occupation came from the country's small mulatto
minority. At the same time, many in the growing black professional classes
departed from the traditional veneration of Haiti's French cultural heritage
and emphasized the nation's African roots, most notably ethnologist Jean Price-
Mars and the journal "Les Griots", edited by Dr. Fran√ßois Duvalier. The
transition government left a better infrastructure, public health, education,
and agricultural development as well as a democratic system. The country had
fully democratic elections in 1930, won by St√©nio Vincent. The Garde was a new
kind of military institution in Haiti. It was a force manned overwhelmingly by
blacks, with a United States- trained black commander, Colonel D√©mosth√®nes
P√©trus Calixte. Most of the Garde's officers, however, were mulattoes. The
Garde was a national organization; it departed from the regionalism that had
characterized most of Haiti's previous armies. In theory, its charge was
apolitical‚Äîto maintain internal order, while supporting a popularly elected
government. The Garde initially adhered to this role. Elections and coups
(1934‚Äì1957). Vincent's Presidency (1934-1941). President Vincent took
advantage of the comparative national stability, which was being maintained by
a professionalized military, to gain absolute power. A plebiscite permitted the
transfer of all authority in economic matters from the legislature to the
executive, but Vincent was not content with this expansion of his power. In
1935 he forced through the legislature a new constitution, which was also
approved by plebiscite. The constitution praised Vincent, and it granted the
executive sweeping powers to dissolve the legislature at will, to reorganize
the judiciary, to appoint ten of twenty-one senators (and to recommend the
remaining eleven to the lower house), and to rule by decree when the
legislature was not in session. Although Vincent implemented some improvements
in infrastructure and services, he brutally repressed his opposition, censored
the press, and governed largely to benefit himself and a clique of merchants
and corrupt military officers. Under Calixte the majority of Garde personnel
had adhered to the doctrine of political nonintervention that their Marine
Corps trainers had stressed. Over time, however, Vincent and Dominican dictator
Rafael Le√≥nidas Trujillo Molina sought to buy adherents among the ranks.
Trujillo, determined to expand his influence over all of Hispaniola, in October
1937 ordered the indiscriminate butchery by the Dominican army of an estimated
15,000 to 20,000 Haitians on the Dominican side of the Massacre River. Some
observers claim that Trujillo supported an abortive coup attempt by young Garde
officers in December 1937. Vincent dismissed Calixte as commander and sent him
abroad, where he eventually accepted a commission in the Dominican military as
a reward for his efforts while on Trujillo's payroll. The attempted coup led
Vincent to purge the officer corps of all members suspected of disloyalty,
marking the end of the apolitical military. Lescot's Presidency (1941-1946). In
1941 Vincent showed every intention of standing for a third term as president,
but after almost a decade of disengagement, the United States made it known
that it would oppose such an extension. Vincent accommodated the Roosevelt
administration and handed power over to Elie Lescot. Lescot was a mulatto who
had served in numerous government posts. He was competent and forceful, and
many considered him a sterling candidate for the presidency, despite his
elitist background. Like the majority of previous Haitian presidents, however,
he failed to live up to his potential. His tenure paralleled that of Vincent in
many ways. Lescot declared himself commander in chief of the military, and
power resided in a clique that ruled with the tacit support of the Garde. He
repressed his opponents,v censored the press, and compelled the legislature to
grant him extensive powers. He handled all budget matters without legislative
sanction and filled legislative vacancies without calling elections. Lescot
commonly said that Haiti's declared state-of-war against the Axis powers during
World War II justified his repressive actions. Haiti, however, played no role
in the war except for supplying the United States with raw materials and
serving as a base for a United States Coast Guard detachment. Aside from his
authoritarian tendencies, Lescot had another flaw: his relationship with
Trujillo. While serving as Haitian ambassador to the Dominican Republic, Lescot
fell under the sway of Trujillo's influence and wealth. In fact, it was
Trujillo's money that reportedly bought most of the legislative votes that
brought Lescot to power. Their clandestine association persisted until 1943,
when the two leaders parted ways for unknown reasons. Trujillo later made
public all his correspondence with the Haitian leader. The move undermined
Lescot's already dubious popular support. In January 1946, events came to a
head when Lescot jailed the Marxist editors of a journal called La Ruche (The
Beehive). This action precipitated student strikes and protests by government
workers, teachers, and shopkeepers in the capital and provincial cities. In
addition, Lescot's mulatto-dominated rule had alienated the predominantly black
Garde. His position became untenable, and he resigned on January 11. Radio
announcements declared that the Garde had assumed power, which it would
administer through a three-member junta. Revolution of 1946. The Revolution of
1946 was a novel development in Haiti's history, as the Garde assumed power as
an institution, not as the instrument of a particular commander. The members of
the junta, known as the Military Executive Committee (Comit√© Ex√©cutif
Militaire), were Garde commander Colonel Franck Lavaud, Major Antoine Levelt,
and Major Paul E. Magloire, commander of the Presidential Guard. All three
understood Haiti's traditional way of exercising power, but they lacked a
thorough understanding of what would be required to make the transition to an
elected civilian government. Upon taking power, the junta pledged to hold free
elections. The junta also explored other options, but public clamor, which
included public demonstrations in support of potential candidates, eventually
forced the officers to make good on their promise. Haiti elected its National
Assembly in May 1946. The Assembly set August 16, 1946, as the date on which it
would select a president. The leading candidates for the office‚Äîall of whom
were black‚Äîwere Dumarsais Estim√©, a former school teacher, assembly member,
and cabinet minister under Vincent; F√©lix d'Orl√©ans Juste Constant, leader of
the Haitian Communist Party (Parti Communiste d'Ha√Øti‚ÄîPCH); and former Garde
commander D√©mosth√®nes P√©trus Calixte, who stood as the candidate of a
progressive coalition that included the Worker Peasant Movement (Mouvement
Ouvrier Paysan‚ÄîMOP). MOP chose to endorse Calixte, instead of a candidate
from its own ranks, because the party's leader, Daniel Fignol√©, was only
twenty-six years old‚Äîtoo young to stand for the nation's highest office.
Estim√©, politically the most moderate of the three, drew support from the
black population in the north, as well as from the emerging black middle class.
The leaders of the military, who would not countenance the election of Juste
Constant and who reacted warily to the populist Fignol√©, also considered
Estim√© the safest candidate. After two rounds of polling, legislators gave
Estim√© the presidency. Estim√©'s Presidency (1946-1950). Estim√©'s election
represented a break with Haiti's political tradition. Although he was reputed
to have received support from commanders of the Garde, Estim√© was a civilian.
Of humble origins, he was passionately anti-elitist and therefore generally
antimulatto. He demonstrated, at least initially, a genuine concern for the
welfare of the people. Operating under a new constitution that went into effect
in November 1946, Estim√© proposed, but never secured passage of, Haiti's first
social- security legislation. He did, however, expand the school system,
encourage the establishment of rural cooperatives, raise the salaries of civil
servants, and increase the representation of middle-class and lower-class
blacks in the public sector. He also attempted to gain the favor of the
Garde‚Äîrenamed the Haitian Army (Arm√©e d'Ha√Øti) in March 1947‚Äîby promoting
Lavaud to brigadier general and by seeking United States military assistance.
Estim√© eventually fell victim to two of the time-honored pitfalls of Haitian
rule: elite intrigue and personal ambition. The elite had a number of
grievances against Estim√©. Not only had he largely excluded them from the
often lucrative levers of government, but he also enacted the country's first
income tax, fostered the growth of labor unions, and suggested that voodoo be
considered as a religion equivalent to Roman Catholicism‚Äîa notion that the
Europeanized elite abhorred. Lacking direct influence in Haitian affairs, the
elite resorted to clandestine lobbying among the officer corps. Their efforts,
in combination with deteriorating domestic conditions, led to a coup in May
1950. To be sure, Estim√© had hastened his own demise in several ways. His
nationalization of the Standard Fruit banana concession sharply reduced the
firm's revenues. He alienated workers by requiring them to invest between 10
percent and 15 percent of their salaries in national-defense bonds. The
president sealed his fate by attempting to manipulate the constitution in order
to extend his term in office. Seizing on this action and the popular unrest it
engendered, the army forced the president to resign on May 10, 1950. The same
junta that had assumed power after the fall of Lescot reinstalled itself. An
army escort conducted Estim√© from the National Palace and into exile in
Jamaica. The events of May 1946 made an impression upon the deposed minister of
labor, Fran√ßois Duvalier. The lesson that Duvalier drew from Estim√©'s ouster
was that the military could not be trusted. It was a lesson that he would act
upon when he gained power. Magloire`s Presidency (1950-1956). The power balance
within the junta shifted between 1946 and 1950. Lavaud was the preeminent
member at the time of the first coup, but Magloire, now a colonel, dominated
after Estim√©'s overthrow. When Haiti announced that its first direct elections
(all men twenty-one or over were allowed to vote) would be held on October 8,
1950, Magloire resigned from the junta and declared himself a candidate for
president. In contrast to the chaotic political climate of 1946, the campaign
of 1950 proceeded under the implicit understanding that only a strong candidate
backed by both the army and the elite would be able to take power. Facing only
token opposition, Magloire won the election and assumed office on December 6.
Magloire restored the elite to prominence. The business community and the
government benefited from favorable economic conditions until Hurricane Hazel
hit the island in 1954. Haiti made some improvements on its infrastructure, but
most of these were financed largely by foreign loans. By Haitian standards,
Magloire's rule was firm, but not harsh: he jailed political opponents,
including Fignol√©, and shut down their presses when their protests grew too
strident, but he allowed labor unions to function, although they were not
permitted to strike. It was in the arena of corruption, however, that Magloire
overstepped traditional bounds. The president controlled the sisal, cement, and
soap monopolies. He and other officials built imposing mansions. The injection
of international hurricane relief funds into an already corrupt system boosted
graft to levels that disillusioned all Haitians. To make matters worse,
Magloire followed in the footsteps of many previous presidents by disputing the
termination date of his stay in office. Politicians, labor leaders, and their
followers flocked to the streets in May 1956 to protest Magloire's failure to
step down. Although Magloire declared martial law, a general strike essentially
shut down Port-au-Prince. Again like many before him, Magloire fled to Jamaica,
leaving the army with the task of restoring order. The Rise of Duvalier (1956-
1957). The period between the fall of Magloire and the election of Duvalier in
September 1957 was a chaotic one, even by Haitian standards. Three provisional
presidents held office during this interval; one resigned and the army deposed
the other two, Franck Sylvain and Fignol√©. Duvalier is said to have engaged
actively in the behind-the-scenes intrigue that helped him to emerge as the
presidential candidate that the military favored. The military went on to guide
the campaign and the elections in a way that gave Duvalier every possible
advantage. Most political actors perceived Duvalier‚Äîa medical doctor who had
served as a rural administrator of a United States-funded anti-yaws campaign
before entering the cabinet under Estim√©‚Äîas an honest and fairly unassuming
leader without a strong ideological motivation or program. When elections were
finally organized, this time under terms of universal suffrage (both men and
women now had the vote), Duvalier, a black, painted himself as the legitimate
heir to Estim√©. This approach was enhanced by the fact that Duvalier's only
viable opponent, Louis D√©joie, was a mulatto and the scion of a prominent
family. Duvalier scored a decisive victory at the polls. His followers took
two-thirds of the legislature's lower house and all of the seats in the Senate.
The Duvalier era (1957‚Äì1986). 'Papa Doc' (1957-1971). A former Minister of
Health who had earned a reputation as a humanitarian while serving as an
administrator in a U.S.-funded anti-yaws campaign, Duvalier (known as ""Papa
Doc"") soon established another dictatorship. His regime is regarded as one of
the most repressive and corrupt of modern times, combining violence against
political opponents with exploitation of Vodou to instill fear in the majority
of the population. Duvalier's paramilitary police, officially the Volunteers
for National Security (Volontaires de la S√©curit√© Nationale ‚Äì VSN) but more
commonly known as the Tonton Macoutes, named for a Vodou monster, carried out
political murders, beatings, and intimidation. An estimated 30,000 Haitians
were killed by his government. Incorporating many "houngans" into the ranks of
the Macoutes, his public recognition of Vodou and its practitioners and his
private adherence to Vodou ritual, combined with his reputed private knowledge
of magic and sorcery, enhanced his popular persona among the common people and
served as a peculiar form of legitimization. Duvalier's policies, designed to
end the dominance of the mulatto elite over the nation's economic and political
life, led to massive emigration of educated people, deepening Haiti's economic
and social problems. However, Duvalier appealed to the black middle class of
which he was a member by introducing public works into middle-class
neighborhoods that previously had been unable to have paved roads, running
water, or modern sewage systems. In 1964, Duvalier proclaimed himself
"President for Life". The Kennedy administration suspended aid in 1961, after
allegations that Duvalier had pocketed aid money and intended to use a Marine
Corps mission to strengthen the Macoutes. Duvalier also clashed with Dominican
President Juan Bosch in 1963, after Bosch provided aid and asylum to Haitian
exiles working to overthrow his regime. He ordered the Presidential Guard to
occupy the Dominican chancery in P√©tionville to apprehend an officer involved
in a plot to kidnap his children, leading Bosch to publicly threaten to invade
Haiti. However, the Dominican army, which distrusted Bosch's leftist leanings,
expressed little support for an invasion, and the dispute was settled by OAS
emissaries. In 1971, Papa Doc entered into 99-year contract with Don Pierson
representing Dupont Caribbean Inc. of Texas for a free port project on the old
buccaneer stronghold of Tortuga island located some off the north coast of the
main Haitian island of Hispaniola. 'Baby Doc' (1971‚Äì1986). On Duvalier's
death in April 1971, power passed to his 19-year-old son Jean-Claude Duvalier
(known as ""Baby Doc""). Under Jean-Claude Duvalier, Haiti's economic and
political condition continued to decline, although some of the more fearsome
elements of his father's regime were abolished. Foreign officials and observers
also seemed more tolerant toward Baby Doc, in areas such as human-rights
monitoring, and foreign countries were more generous to him with economic
assistance. The United States restored its aid program in 1971. In 1974, Baby
Doc expropriated the Freeport Tortuga project and this caused the venture to
collapse. Content to leave administrative matters in the hands of his mother,
Simone Ovid Duvalier, while living as a playboy, Jean-Claude enriched himself
through a series of fraudulent schemes. Much of the Duvaliers' wealth,
amounting to hundreds of millions of dollars over the years, came from the
R√©gie du Tabac (Tobacco Administration), a tobacco monopoly established by
Estim√©, which expanded to include the proceeds from all government enterprises
and served as a slush fund for which no balance sheets were ever kept. His
marriage, in 1980, to a beautiful mulatto divorc√©e, Mich√®le Bennett, in a
$3¬ million ceremony, provoked widespread opposition, as it was seen as a
betrayal of his father's antipathy towards the mulatto elite. At the request of
Mich√®le, Papa Doc's widow Simone was expelled from Haiti. Baby Doc's
kleptocracy left the regime vulnerable to unanticipated crises, exacerbated by
endemic poverty, most notably the epidemic of African swine fever
virus‚Äîwhich, at the insistence of USAID officials, led to the slaughter of
the creole pigs, the principal source of income for most peasants; and the
widely-publicized outbreak of AIDS in the early 1980s. Widespread discontent in
Haiti began in 1983, when Pope John Paul II condemned the regime during a
visit, finally provoking a rebellion, and in February 1986, after months of
disorder, the army forced Duvalier to resign and go into exile. The Struggle
for Democracy (1986-present day). Transitional government (1986‚Äì1990). From
1986 to early 1988 Haiti was ruled by a provisional military government under
General Namphy. In 1987, a new constitution was ratified, providing for an
elected bicameral parliament, an elected president, and a prime minister,
cabinet, ministers, and supreme court appointed by the president with
parliament's consent. The Constitution also provided for political
decentralization through the election of mayors and administrative bodies
responsible for local government. The November 1987 elections was cancelled
after troops massacred 30‚Äì300 voters on election day. Jimmy Carter later
wrote that "Citizens who lined up to vote were mowed down by fusillades of
terrorists‚Äô bullets. Military leaders, who had either orchestrated or
condoned the murders, moved in to cancel the election and retain control of the
Government." The election was followed several months later by the Haitian
presidential election, 1988, which was boycotted by almost all the previous
candidates, and saw turnout of just 4%. The 1988 elections led to Professor
Leslie Manigat becoming President, but three months later he too was ousted by
the military. Further instability ensued, with several massacres, including the
St Jean Bosco massacre in which the church of Jean-Bertrand Aristide was
attacked and burned down. During this period, the Haitian National Intelligence
Service (SIN), which had been set up and financed in the 80s by the Central
Intelligence Agency as part of the war on drugs, participated in drug
trafficking and political violence. The rise of Aristide (1990-1991). In
December 1990, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a liberation theology Roman Catholic
(Salesian) priest, won 67% of the vote in elections that international
observers deemed largely free and fair. Aristide's radical populist policies
and the violence of his bands of supporters alarmed many of the country's
elite, and, in September 1991, he was overthrown in the 1991 Haitian coup
d'√©tat, which brought General Raoul C√©dras to power. The coup saw hundreds
killed, and Aristide was forced into exile, his life saved by international
diplomatic intervention. Military rule (1991-1994). An estimated
3‚ÄØ000‚Äì5‚ÄØ000 Haitians were killed during the period of military rule. The
coup created a large-scale exodus of refugees to the United States. The United
States Coast Guard interdicted (in many cases, rescued) a total of 41‚ÄØ342
Haitians during 1991 and 1992. Most were denied entry to the United States and
repatriated back to Haiti. According to Mark Weisbrot, Aristide has accused the
United States of backing the 1991 coup. In response to the coup, the United
Nations Security Council passed Resolution 841 imposing international sanctions
and an arms embargo on Haiti. The military regime governed Haiti until 1994,
and according to some sources included drug trafficking led by Chief of
National Police Michel Fran√ßois. Various initiatives to end the political
crisis through the peaceful restoration of the constitutionally elected
government failed. In July 1994, as repression mounted in Haiti and a civilian
human rights monitoring mission was expelled from the country, the United
Nations Security Council adopted United Nations Security Council Resolution
940, which authorized member states to use all necessary means to facilitate
the departure of Haiti's military leadership and to restore Haiti's
constitutionally elected government to power. The return of Aristide (1994-
1996). In mid-September 1994, with U.S. troops prepared to enter Haiti by force
for Operation Uphold Democracy, President Bill Clinton dispatched a negotiating
team led by former President Jimmy Carter to persuade the authorities to step
aside and allow for the return of constitutional rule. With intervening troops
already airborne, C√©dras and other top leaders agreed to step down. In
October, Aristide was able to return. The Haitian general election, 1995 in
June 1995 saw Aristide's coalition, the Lavalas (Waterfall) Political
Organization, gain a sweeping victory, and Ren√© Pr√©val, a prominent Aristide
political ally, elected President with 88% of the vote. When Aristide's term
ended in February 1996, this was Haiti's first ever transition between two
democratically elected presidents. Preval's first Presidency (1996-2001). In
late 1996, Aristide broke with Pr√©val and formed a new political party, the
Lavalas Family (Fanmi Lavalas, FL), which won elections in April 1997 for one-
third of the Senate and local assemblies, but these results were not accepted
by the government. The split between Aristide and Pr√©val produced a dangerous
political deadlock, and the government was unable to organize the local and
parliamentary elections due in late 1998. In January 1999, Pr√©val dismissed
legislators whose terms had expired ‚Äì the entire Chamber of Deputies and all
but nine members of the Senate, and Pr√©val then ruled by decree. Aristide's
second presidency (2001-2004). In May 2000 the Haitian legislative election,
2000 for the Chamber of Deputies and two-thirds of the Senate took place. The
election drew a voter turnout of more than 60%, and the FL won a virtual sweep.
However, the elections were marred by controversy in the Senate race over the
calculation of whether Senate candidates had achieved the majority required to
avoid a run-off election (in Haiti, seats where no candidate wins an absolute
majority of votes cast has to enter a second-round run-off election). The
validity of the Electoral Council's post-ballot calculations of whether a
majority had been attained was disputed. The Organization of American States
complained about the calculation and declined to observe the July run-off
elections. The opposition parties, regrouped in the Democratic Convergence
(Convergence D√©mocratique, CD), demanded that the elections be annulled, and
that Pr√©val stand down and be replaced by a provisional government. In the
meantime, the opposition announced it would boycott the November presidential
and senatorial elections. Haiti's main aid donors threatened to cut off aid. At
the November 2000 elections, boycotted by the opposition, Aristide was again
elected president, with more than 90% of the vote, on a turnout of around 50%
according to international observers. The opposition refused to accept the
result or to recognize Aristide as president. Allegations emerged of drug
trafficking reaching into the upper echelons of government, as it had done
under the military regimes of the 1980s and early 1990s (illegal drug trade in
Haiti). Canadian police arrested Oriel Jean, Aristide's security chief and one
of his most trusted friends, for money laundering. Beaudoin Ketant, a notorious
international drug trafficker, Aristide's close partner, and his daughter's
godfather, claimed that Aristide "turned the country into a narco-country; it's
a one-man show; you either pay (Aristide) or you die". Aristide spent years
negotiating with the Convergence D√©mocratique on new elections, but the
Convergence's inability to develop a sufficient electoral base made elections
unattractive, and it rejected every deal offered, preferring to call for a US
invasion to topple Aristide. The 2004 coup d'√©tat. Anti-Aristide protests in
January 2004 led to violent clashes in Port-au-Prince, causing several deaths.
In February, a revolt broke out in the city of Gona√Øves, which was soon under
rebel control. The rebellion then began to spread, and Cap-Ha√Øtien, Haiti's
second-largest city, was captured. A mediation team of diplomats presented a
plan to reduce Aristide's power while allowing him to remain in office until
the end of his constitutional term. Although Aristide accepted the plan, it was
rejected by the opposition, which mostly consisted of Haitian businessmen and
former members of the army (who sought to reinstate the military following
Aristide's disbandment of it). On February 29, 2004, with rebel contingents
marching towards Port-au-Prince, Aristide departed from Haiti. Aristide insists
that he was essentially kidnapped by the U.S., while the U.S. State Department
maintains that he resigned from office. Aristide and his wife left Haiti on an
American airplane, escorted by American diplomats and military personnel, and
were flown directly to Bangui, capital of the Central African Republic, where
he stayed for the following two weeks, before seeking asylum in a less remote
location. This event was later characterized by Aristide as a kidnapping.
Though this has never been proven, many observers in the press and academia
believe that the US has not provided convincing answers to several of the more
suspicious details surrounding the coup, such as the circumstances under which
the US obtained Aristide's purported letter of "resignation" (as presented by
the US) which, translated from Kreyol, does not actually read as a resignation.
Aristide has accused the U.S. of deposing him in concert with the Haitian
opposition. In a 2006 interview, he said the U.S. went back on their word
regarding compromises he made with them over privatization of enterprises to
ensure that part of the profits would go to the Haitian people and then "relied
on a disinformation campaign" to discredit him. Political organizations and
writers, as well as Aristide himself, have suggested that the rebellion was in
fact a foreign controlled coup d'√©tat. Caricom, which had been backing the
peace deal, accused the United States, France, and the International community
of failing in Haiti because they allegedly allowed a controversially elected
leader to be violently forced out of office. The international community stated
that the crisis was of Aristide's making and that he was not acting in the best
interests of his country. They have argued that his removal was necessary for
future stability in the island nation. Some investigators claimed to have
discovered extensive embezzlement, corruption, and money laundering by
Aristide. It was claimed Aristide had stolen tens of millions dollars from the
country, though specific bank account documents proving this have yet to be
presented. None of the allegations about Aristide's involvement in
embezzlement, corruption, or money laundering schemes could be proven. The
criminal court case brought against Aristide was quietly shelved, though
various members of his Lavalas party languished for years in prison without
charge or trial due to similar accusations The Haitian government suspended the
suit against Aristide on Jun. 30, 2006 to prevent it from being thrown out for
want of prosecution. The government was taken over by Supreme Court Chief
Justice Boniface Alexandre. Alexandre petitioned the United Nations Security
Council for the intervention of an international peacekeeping force. The
Security Council passed a resolution the same day "aking note of the
resignation of Jean-Bertrand Aristide as President of Haiti and the swearing-in
of President Boniface Alexandre as the acting President of Haiti in accordance
with the Constitution of Haiti" and authorized such a mission. As a vanguard of
the official U.N. force, a force of about 1,000 U.S. Marines arrived in Haiti
within the day, and Canadian and French troops arrived the next morning; the
United Nations indicated it would send a team to assess the situation within
days. These international troops have been criticized for cooperating with
rebel forces, refusing to disarm them, and integrating former military and
death-squad (FRAPH) members into the re-militarized Haitian National Police
force following the coup. On June 1, 2004, the peacekeeping mission was passed
to MINUSTAH and comprised a 7,000 strength force led by Brazil and backed by
Argentina, Chile, Jordan, Morocco, Nepal, Peru, Philippines, Spain, Sri Lanka,
and Uruguay. Brazilian forces led the United Nations peacekeeping troops in
Haiti composed of United States, France, Canada, and Chile deployments. These
peacekeeping troops were a part of the ongoing MINUSTAH operation. In November,
2004, the University of Miami School of Law carried out a Human Rights
Investigation in Haiti and documented serious human rights abuses. It stated
that "summary executions are a police tactic." It also suggested a "disturbing
pattern." On October 15, 2005, Brazil called for more troops to be sent due to
the worsening situation in the country. After Aristide's overthrow, the
violence in Haiti continued, despite the presence of peacekeepers. Clashes
between police and Fanmi Lavalas supporters were common, and peacekeeping
forces were accused of conducting a massacre against the residents of Cit√©
Soleil in July 2005. Several of the protests resulted in violence and deaths.
The second Pr√©val Presidency (2006‚Äì2011). In the midst of the ongoing
controversy and violence, however, the interim government planned legislative
and executive elections. After being postponed several times, these were held
in February 2006. The elections were won by Ren√© Pr√©val, who had a strong
following among the poor, with 51% of the votes. Pr√©val took office in May
2006. In the spring of 2008, Haitians demonstrated against rising food prices.
In some instances, the few main roads on the island were blocked with burning
tires and the airport at Port-au-Prince was closed. Protests and demonstrations
by Fanmi Lavalas continued in 2009. Earthquake 2010. On January 12, 2010, Haiti
suffered a devastating earthquake, magnitude 7.0 with a death toll estimated by
the Haitian government at over 300,000, and by non-Haitian sources from 50,000
to 220,000. Aftershocks followed, including one of magnitude 5.9. The capital
city, Port-au-Prince, was effectively leveled. A million Haitians were left
homeless, and hundreds of thousands are starving. The earthquake caused massive
devastation, with most buildings crumbled, including Haiti's presidential
palace. The enormous death toll made it necessary to bury the dead in mass
graves. Most bodies were unidentified and few pictures were taken, making it
impossible for families to identify their loved ones. The spread of disease is
a major secondary disaster. Many survivors were treated for injuries in
emergency makeshift hospitals, but many more died of gangrene, malnutrition,
and infectious diseases. The Martelly Presidency (2011-present day). On 4 April
2011, a senior Haitian official announced that Michel Martelly had won the
second round of the election against candidate Mirlande Manigat. Michel
Martelly also known by his stage name "Sweet Micky" is a former musician and
businessman.
