History of road transport The history of road transport started with the
development of tracks by humans and their beasts of burden. Early roads. The
first forms of road transport were horses, oxen or even humans carrying goods
over tracks that often followed game trails, such as the Natchez Trace. In the
Stone Age humans did not need constructed tracks in open country. The first
improved trails would have been at fords, mountain passes and through swamps.
The first improvements would have consisted largely of clearing trees and big
stones from the path. As commerce increased, the tracks were often flattened or
widened to accommodate human and animal traffic. Some of these dirt tracks were
developed into fairly extensive networks, allowing communications, trade and
governance over wide areas. The Incan Empire in South America and the Iroquois
Confederation in North America, neither of which had the wheel, are examples of
effective use of such paths. The first goods transport was on human backs and
heads, but the use of pack animals, including donkeys and horses, developed
during the Stone Age. The first vehicle is believed to have been the travois, a
frame used to drag loads, which probably developed in Eurasia after the first
use of bullocks (castrated cattle) for pulling ploughs. In about 5000 BC, sleds
developed, which are more difficult to build than travois, but are easier to
propel over smooth surfaces. Pack animals, ridden horses and bullocks dragging
travois or sleds require wider paths and higher clearances than people on foot
and improved tracks were required. As a result by about 5000 BC roads,
including the Ridgeway, developed along ridges in England to avoid crossing
rivers and bogging. In central Germany, such ridgeways remained the predominant
form of long-distance road till the mid 18th century. Harappan roads. Street
paving has been found from the first human settlements around 4000 BC in cities
of the Indus Valley Civilization on the Indian subcontinent, such as Harrapa
and Mohenjo-daro. Wheeled transport. Wheels appear to have been developed in
ancient Sumer in Mesopotamia around 5000 BC, perhaps originally for the making
of pottery. Their original transport use may have been as attachments to
travois or sleds to reduce resistance. It has been argued that logs were used
as rollers under sleds prior to the development of wheels, but there is no
archeological evidence for this. Most early wheels appear to have been attached
to fixed axles, which would have required regular lubrication by animal fats or
vegetable oils or separation by leather to be effective. The first simple two-
wheel carts, apparently developed from travois, appear to have been used in
Mesopotamia and northern Iran in about 3000 BC and two-wheel chariots appeared
in about 2800 BC. They were hauled by onagers, related to donkeys. Heavy four-
wheeled wagons developed about 2500 BC, which were only suitable for oxen-
haulage, and therefore were only used where crops were cultivated, particularly
Mesopotamia. Two-wheeled chariots with spoked wheels appear to have been
developed around 2000 BC by the Andronovo culture in southern Siberia and
Central Asia. At much the same time the first primitive harness enabling horse-
haulage was invented. Wheeled-transport created the need for better roads.
Generally natural materials cannot be both soft enough to form well-graded
surfaces and strong enough to bear wheeled vehicles, especially when wet, and
stay intact. In urban areas it began to be worthwhile to build stone-paved
streets and, in fact, the first paved streets appear to have been built in Ur
in 4000 BC. Corduroy roads were built in Glastonbury, England in 3300 BC and
brick-paved roads were built in the Indus Valley Civilization on the Indian
subcontinent from around the same time. Improvements in metallurgy meant that
by 2000 BC stone-cutting tools were generally available in the Middle East and
Greece allowing local streets to be paved. Notably, in about 2000 BC, the
Minoans built a 50Â km paved road from Knossos in north Crete through the
mountains to Gortyn and Lebena, a port on the south coast of the island, which
had side drains, a 200Â mm thick pavement of sandstone blocks bound with clay-
gypsum mortar, covered by a layer of basaltic flagstones and had separate
shoulders. This road could be considered superior to any Roman road. Royal
Road. In 500 BC, Darius I the Great started an extensive road system for Persia
(Iran), including the famous Royal Road which was one of the finest highways of
its time. The road was used even after the Roman times. Because of the road's
superior quality, mail couriers could travel in seven days. Roman roads. With
the advent of the Roman Empire, there was a need for armies to be able to
travel quickly from one area to another, and the roads that existed were often
muddy, which greatly delayed the movement of large masses of troops. To solve
this problem, the Romans built great roads. These 'Roman roads' used deep
roadbeds of crushed stone as an underlying layer to ensure that they kept dry,
as the water would flow out from the crushed stone, instead of becoming mud in
clay soils. The legions made good time on these roads and some are still used
millennia later. On the more heavily traveled routes, there were additional
layers that included six sided capstones, or pavers, that reduced the dust and
reduced the drag from wheels. The pavers allowed the Roman chariots to travel
very quickly, ensuring good communication with the Roman provinces. Farm roads
were often paved first on the way into town, to keep produce clean. Early forms
of springs and shocks to reduce the bumps were incorporated in horse drawn
transport, as the original pavers were sometimes not perfectly aligned. Roman
roads deteriorated in medieval Europe because of lack of resources and skills
to maintain them, but many continued to be used. The alignments are still
partially used today, for instance, parts of England's A1. Early tar-paved
roads. In the medieval Islamic world, many roads were built throughout the Arab
Empire. The most sophisticated roads were those of the Baghdad, Iraq, which
were paved with tar in the 8th century. Tar was derived from petroleum,
accessed from oil fields in the region, through the chemical process of
destructive distillation. New construction methods in the 18th and 19th
centuries. As states developed and became richer, especially with the
Renaissance, new roads and bridges began to be built, often based on Roman
designs. Although there were attempts to rediscover Roman methods, there was
little useful innovation in road building before the 18th century. Between 1725
and 1737 General George Wade constructed of road and 40 bridges to improve
Britain's control of the Scottish Highlands, using Roman road designs with
large stones at the bottom and gravel on top, with a typical overall depth of
two metres. They were so poorly aligned and steep, according to Thomas Telford,
"as to be unfit for the purposes of civil life" and also rough and poorly
drained. Toll roads. England and Wales. As traffic increased in England, roads
deteriorated. Toll roads were built by "Turnpike Trusts", especially between
1730-1770. It has been claimed that as a result the time taken between London,
to York, Manchester or Exeter was cut by two-thirds between 1720 and 1780.
Blind Jack Metcalf (1717â€“1810) built about of turnpike road between 1753 and
1810, mainly in Lancashire, Derbyshire, Cheshire and Yorkshire. He understood
the importance of good drainage and surfaced his roads with "a compact layer of
small, broken stones with sharp edges", rather than the naturally rounded
stones traditionally used in European road building. British turnpike builders
began to realise the importance of selecting clean stones for surfacing, and
excluding vegetable material and clay to make better lasting roads. United
States of America. Turnpikes were also later built in the United States. They
were usually built by private companies under a government franchise. They
typically paralleled or replaced routes already with some volume of commerce,
hoping the improved road would divert enough traffic to make the enterprise
profitable. Plank roads were particularly attractive as they greatly reduced
rolling resistance and mitigated the problem of getting mired in mud. Another
improvement, better grading to lessen the steepness of the worst stretches,
allowed draft animals to haul heavier loads. Water transport on rivers and
canals carried many farm goods from the frontier U.S. (between the Appalachian
mountains and Mississippi River) in the early 19th century, but the shorter
route over the mountains had advantages. Successful farms created a demand for
imported and manufactured goods from the Atlantic coast. The commercial
interests of the East were quick to see the possibilities of this new market.
An eager rivalry sprung up between the merchants of New York, Philadelphia, and
Baltimore. Everywhere ways and means of cheaper transportation were discussed.
In this subject the western farmer was vitally interested, for freight charges
added nearly one third to the cost of merchandise transported over the
mountains. The cotton planter of the Seaboard States, also, feeling the
competition of the Southwest, where riverways were abundant and easily
navigable, saw the need of better roads to tidewater, in order to lessen the
cost of marketing his produce. The popular demand for better roads was not
recent. All the states had encouraged, directly or indirectly, the building of
turnpikes and bridges. Between 1793 and 1812, Pennsylvania had chartered fifty-
five turnpike companies, and other states had been scarcely less ready to grant
articles of incorporation to stock companies. Private enterprise had, indeed,
done much to improve communication along the seaboard. As the system became
interconnected, turnpikes and bridges had shortened the journey from Boston to
Washington by stagecoach to four and a quarter days by the year 1815. While
having power over coastal trade and defense issues, the federal power over
domestic "internal improvements", away from the coasts and among the states,
did not gain political consensus. Federal assistance for "internal
improvements" evolved slowly and haphazardlyâ€”the product of contentious
congressional factions and an executive branch generally concerned with
avoiding unconstitutional federal intrusions into state affairs. In Federalist
President John Adams' first message to Congress, he advocated not only the
construction of roads and canals on a national basis but also the establishment
of observatories and a national university. Later, in 1806 Democratic-
Republican President Jefferson also had recommended many internal improvements
for Congress to consider, including the creation of necessary amendments to the
Constitution to allow themselves such powers. Adams did not share Jefferson's
view of the limitations of the Constitution. In much alarm Jefferson suggested
to Madison the desirability of having Virginia adopt a new set of resolutions,
bottomed on those of 1798, and directed against the acts for internal
improvements. The magnitude of the transportation problem was such, however,
that neither individual states nor private corporations seemed able to meet the
demands of an expanding internal trade. As early as 1807, Albert Gallatin had
advocated the construction of a great system of internal waterways to connect
East and West, at an estimated cost of $20,000,000. But the only contribution
of the national government to internal improvements during the Jeffersonian era
was an appropriation in 1806 of two percent of the net proceeds of the sales of
public lands in Ohio for the construction of a national road, with the consent
of the states through which it should pass. By 1818 the road was open to
traffic from Cumberland, Maryland, to Wheeling, West Virginia. In 1816, with
the experiences of the war before him, no well-informed statesman could shut
his eyes to the national aspects of the problem. Even President Madison invited
the attention of Congress to the need of establishing "a comprehensive system
of roads and canals". Soon after Congress met, it took under consideration a
bill drafted by Calhoun which proposed an appropriation of $1,500,000 for
internal improvements. Because this appropriation was to be met by the moneys
paid by the National Bank to the government, the bill was commonly referred to
as the "Bonus Bill". But on the day before he left office, President Madison
vetoed the bill because it was unconstitutional. The policy of internal
improvements by federal aid was thus wrecked on the constitutional scruples of
a member of the Virginia dynasty. Nevertheless, road and canal construction
soon began, with private businesses and state and local governments funding
much of the work. Having less regard for consistency, the House of
Representatives recorded its conviction, by close votes, that Congress could
appropriate money to construct roads and canals, but had not the power to
construct them. As yet the only direct aid of the national government to
internal improvements consisted of various appropriations, amounting to about
$1,500,000 for the Cumberland Road. As the country recovered from financial
depression following the Panic of 1819, the question of internal improvements
again forged to the front. In 1822, a bill to authorize the collection of tolls
on the Cumberland Road had been vetoed by the President. In an elaborate essay
Monroe set forth his views on the constitutional aspects of a policy of
internal improvements. Congress might appropriate money, he admitted, but it
might not undertake the actual construction of national works nor assume
jurisdiction over them. For the moment the drift toward a larger participation
of the national government in internal improvements was stayed. The situation
would change dramatically two years later however, with the Judicial Branch of
government weighing in on related constitutional questions and ruling on them
with some finality. In March 1824 the Supreme Court ruled on Gibbons v. Ogden,
in what would become a landmark decision; the Court held that the power to
regulate interstate commerce was granted to Congress by the Commerce Clause of
the United States Constitution. The Court went on to conclude that
Congressional power over commerce should extend to the regulation of all
aspects of it, overriding state law to the contrary. In the debate that
followed, no one pleaded more eloquently for a larger conception of the
functions of the national government than Speaker of the House Henry Clay, the
foremost proponent of the 'American System'. He called the attention of his
hearers to provisions made for coast surveys and lighthouses on the Atlantic
seaboard and deplored the neglect of the interior of the country. Of the other
presidential candidates, Senator and war-hero Andrew Jackson voted for the
General Survey Act, as did Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, who left no
doubt in the public mind that he did not reflect the narrow views of his New
England region on this issue. William H. Crawford felt the constitutional
scruples which were everywhere being voiced in the South, and followed the old
expedient of advocating a constitutional amendment to sanction national
internal improvements. Shortly thereafter, Congress passed two important laws
that would set a new course concerning federal involvement in "internal
improvements". In April Congress passed the General Survey Act, which
authorized the president to have surveys made of routes for roads and canals
"of national importance, in a commercial or military point of view, or
necessary for the transportation of public mail;" this is sometimes refereed to
as the first "Roads and Canals" Act. It authorized the survey of waterways to
designate those "capable of sloop navigation." The second act, "An Act to
Improve the Navigation of the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers," was passed in May;
it appropriated $75,000 to improve navigation on the Ohio and Mississippi
rivers by removing sandbars, snags, and other obstacles; the second act is
often called the first rivers and harbors legislation. The president assigned
responsibility for the road, canal and waterway surveys as well as the
navigation improvements to the Corps of Engineers. This legislation marked the
beginning of the USACE's continuous involvement in domestic civil works. Some
political differences did remain; in March, 1826, the Virginia general assembly
declared that all the principles of their earlier resolutions applied "will
full force against the powers assumed by Congress" in passing acts to further
internal improvements and to protect manufacturers. That the John Quincy Adams
administration would meet with opposition in Congress was a foregone
conclusion. TrÃ©saguet's work in France. In France, Pierre-Marie-JÃ©rÃ´me
TrÃ©saguet is widely credited with establishing the first scientific approach
to road building about the year 1764. He wrote a memorandum on his method in
1775, which became general practice in France. It involved a layer of large
rocks, covered by a layer of smaller gravel. The lower layer improved on Roman
practice in that it was based on the understanding that the purpose of this
layer (the sub-base or base course) is to transfer the weight of the road and
its traffic to the ground, while protecting the ground from deformation by
spreading the weight evenly. Therefore, the sub-base did not have to be a self-
supporting structure. The upper running surface provided a smooth surface for
vehicles, while protecting the large stones of the sub-base. TrÃ©saguet
understood the importance of drainage by providing deep side ditches, but he
insisted on building his roads in trenches, so that they could be accessed from
the sides, which undermined this principle. Well-maintained surfaces and drains
protect the integrity of the sub-base and TrÃ©saguet introduced a system of
continuous maintenance, where a roadman was allocated a section of road to be
kept up to a standard. Developments in Britain. Telford. Thomas Telford
(1757â€“1834) a Scottish surveyor and engineer also made substantial advances
in the engineering of new roads and the construction of bridges. Under his
supervision 1,500Â km of roads and 1,000 bridges were built in Scotland between
1802 and 1822. He elaborated on the TrÃ©saguet method by a more complex and
costly system of stonework in the subgrade, but his main improvement over
TrÃ©saguet was the raising of his roads above the natural level to improve
drainage or the drainage of the area around the road. McAdam. John Loudon
McAdam (1756â€“1836), another Scottish engineer, designed the first modern
roads. He developed an inexpensive paving material of soil and stone aggregate
(known as macadam). He had noticed in his observations that coaches with
narrow, iron-tyred wheels and moving at relatively high speed were causing
significant damage to roads, but that areas of small broken stones were most
resistant to damage, while the areas that had large surface stones degraded
fastest. His solution was to create roads with three layers of stones laid on a
crowned subgrade with side ditches for drainage. The first two layers consisted
of angular hand-broken aggregate, maximum size 3 inches (75Â mm), to a total
depth of about 8Â inches (200Â mm). The third layer was about 2Â inches
(50Â mm) thick with a maximum aggregate size of 1Â inch (25Â mm). Each layer
would be compacted with a heavy roller, causing the angular stones to lock
together with their neighbours. It is possible that his initial decision not to
use the heavy layer of base stones used by Telford in his subgrade reflected
lack of suitable stones, but McAdam quickly saw they were not necessary. In
practice, his roads proved to be twice as strong as Telford's roads. He also
insisted on raising the roads to ensure good drainage and flat crowned
surfaces, rather than ridges built into the road to encourage drainage. McAdam
was adamantly opposed to the filling of the voids between his small cut stones
with smaller material, possibly as a reaction against the use of poor
materials, including soil and vegetable matter, on roads in the past.
Nevertheless, in practice road builders began to introduce filler materials
such as smaller stones, sand and clay, and it was observed that these roads
were stronger as a result. Macadam roads were being built widely in the United
States and Australia in the 1820s and in Europe in the 1830s and 1840s.
Development of modern paved roads. Various systems had been developed over
centuries to reduce washaways, bogging and dust in cities, including
cobblestones and wooden paving. Tar-bound macadam (tarmac) was applied to
macadam roads towards the end of the 19th century in cities such as Paris. In
the early 20th century tarmac and concrete paving were extended into the
countryside. Incidentally, bicyclists were among the early campaigners on what
was called the Good Roads Movement. Bicycling was an extremely popular
recreation among the middle and upper classes in the late 19th century and was
more fun on paved roads.
