History of the Bahamas The history of the Bahamas begins with the earliest
arrival of humans in the islands in the first millennium AD. The first
inhabitants of the islands now known as The Bahamas were the Lucayans, an
Arawakan-speaking Taino people, who arrived between about 500 and 800 from the
islands of the Caribbean. Recorded history begins in 1492, when Christopher
Columbus landed on the island of Guanahani, an unknown island somewhere in the
Bahamas, on his first voyage. The earliest permanent European settlement
occurred in 1647 on the island. The 18th century slave trade brought many
Africans to the Bahamas. Their descendants constitute 85 percent of the
Bahamian population. The Bahamas gained independence from the United Kingdom on
July 10, 1973. Pre-Columbian period. The first inhabitants of the Bahamas were
the Lucayans, a branch of the Arawakan-speaking Tainos of the Greater Antilles.
Sometime between 500 to 800, Tainos began crossing in dugout canoes from
Hispaniola and/or Cuba to the Bahamas. Suggested routes for the earliest
migrations have been from Hispaniola to the Caicos Islands, from Hispaniola or
eastern Cuba to Great Inagua Island, and from central Cuba to Long Island (in
the central Bahamas). William Keegan argues that the most likely route was from
Hispaniola or Cuba to Great Inagua. Granberry and Vescelius argue for two
migrations, from Hispaniola to the Turks and Caicos Islands and from Cuba to
Great Inagua. From the initial colonization(s) the Lucayans expanded throughout
the Bahamas Islands in some 800 years (c. 700 â€“ c. 1500), growing to a
population of about 40,000. Population density at the time of first European
contact was highest in the south central area of the Bahamas, declining towards
the north, reflecting the progressively shorter time of occupation of the
northern islands. Known Lucayan settlement sites are confined to the nineteen
largest islands in the archipelago, or to smaller cays located less than one
km. from those islands. Population density in the southern-most Bahamas
remained lower, probably due to the drier climate there (less than 800Â mm of
rain a year on Great Inagua Island and the Turks and Caicos Islands and only
slightly higher on Acklins and Crooked Islands and Mayaguana). Spanish-Lucayan
encounter. In 1492 Christopher Columbus sailed from Spain on his first voyage
with three ships, the Nina, the Pinta and the flag ship The Santa Maria,
seeking a direct route to Asia. On 12 October 1492 Columbus reached an island
in the Bahamas, an event long regarded as the 'discovery' of America. This
first island to be visited by Columbus was called Guanahani by the Lucayans,
and San Salvador by the Spanish. The identity of the first American landfall by
Columbus remains controversial, but many authors accept Samuel E. Morison's
identification of what was then called Watling (or Watling's) Island as
Columbus' San Salvador. The former Watling Island is now officially named San
Salvador. Columbus visited several other islands in the Bahamas before sailing
on to Cuba and afterward to Hispaniola. The Bahamas held little of interest to
the Spanish other than as a source of slave labor. Nearly the entire population
of Lucayans (almost 40,000 people total) were deported over the next 30 years.
When the Spanish decided to evacuate the remaining Lucayans to Hispaniola in
1520, they could find only eleven in all of the Bahamas. The islands remained
abandoned and depopulated for 130 years afterwards. With no gold to be found,
and the population removed, the Spanish effectively abandoned the Bahamas, but
still retained titular claims to them until the Treaty of Paris in 1783. When
Europeans first landed on the islands, they reported the Bahamas were lushly
forested. The forests were cleared during plantation days and have not regrown.
Early English settlement. In 1648 a group from Bermuda called 'The Company of
Adventurers for the Plantation of the Islands of Eleutheria' which was led by
William Sayle, sailed to the Bahamas to found a colony. These early settlers
were Puritans and republicans. Bermuda was also becoming overcrowded, and the
Bahamas offered both religious and political freedom and economic opportunity.
The larger of the company's two ships, the "William", wrecked on the reef at
the north end of what is now called Eleuthera Island, with the loss of all
provisions. Despite the arrival of additional settlers, including whites,
slaves and free blacks, from Bermuda and the receipt of relief supplies from
Virginia and New England, the Eleuthera colony struggled for many years because
of poor soil, fighting between settlers, and conflict with the Spanish. In the
mid-1650s many of the settlers returned to Bermuda. The remaining settlers
founded communities on Harbour Island and Saint George's Cay (Spanish Wells) at
the north end of Eleuthera. In 1670 there were about 20 families living in the
Eleuthera communities. In 1666 other settlers from Bermuda arrived on New
Providence, which soon became the center of population and commerce in the
Bahamas, with almost 500 people living on the island by 1670. Unlike the
Eleutherians, who were primarily farmers, the first settlers on New Providence
made their living from the sea, salvaging (mainly Spanish) wrecks, making salt,
and taking fish, turtles, conchs and ambergris. Farmers from Bermuda soon
followed the seamen to New Providence, where they found good, plentiful land.
Neither the Eleutherian colony nor the settlement on New Providence had any
legal standing under English law. In 1670 the Proprietors of Carolina were
issued a patent for the Bahamas, but the governors sent by the Proprietors had
difficulty in imposing their authority on the independent-minded residents of
New Providence. The early settlers continued to live much as they had in
Bermuda, fishing, hunting turtles, whales, and seals, finding ambergris, making
salt on the drier islands, cutting the abundant hardwoods of the islands for
lumber, dyewood and medicinal bark, and wrecking, or salvaging wrecks. The
Bahamas were close to the sailing routes between Europe and the Caribbean, so
shipwrecks in the islands were common, and wrecking was the most lucrative
occupation available to the Bahamians. Wreckers, privateers and pirates. The
Bahamians soon came into conflict with the Spanish over the salvaging of
wrecks. The Bahamian wreckers drove the Spanish away from their wrecked ships,
and even attacked the Spanish salvagers and seized goods the Spanish had
already recovered from the wrecks. The Spanish raided the Bahamas, the
Bahamians in turn commissioned privateers against Spain, even though England
and Spain were at peace, and in 1684 the Spanish burned the settlements on New
Providence and Eleuthera, after which they were largely abandoned. New
Providence was settled a second time in 1686 from Jamaica. In the 1690s English
privateers (England was at war with France) established themselves in the
Bahamas. In 1696 Henry Every (or Avery), using the assumed name Henry
Bridgeman, brought his ship "Fancy", loaded with pirate's loot, into Nassau
harbor. Every bribed the governor, Nicholas Trott (uncle of the Nicholas Trott
who presided at the trial of Stede Bonnet), with gold and silver, and by
leaving him the "Fancy", still loaded with 50 tons of elephant tusks and 100
barrels of gunpowder. Following peace with France in 1697 many of the
privateers became the pirates. From this time the pirates increasingly made the
Bahamian capitol of Nassau, founded in 1694, their base. The governors
appointed by the Proprietors usually made a show of suppressing the pirates,
but most were often accused of dealing with the pirates. By 1701 England was at
war with France and Spain. In 1703 and in 1706 combined French-Spanish fleets
attacked and sacked Nassau, after which some settlers left and the Proprietors
gave up on trying to govern the Bahamas. With no functioning government in the
Bahamas, Nassau became a base of operations for English privateers, in what has
been called a "privateers' republic," which lasted for eleven years. The
raiders attacked French and Spanish ships, while French and Spanish forces
burned Nassau several times. The War of the Spanish Succession ended in 1714,
but some privateers were slow to get the news, or reluctant to accept it, and
slipped into piracy. One estimate puts at least 1,000 pirates in the Bahamas in
1713, outnumbering the 200 families of more permanent settlers. The
"privateers' republic" in Nassau became a "pirates' republic". At least 20
pirate captains used Nassau or other places in the Bahamas as a home port
during this period, including Henry Jennings, Edward Teach (Blackbeard),
Benjamin Hornigold and Stede Bonnet. Many settler families moved from New
Providence to Eleuthera or Abaco to escape harassment from the pirates. On the
other hand, residents of Harbor Island were happy to serve as middlemen for the
pirates, as merchants from New England and Virginia came there to exchange
needed supplies for pirate plunder. As mentioned above, the activities of
pirates provoked frequent and brutal retaliatory attacks by the French and
Spanish. Woodes Rogers. The "pirates' republic" came to an end in 1718, when
Woodes Rogers, the first Royal Governor of the Bahamas, reached Nassau with a
small fleet of warships. Starting in 1713, Rogers had conceived the idea of
leading an expedition to Madagascar to suppress the pirates there and establish
it as a British colony. Rogers' friends Richard Steele and Joseph Addison
eventually convinced him to tackle the pirates nest in the Bahamas, instead.
Rogers and others formed a company to fund the venture. They persuaded the
Proprietors of Carolina to surrender the government of the Bahamas to the king,
while retaining title to the land. The 1,000 or so pirates on the islands
surrendered peacefully and the Proprietors then leased their land in the
Bahamas to Rogers' company for 21 years. In 1717 King George appointed Rogers
governor of the Bahamas and issued a proclamation granting a pardon to any
pirate who surrendered to a British governor within one year. Word of the
appointment of a new governor and of the offer of pardons reached Nassau ahead
of Rogers. Some of the pirates were willing to accept a pardon and retire from
piracy. Others were not ready to give up. Many of those were Jacobites,
supporters of the House of Stuart, who regarded themselves as enemies of the
Hanoverian King George. Still others simply saw themselves as rebels, or
thought they were better off as pirates than trying to earn an honest living.
When a Royal Navy ship brought official word to Nassau of the pardon offer, it
seemed at first that most of the pirates in Nassau would accept. Soon, however,
the recalcitrant party gained the upper hand, eventually forcing the Navy ship
to leave. Some pirates, such as Henry Jennings and Christopher Winter, sailed
off to find British authorities to confirm their acceptance of the amnesty.
Others, such as Blackbeard, Stede Bonnet, Nicholas Brown and Edmond Condent,
left the Bahamas for other territories. Charles Vane, with "Calico Jack"
Rackham and Edward England in his crew, came to prominence at this time. Vane
worked to organize resistance to the anticipated arrival of Royal authority,
even appealing to the James Francis Edward Stuart, the Stuart pretender, for
aid in holding the Bahamas and capturing Bermuda for the Stuarts. As aid from
the Stuarts failed to materialize and Rogers' arrival approached, Vane and his
crew prepared to leave Nassau. Woodes Rogers arrived in Nassau in late July
1718, with his own 460 ton warship, three other ships belonging to his company,
and escorted by three ships of the Royal Navy. Vane's ship was trapped in
Nassau harbor. His crew set that ship on fire, sending it towards Rogers'
ships, and escaped in the ensuing confusion in a smaller ship they had seized
from another pirate. Rogers' arrival in Nassau was welcomed by the remaining
population, about 200 settlers and 500 to 700 pirates who want to receive
pardons, most prominently Benjamin Hornigold. Rogers had control of Nassau, but
Charles Vane was loose and threatening to drive Rogers out, and Rogers received
word that the King of Spain wanted to drive the English completely out of the
Bahamas. Rogers worked to improve the defenses of Nassau, but an unidentified
disease killed almost 100 of the men who had come to Nassau with Rogers, and
then the Navy ships left. Rogers sent four of his ships to Havana to assure the
Spanish governor that Rogers was suppressing piracy in the Bahamas and to trade
for supplies. The crews of ex-pirates and men who had come with Rogers all
turned pirate themselves. Ten of those men were caught at Green Turtle Cay by
Rogers' new pirate-hunter, the ex-pirate Benjamin Hornigold. Eight of the
pirates were found guilty and hanged in front of the fort. Charles Vane
attacked several small settlements in the Bahamas, but after he refused to
attack a stronger French frigate, he was deposed for cowardice and replaced as
captain by "Calico Jack" Rackham. Vane never returned to the Bahamas, but was
eventually caught, tried and executed in Jamaica. After nearly being captured
by Jamaican privateers, and hearing that the king had extended the deadline
being pardoned for piracy, Rackham and his crew returned to Nassau and received
pardons from Woodes Rogers. In Nassau Rackham became involved with Anne Bonny
and tried to arrange an annulment of her marriage to another ex-pirate, James
Bonny. Rogers blocked the annulment, and Rackham and Bonny left Nassau to be
pirates again, taking a small crew and Bonny's friend Mary Read with them.
Within months, Rackham, Bonny and Read were captured and taken to Jamaica,
where Rackham was executed and Bonny and Read escaped execution due to
pregnancy. Bonny died in prison, while Read's fate is unknown. Britain and
Spain went to war again in 1719, and many of the ex-pirates became privateers.
A Spanish invasion fleet set out for the Bahamas, but was diverted to
Pensacola, Florida when it was seized by the French. Rogers continued to
improve the defenses of Nassau, spending his money and going heavily into debt
to do so. A second Spanish invasion fleet in 1720 was deterred by the defenses
(and the accidental presence of a Royal Navy ship in Nassau). His efforts has
also physically exhausted Rogers. He returned to Britain in 1722 to plead for
repayment of the money he had borrowed to build up Nassau, only to find he had
been replaced as governor. He then ended up in debtors' prison, although his
creditors later absolved his debts, allowing him to leave prison. After the
publication in 1724 of "A General History of the Robberies and Murders of the
Most Notorious Pirates," which gave a favorable account of Rogers' efforts to
suppress piracy in the Bahamas, his fortunes began to improve. The king awarded
him a pension, retroactive to 1721, and in 1728 appointed Governor of the
Bahamas for a second term. Rogers dissolved the colony's assembly when it would
not approve taxes to repair Nassau's defenses. Woodes Rogers died in Nassau in
1732. Mid-century. William Shirley, former governor of Massachusetts, was
appointed governor of the Bahamas in 1758 and served until 1770. Loyalists.
During the American War of Independence the Bahamas fell to Spanish forces
under General Galvez in 1782. A British-American loyalist expedition led by
Colonel Andrew Deveaux, later recaptured the islands. After the American
Revolution, the British issued land grants to American Loyalists, and the
sparse population of the Bahamas tripled within a few years. Cotton growing
soon became established, but it eventually dwindled from insect damage and soil
exhaustion. Most of the current inhabitants are descended from the slaves
brought to work on the Loyalist plantations, or from liberated Africans set
free by the British navy after the abolition of the slave trade in the British
Empire in 1807. Plantation life ended with the British emancipation of slaves
in 1834. Post-emancipation. During the American Civil War, the Bahamas
prospered as a base for Confederate blockade-running, bringing in cotton for
the mills of England and running out arms and munitions. During Prohibition
after World War I, the islands were a base for American rum-runners,smuggling
liquor into the US. None of these provided any lasting prosperity to the
islands, nor did attempts to grow various crops. After emancipation Caribbean
societies inherited a rigid racial stratification that was reinforced by the
unequal distribution of wealth and power. The three-tier race structure, which
existed well into the 1940s and in some societies beyond, upheld the belief of
European racial superiority, although most West Indians are of African descent.
Race and racial attitudes remain important in mixed Caribbean societies. Late-
colonial period. In 1911, there was a short-lived movement to make the Bahamas
part of Canada. Although the movement enjoyed the support of many in Nassau and
from the head of Sun Life, a Canadian insurance company, the movement failed.
The failure of the movement was, in part, due to the British government's
opposition to uniting a predominantly Black colony with a predominantly white
country. World War II. The Duke of Windsor was installed as Governor of the
Bahamas, arriving at that post in August 1940 with his new Duchess. They were
appalled at the condition of Government House, but they "tried to make the best
of a bad situation." He did not enjoy the position, and referred to the islands
as "a third-class British colony". He opened the small local parliament on
October 29, 1940, and they visited the 'Out Islands' that November, which cause
some controversy because of on whose yacht they were cruising. The British
Foreign Office strenuously objected when the Duke and Duchess planned to tour
aboard a yacht belonging to a Swedish magnate, Axel Wenner-Gren, whom American
intelligence wrongly believed to be a close friend of Luftwaffe commander
Hermann GÃ¶ring. The Duke was praised, however, for his efforts to combat
poverty on the islands, although he was as contemptuous of the Bahamians as he
was of most non-white peoples of the Empire. He was also praised for his
resolution of civil unrest over low wages in Nassau in June 1942, when there
was a "full-scale riot," even though he blamed the trouble on "mischief makers
â€“ communists" and "men of Central European Jewish descent, who had secured
jobs as a pretext for obtaining a deferment of draft". The Duke resigned the
post on 16 March 1945. During World War II, the Allies centred their flight
training and antisubmarine operations for the Caribbean in the Bahamas. Post-
war period. The wartime airfield became Nassau's international airport in 1957
and helped spur the growth of mass tourism, which accelerated after Havana was
closed to American tourists in 1961. Freeport, on the island of Grand Bahama,
was established as a free trade zone in the 1950s and became the country's
second city. Bank secrecy combined with the lack of corporate and income taxes
led to a rapid growth in the offshore financial sector during the postwar
years. Modern political development began after the Second World War. The first
political parties were formed in the 1950s and the British made the islands
internally self-governing in 1964, with Sir Roland Symonette, of the United
Bahamian Party, as the first Premier. The fourth James Bond film,
"Thunderball", was partly filmed in 1965 in Nassau. In 1967, Lynden Pindling
(Sir Lynden from 1983), of the Progressive Liberal Party, became the first
black Premier of the colony, and in 1968 the title was changed to Prime
Minister. In 1973, the Bahamas became fully independent as a Commonwealth
realm, thus retaining membership of the Commonwealth of Nations. Sir Milo
Butler was appointed the first Governor-General of the Bahamas (the official
representative of Queen Elizabeth II) shortly after independence. Based on the
twin pillars of tourism and offshore finance, the Bahamian economy has
prospered since the 1950s. However, there remain significant challenges in
areas such as education, health care, housing, international narcotics
trafficking and illegal immigration from Haiti. The College of the Bahamas is
the national higher education/tertiary system. Offering baccalaureate, masters
and associate degrees, COB has three campuses and teaching and research centres
throughout the Bahamas. The College is in the process of becoming the
University of the Bahamas as early as 2012. Post-independence era. Bahamians
achieved self-government in 1964 and full independence within the Commonwealth
of Nations on July 10, 1973. The countryâ€™s first prime minister was Lynden O.
Pindling, leader of the Progressive Liberal Party. Pindling ruled for nearly 20
years, during which the Bahamas benefited from tourism and foreign investment.
By the early 1980s, the islands had also become a major center for the drug
trade, with 90% of all the cocaine entering the United States reportedly
passing through the Bahamas. Diplomatic relations were established with Cuba in
1974. A decade later, as increased Cuban immigration to the islands strained
the Bahamasâ€™ resources, Cuba refused to sign a letter of repatriation. In
September 2004, Hurricane Frances swept through the Bahamas, leaving widespread
damage in its wake. Just three weeks later, Hurricane Jeanne flattened the
islands. Jeanne uprooted trees, blew out windows, and sent seawater flooding
through neighborhoods on the islands of Abaco and Grand Bahama. Receding
floodwaters left boats tossed on roads and homes battered.
