History of Vietnam The history of Vietnam is one of the longest continuous
histories in the world, with archaeological findings showing that human
settlements as far back as around half a million years ago and a cultural
history of over 20,000 years. Ancient Vietnam was home to some of the world's
earliest civilizations and societies - making them one of the world's first
people who practiced agriculture. The Red River valley formed a natural
geographic and economic unit, bounded to the north and west by mountains and
jungles, to the east by the sea and to the south by the Red River Delta. The
need to have a single authority to prevent floods of the Red River, to
cooperate in constructing hydraulic systems, trade exchange, and to fight
invaders, led to the creation of the first Vietnamese states in 2879 BC. The
first truly influential part of history in Vietnam occurred during the Bronze
Age, when the ƒê√¥ng S∆°n culture dramatically advanced the civilization.
Vietnam's peculiar geography made it a difficult country to attack, which is
why Vietnam under H√πng V∆∞∆°ng was for so long an independent and self-
contained state. The √Çns and Qins were among the earliest foreign aggressors
of Vietnam, but the ancient Vietnamese managed to regain control of the country
soon after the invasions. Once Vietnam did succumb to foreign rule, however, it
proved unable to escape from it, and for 1,100 years, Vietnam had been
successively governed by a series of foreign powers: the Hans, Eastern Hans,
Eastern Wus, Cao Wei, Jins, Liu Songs, Southern Qis, Liangs, Suis, Tangs, and
Southern Hans; leading to the losses of its writing system, language, and
national identity. At certain periods during these 1,100 years, Vietnam was
independently governed under the Tri·ªáus, Tr∆∞ng Sisters, Anterior L√Ωs,
Kh√∫cs and D∆∞∆°ng ƒê√¨nh Ngh·ªá - although their triumphs and reigns were
brief. During the foreign domination of North Vietnam, several Indianized
civilizations flourished in the central and south of what we know as Vietnam,
particularly the Funanese and the Chams. The founders and rulers of these
governments, however, were not native to Vietnam. From the 10th century
onwards, the Vietnamese, emerging in their heartland of the Red River Delta,
began to conquer these civilizations. When Ng√¥ Quy·ªÅn (King of Vietnam)
(939‚Äì944) restoring sovereign power in the country, the next millennium
Vietnam advanced by the accomplishments of a series of dynasties: Ng√¥s,
ƒêinhs, Prior L√™s, L√Ωs, Tr·∫ßns, H·ªìs, Posterior Tr·∫ßns, Later L√™s,
M·∫°cs, Tr·ªãnhs, Nguy·ªÖns, T√¢y S∆°ns and again Nguy·ªÖns. At various points
during these 1,000 years of imperial dynasties, Vietnam was ravaged and divided
by civil wars and repeatedly attacked by the Songs, Mongol Yuans, Chams, Mings,
Dutch, Manchus, French, and the Americans. The Ming Empire conquered the Red
River valley for a while before native Vietnamese regained control and the
French Empire reduced Vietnam to a French dependency for nearly a century,
followed by an occupation by the Japanese Empire. Political upheaval and
Communist insurrection put an end to the monarchy after World War II, and the
country was proclaimed a republic. First human vestiges. Archaeological
excavations revealed the existence of human on Vietnamese territory as early as
the Paleolithic age. The presence of Homo erectus around 500,000 BC was found
in caves of Lang Son and Nghe An provinces in North Vietnam. The oldest Homo
sapiens fossils from mainland Southeast Asia are of Middle Pleistocene age.
They include mostly isolated teeth from northern Vietnam at Tham Om (250-140
kyr), and Hang Hum (140-80 kyr). Teeth attributed to Homo sapiens are also
known from the Late Pleistocene of Vietnam at Dong Can (16 kyr) and from the
Early Holocene at Mai Da Dieu/Mai Da Nuoc (8.2 kyr), Lang Gao and Lang Cuom
(6.44 ¬± 0.5 kyr). There are some caves with Paleolithic remains typified by
the Nguom industry and the Son Vi culture, dating from 28,000 BC to 8,000 BC.
The most important event in Vietnamese prehistory is the appearance of Hoa Binh
and Bac Son cultures - the most typical cave cultures in Southeast Asia.
Archeological excavations in Thailand (Spirit Cave, Non Nok Tha) and northern
Vietnam (Dong Son, Hoa Binh) revealed a major surprise: the first Southeast
Asians had agriculture and pottery at the same time as the city-states of
ancient Mesopotamia. The finds of the fossils of Homo erectus, Homo sapiens and
Homo sapiens sapiens in the cave sites in North Vietnam have confirmed that the
evolution of human formation took place the most dramatically in the karst
topology, from the late Pleistocene to Holocene. Early Dynastic Period (2879
‚Äì 111 BC). H·ªìng B√ ng Dynasty (2879 ‚Äì 258 BC). Evidence of the earliest
established society other than the Iron Age ƒê√¥ng S∆°n culture in Northern
Vietnam was found in C·ªï Loa, an ancient city situated near present-day H√ 
N·ªôi. L·ªôc T·ª•c (2919‚Äì2794 BC) succeeded his predecessor as tribal chief.
In 2879 BC, L·ªôc T·ª•c was master of almost all of Vietnam. In that year, a
convocation of the subjugated tribes proclaimed him Kinh D∆∞∆°ng V∆∞∆°ng,
leader of the united ancient Vietnamese tribes. Kinh D∆∞∆°ng V∆∞∆°ng reigns
over the X√≠ch Qu·ª∑ confederacy that occupied the Red River delta in present-
day Northern Vietnam and part of southeastern China, starting the H·ªìng B√ ng
Dynasty. S√πng L√£m (2825 BC - ????) was Kinh D∆∞∆°ng V∆∞∆°ng's successor. The
next line of kings that followed renamed the country VƒÉn Lang. The people of
VƒÉn Lang were known as the L·∫°c Vi·ªát. The ancient Vietnamese kings of the
H·ªìng B√ ng period, collectively known as the H√πng V∆∞∆°ng, ruled the country
until 258 BC and consisted of 18 lines of kings. VƒÉn Lang is thought to have
been a matriarchal society, similar to many other matriarchal societies common
in Southeast Asia and in the Pacific islands at the time. Various
archaeological sites in northern Vietnam, such as ƒê√¥ng S∆°n have yielded
metal weapons and tools from this age. Most famous of these artifacts are large
bronze drums, probably made for ceremonial purposes, with sophisticated
engravings on the surface, depicting life scenes with warriors, boats, houses,
birds and animals in concentric circles around a radiating sun at the center.
Many legends from this period offer a glimpse into the life of the people. The
Legend of the Rice Cakes is about a prince who won a culinary contest; he then
wins the throne because his creations, the rice cakes, reflect his deep
understanding of the land's vital economy: rice farming. The Legend of Giong
tells of a youth going to war to save the country, wearing iron armor, riding
an armored horse, and wielding an iron staff, showed that metalworking was
sophisticated. The Legend of the Magic Crossbow, about a crossbow that can
deliver thousands of arrows, showed extensive use of archery in warfare.
Chinese accounts tell much about the early Vietnamese people. Plows and draft
animals were not yet used, and fields were worked with polished stone hoes.
Fishing and hunting supplemented the main rice crop. Arrowheads and spears were
dipped in poison to kill larger animals such as elephants, whose tusks were
traded to China for iron ore. Betel nuts were widely chewed and the lower
classes rarely wore clothing more substantial than a loincloth. Every spring, a
fertility festival was held which featured huge parties and sexual abandon.
Religion consisted of primitive animistic cults. Overall, the early Vietnamese
were not much different from other Southeast Asian peoples of the time, and it
wasn't until later that a distinct national culture emerged. Recent research
has revealed artificial circular earthworks in the areas of present day
southern Vietnam and overlapping to the borders of Cambodia. These
archaeological remains are estimated to be economic, social and cultural
entities from the 1st millennium BC. Th·ª•c Dynasty (257 ‚Äì 207 BC). By the
3rd century BC, another Viet group, the √Çu Vi·ªát, emigrated from present-day
southern China to the Red River delta and mixed with the indigenous VƒÉn Lang
population. In 258 BC, a new kingdom, √Çu L·∫°c, emerged as the union of the
√Çu Vi·ªát and the L·∫°c Vi·ªát, with Th·ª•c Ph√°n proclaiming himself "An
D∆∞∆°ng V∆∞∆°ng" ("King An D∆∞∆°ng"). At his capital, C·ªï Loa, he built many
concentric walls around the city for defensive purposes. These walls, together
with skilled √Çu L·∫°c archers, kept the capital safe from invaders. However,
records showed that espionage resulted in the downfall of An D∆∞∆°ng V∆∞∆°ng.
Tri·ªáu Dynasty (207 ‚Äì 111 BC). In 207¬ BC, Qin warlord Tri·ªáu ƒê√ 
("pinyin:" Zhao Tuo) defeated King An D∆∞∆°ng V∆∞∆°ng by having his son Tr·ªçng
Th·ªßy ("pinyin:" Zhong Shi) act as a spy after marrying An D∆∞∆°ng V∆∞∆°ng's
daughter. Tri·ªáu ƒê√  annexed √Çu L·∫°c into his domain located in present-day
Guangdong, southern China, then proclaimed himself king of a new independent
kingdom, Nam Vi·ªát (Nan Yue). Tr·ªçng Th·ªßy, the supposed crown prince,
drowned himself in C·ªï Loa out of remorse for the death of his wife in the
war. Some Vietnamese consider Tri·ªáu's rule a period of Chinese domination,
since Tri·ªáu ƒê√  was a former Qin general. Others consider it an era of
Vi·ªát independence as the Tri·ªáu family in Nam Vi·ªát were assimilated to
local culture. They ruled independently of what then constituted Han China. At
one point, Tri·ªáu ƒê√  even declared himself Emperor, equal to the Han Emperor
in the north. The Long Eclipse: Chinese Millennium (111 BC ‚Äì 939 AD). Han
domination (111 BC ‚Äì 39 AD). In 111 BC, Han troops invaded Nam Vi·ªát and
established new territories, dividing Vietnam into Giao Ch·ªâ ("pinyin:
" Jiaozhi, now the Red River delta); C·ª≠u Ch√¢n from modern-day Thanh Ho√° to
H√  Tƒ©nh; and Nh·∫≠t Nam, from modern-day Qu·∫£ng B√¨nh to Hu·∫ø. While
governors and top officials were Chinese, the original Vietnamese nobles (L·∫°c
H·∫ßu, L·∫°c T∆∞·ªõng) still managed some highlands. The Han began a vigorous
campaign to civilize and assimilate the as-yet illiterate, tribal native
population. Chinese culture, rituals, and governmental organization were
imposed along with Taoism and Confucianism in addition to the language and
writing system. Even Chinese clothing and hairstyles were required. Many of
these innovations were gladly taken up by the Vietnamese, but they still
insisted on maintaining a distinct language and national identity. Over time,
Vietnamese nationalism grew, and while they looked to their huge neighbor for
cultural inspiration, the desire for independence was strong. Tr∆∞ng Sisters
(40 ‚Äì 43). In 40¬ AD, the Tr∆∞ng Sisters led a successful revolt against Han
Governor T√¥ ƒê·ªãnh ("pinyin:" S≈´ D√¨ng) and recaptured 65 states (including
modern Guangxi). Tr∆∞ng Tr·∫Øc became the Queen (Tr∆∞ng N·ªØ V∆∞∆°ng). In
43¬ AD, Emperor Guangwu of Han sent his famous general M√£ Vi·ªán ("pinyin:" Ma
Yuan) with a large army to quell the revolt. After a long, difficult campaign,
M√£ Vi·ªán suppressed the uprising and the Trung Sisters committed suicide to
avoid capture. To this day, the Tr∆∞ng Sisters are revered in Vietnam as the
national symbol of Vietnamese women. From Eastern Han to Liang domination (43
‚Äì 544). Learning a lesson from the Tr∆∞ng revolt, the Han and other
successful Chinese dynasties took measures to eliminate the power of the
Vietnamese nobles. The Vietnamese elites would be coerced to assimilate into
Chinese culture and politics. Nearly 200 years passed before the Vietnamese
attempted another revolt. In 225 AD another woman, Tri·ªáu Th·ªã Trinh,
popularly known as Lady Tri·ªáu (B√  Tri·ªáu), led another revolt which lasted
until 248¬ AD. Once again, the uprising failed and Tri·ªáu Th·ªã Trinh threw
herself into a river. During the Tang dynasty, Vietnam was called Annam (Giao
Ch√¢u) until the early 10th century. Giao Ch·ªâ (with its capital around modern
B·∫Øc Ninh Province) became a flourishing trading outpost, receiving goods from
the southern seas. The "History of Later Han" (H·∫≠u H√°n Th∆∞, Hou Hanshu)
recorded that in 166¬ AD the first envoy from the Roman Empire to China arrived
by this route, and merchants were soon to follow. The 3rd-century "Tales of
Wei" (Ng·ª•y L·ª•c, "Weilue") mentioned a "water route" (the Red River) from
Giao Ch·ªâ into what is now southern Yunnan. From there, goods were taken
overland to the rest of China via the regions of modern Kunming and Chengdu. At
the same time, in present-day Central Vietnam, there was a successful revolt of
Cham nations. Chinese dynasties called it Lin-Yi (Lin village; Vietnamese:
"L√¢m ·∫§p"). It later became a powerful kingdom, Champa, stretching from
Qu·∫£ng B√¨nh to Phan Thi·∫øt (B√¨nh Thu·∫≠n). In addition, the local languages
began to diverge. The modern Vietnamese tongue developed from the dialect of
the towns, while that of the hill tribes developed into the Hmung language. By
the 10th century, the separation between the two was complete. Anterior L√Ω
Dynasty (544 ‚Äì 602). In the period between the beginning of the Chinese Age
of Fragmentation to the end of the Tang Dynasty, several revolts against
Chinese rule took place, such as those of L√Ω B√¥n and his general and heir
Tri·ªáu Quang Ph·ª•c; and those of Mai Th√∫c Loan and Ph√πng H∆∞ng. All of them
ultimately failed, yet most notable were L√Ω B√¥n and Tri·ªáu Quang Ph·ª•c,
whose Anterior L√Ω Dynasty ruled for almost half a century, from 544¬ AD to
602¬ AD, before the Chinese Sui Dynasty reconquered their kingdom V·∫°n Xu√¢n.
From Sui to Tang domination (602 ‚Äì 905). Early in the 10th century, as China
became politically fragmented, successive lords from the Kh√∫c family, followed
by D∆∞∆°ng ƒê√¨nh Ngh·ªá, ruled Giao Ch√¢u autonomously under the Tang title of
Ti·∫øt ƒê·ªô S·ª©, Virtuous Lord, but stopping short of proclaiming themselves
kings. Autonomy (905 ‚Äì 938). In 938, Southern Han sent troops to conquer
autonomous Giao Ch√¢u. Ng√¥ Quy·ªÅn, D∆∞∆°ng ƒê√¨nh Ngh·ªá's son-in-law,
defeated the Southern Han fleet at the Battle of B·∫°ch ƒê·∫±ng River (938). He
then proclaimed himself King Ng√¥ and effectively began the age of independence
for Vietnam. Late Dynastic Period (939 ‚Äì 1945). Ng√¥, ƒêinh, & Prior L√™
dynasties (939 ‚Äì 1009). Ng√¥ Quy·ªÅn's untimely death after a short reign
resulted in a power struggle for the throne, the country's first major civil
war, the upheaval of Twelfth Warlords (Lo·∫°n Th·∫≠p Nh·ªã S·ª© Qu√¢n). The war
lasted from 944 to 968 when the clan led by ƒêinh B·ªô Lƒ©nh defeated the other
warlords, unifying the country. B·ªô Lƒ©nh founded the ƒêinh Dynasty and
proclaimed himself ƒêinh Ti√™n Ho√ ng (ƒêinh the First Emperor) and renamed the
country from Tƒ©nh H·∫£i qu√¢n to ƒê·∫°i C·ªì Vi·ªát (literally "Great Viet
Land"), with its capital in Hoa L∆∞ (modern day Ninh B√¨nh Province). Emperor
ƒêinh Ti√™n Ho√ ng introduced strict penal codes to prevent chaos from
happening again. He tried to form alliances by granting the title of Queen to
five women from the five most influential families. In 979, Emperor ƒêinh Ti√™n
Ho√ ng and his crown prince ƒêinh Li·ªÖn were assassinated, leaving his lone
surviving son, the 6-year-old ƒêinh To√ n, to assume the throne. Taking
advantage of the situation, Song China invaded ƒê·∫°i C·ªì Vi·ªát. Facing such
a grave threat to national independence, the court's Commander of the Ten
Armies (Th·∫≠p ƒê·∫°o T∆∞·ªõng Qu√¢n) L√™ Ho√ n took the throne, founding the
Anterior L√™ Dynasty. A capable military tactician, L√™ Hoan realized the risks
of engaging the mighty Song troops head on; thus he tricked the invading army
into Chi LƒÉng Pass, then ambushed and killed their commander, quickly ending
the threat to his young nation in 981. The Song Dynasty withdrew their troops
and L√™ Ho√ n referred to in his realm as ƒê·∫°i H√ nh Emperor (ƒê·∫°i H√ nh
Ho√ ng ƒê·∫ø). Emperor L√™ ƒê·∫°i H√ nh was also the first Vietnamese monarch
who began the southward expansion process against the kingdom of Champa.
Emperor L√™ ƒê·∫°i H√ nh's death in 1005 resulted in infighting for the throne
amongst his sons. The eventual winner, L√™ Long ƒêƒ©nh, became the most
notorious tyrant in Vietnamese history. He devised sadistic punishments of
prisoners for his own entertainment and indulged in deviant sexual activities.
Toward the end of his short lifehe died at 24L√™ Long ƒêƒ©nh became so ill that
he had to lie down when meeting with his officials in court. L√Ω, Tr·∫ßn, &
H·ªì dynasties (1009 ‚Äì 1407). When the king L√™ Long ƒêƒ©nh died in 1009¬ AD,
a Palace Guard Commander named L√Ω C√¥ng U·∫©n was nominated by the court to
take over the throne, and founded the L√Ω dynasty. This event is regarded as
the beginning of a golden era in Vietnamese history, with great following
dynasties. The way L√Ω C√¥ng U·∫©n ascended to the throne was rather uncommon
in Vietnamese history. As a high-ranking military commander residing in the
capital, he had all opportunities to seize power during the tumultuous years
after Emperor L√™ Ho√ n's death, yet preferring not to do so out of his sense
of duty. He was in a way being "elected" by the court after some debate before
a consensus was reached. L√Ω C√¥ng U·∫©n, posthumously referred as L√Ω Th√°i
T·ªï, changed the country's name to ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát (literally "Great Viet"). The
L√Ω Dynasty is credited for laying down a concrete foundation, with strategic
vision, for the nation of Vietnam. Leaving Hoa L∆∞, a natural fortification
surrounded by mountains and rivers, L√Ω C√¥ng U·∫©n moved his court to the new
capital in present-day Hanoi and called it ThƒÉng Long (Ascending Dragon). L√Ω
C√¥ng U·∫©n thus departed from the militarily defensive mentality of his
predecessors and envisioned a strong economy as the key to national survival.
Successive L√Ω kings continued to accomplish far-reaching feats: building a
dike system to protect the rice producing area; founding Qu·ªëc T·ª≠ Gi√°m, the
first noble university; holding regular examinations to select capable
commoners for government positions once every three years; organizing a new
system of taxation; establishing humane treatment of prisoners. Women were
holding important roles in L√Ω society as the court ladies were in charge of
tax collection. The L√Ω Dynasty also promoted Buddhism, yet maintained a
pluralistic attitude toward the three main philosophical systems of the time:
Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism. During the L√Ω Dynasty, the Chinese Song
Dynasty officially recognized the ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát monarch as King of Giao Ch·ªâ
(Giao Ch·ªâ Qu·∫≠n V∆∞∆°ng). The L√Ω Dynasty had two major wars with Song
China, and a few conquests against neighboring Champa in the south. The most
notable battle took place on Chinese territory in 1075¬ AD. Upon learning that
a Song invasion was imminent, the L√Ω army and navy totaling about 100,000 men
under the command of L√Ω Th∆∞·ªùng Ki·ªát, T√¥ng ƒê·∫£n used amphibious
operations to preemptively destroy three Song military installations at Yong
Zhou, Qin Zhou, and Lian Zhou in present-day Guangdong and Guangxi, and killed
100,000 Chinese. The Song Dynasty took revenge and invaded ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát in
1076, but the Song troops were held back at the Battle of Nh∆∞ Nguy·ªát River
commonly known as the C·∫ßu river, now in B·∫Øc Ninh province about 40¬ km from
the current capital, Hanoi. Neither side was able to force a victory, so the
L√Ω Dynasty proposed a truce, which the Song emperor accepted. Champa and the
powerful Khmer Empire took advantage of the L√Ω Dynasty's distraction with the
Chinese to pillage the south of the country. Together they invaded Vietnam in
1128 and 1132. Further invasions followed in the subsequent decades. Toward the
end of the L√Ω Dynasty, a powerful court minister named Tr·∫ßn Th·ªß ƒê·ªô
forced king L√Ω Hu·ªá T√¥ng to become a Buddhist monk and L√Ω Chi√™u Ho√ ng,
Hu·ªá T√¥ng's young daughter, to become queen. Tr·∫ßn Th·ªß ƒê·ªô then arranged
the marriage of Chi√™u Ho√ ng to his nephew Tr·∫ßn C·∫£nh and eventually had
the throne transferred to Tr·∫ßn C·∫£nh, thus begun the Tr·∫ßn Dynasty. Tr·∫ßn
Th·ªß ƒê·ªô viciously purged members of the L√Ω nobility; some L√Ω princes
escaped to Korea, including L√Ω Long T∆∞·ªùng. After the purge, most Tr·∫ßn
kings ruled the country in similar manner to the L√Ω kings. Noted Tr·∫ßn
Dynasty accomplishments include the creation of a system of population records
based at the village level, the compilation of a formal 30-volume history of
ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát (ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát S·ª≠ K√Ω) by L√™ VƒÉn H∆∞u, and the rising in
status of the N√¥m script, a system of writing for Vietnamese language. The
Tr·∫ßn Dynasty also adopted a unique way to train new kings: when a crown
prince reached the age of 18, his predecessor would abdicate and turn the
throne over to him, yet holding a title of August Higher Emperor (Th√°i
Th∆∞·ª£ng Ho√ ng), acting as a mentor to the new Emperor. Despite continued
Champa-Khmer attacks, the Tr·∫ßn managed to arrange several periods of peace
with them. During the Tr·∫ßn Dynasty, the armies of the Mongol Empire under
M√∂ngke Khan and Kublai Khan, the founder of the Yuan dynasty invaded Vietnam
in 1257¬ AD, 1284¬ AD, and 1288¬ AD. ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát repelled all attacks of the
Yuan during the reign of Kublai Khan. Three Yuan armies said to have numbered
from 300,000 to 500,000 men were defeated. The key to ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát's successes
was to avoid the Mongols' strength in open field battles and city sieges - the
Tr·∫ßn court abandoned the capital and the cities. The Mongols were then
countered decisively at their weak points, which were battles in swampy areas
such as Ch∆∞∆°ng D∆∞∆°ng, H√ m T·ª≠, V·∫°n Ki·∫øp and on rivers such as V√¢n
ƒê·ªìn and B·∫°ch ƒê·∫±ng. The Mongols also suffered from tropical diseases and
loss of supplies to Tr·∫ßn army's raids. The Yuan-Tr·∫ßn war reached its climax
when the retreating Yuan fleet was decimated at the Battle of B·∫°ch ƒê·∫±ng
(1288). The military architect behind ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát's victories was Commander
Tr·∫ßn Qu·ªëc Tu·∫•n, more popularly known as Tr·∫ßn H∆∞ng ƒê·∫°o. In order to
avoid further disastrous campaigns, the Tran and Champa acknowledged Mongol
supremacy. It was also during this period that the Tr·∫ßn kings waged many wars
against the southern kingdom of Champa, continuing the Viets' long history of
southern expansion (known as Nam Ti·∫øn) that had begun shortly after gaining
independence in the 10th century. Often, they encountered strong resistance
from the Chams. Champa was made into a tributary state of Vietnam in 1312, but
ten years later regained independence and Champa troops led by king Ch·∫ø
B·ªìng Nga (Cham: Po Binasuor or Che Bonguar) killed king Tr·∫ßn Du·ªá T√¥ng in
battle and even laid siege to ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát's capital ThƒÉng Long in 1377¬ AD
and again in 1383¬ AD. However, the Tr·∫ßn Dynasty was successful in gaining
two Champa provinces, located around present-day Hu·∫ø, through the peaceful
means of the political marriage of Princess Huy·ªÅn Tr√¢n to a Cham king. The
wars with Champa and the Mongols left Vietnam exhausted and bankrupt. The
Tr·∫ßn dynasty was in turn overthrown by one of its own court officials, H·ªì
Qu√Ω Ly. H·ªì Qu√Ω Ly forced the last Tr·∫ßn king to resign and assumed the
throne in 1400. He changed the country name to ƒê·∫°i Ngu and moved the capital
to T√¢y ƒê√¥, Western Capital, now Thanh H√≥a. ThƒÉng Long was renamed ƒê√¥ng
ƒê√¥, Eastern Capital. Although widely blamed for causing national disunity and
losing the country later to the Chinese Ming Dynasty, H·ªì Qu√Ω Ly's reign
actually introduced a lot of progressive, ambitious reforms, including the
addition of mathematics to the national examinations, the open critique of
Confucian philosophy, the use of paper currency in place of coins, investment
in building large warships and cannon, and land reform. He ceded the throne to
his son, H·ªì H√°n Th∆∞∆°ng, in 1401 and assumed the title Th√°i Th∆∞·ª£ng
Ho√ ng, in similar manner to the Tr·∫ßn kings. Feudal state & society. The
basic nature of Vietnamese society changed little during the nearly 1,000 years
between independence from China in the 10th century and the French conquest in
the 19th century. The king was the ultimate source of political authority, the
final dispenser of justice, law, and supreme commander-in-chief of the armed
forces, as well as overseer of religious rituals. Administration was carried
out by mandarins who were trained exactly like their Chinese counterparts (i.e.
by rigorous study of Confucian texts). Overall, Vietnam remained very
efficiently and stably governed except in times of war and dynastic breakdown,
and its administrative system was probably far more advanced than that of any
other Southeast Asian state. No serious challenge to the king's authority ever
arose, as titles of nobility were bestowed purely as honors and were not
hereditary. Periodic land reforms broke up large estates and ensured that
powerful landowners could not emerge. No religious/priestly class ever arose
outside of the mandarins either. This stagnant absolutism ensured a stable,
well-ordered society, but also total resistance to any social, cultural, or
technological innovations. Reformers looked only to the past for inspiration.
Literacy remained the provenance of the upper classes. Initially, Chinese was
used for writing purposes, but by the 13th century, a set of derivative
characters known as Ch·ªØ N√¥m emerged that allowed native Vietnamese words to
be written. However, it remained limited to poetry, literature, and practical
texts like medicine while all state and official documents were written in
Classical Chinese. Aside from some mining and fishing, subsistence agriculture
was the primary activity of most Vietnamese, and economic development and trade
were not promoted or encouraged by the state. Ming domination & Posterior L√™
Dynasty (1407 ‚Äì 1527). In 1407, under the pretext of helping to restore the
Tr·∫ßn Dynasty, Chinese Ming troops invaded ƒê·∫°i Ngu and captured H·ªì Qu√Ω
Ly and H·ªì H√°n Th∆∞∆°ng. The H·ªì Dynasty came to an end after only 7 years
in power. The Ming occupying force annexed ƒê·∫°i Ngu into the Ming Empire
after claiming that there was no heir to Tr·∫ßn throne. Vietnam, weakened by
dynastic feuds and the wars with Champa, quickly succumbed. The Ming conquest
was harsh. Vietnam was annexed directly as a province of China, the old policy
of cultural assimilation again imposed forcibly, and the country was ruthlessly
exploited. However by this time, Vietnamese nationalism had reached a point
where attempts to turn them into Chinese could only arose further resistance.
Almost immediately, Tr·∫ßn loyalists started a resistance war. The resistance,
under the leadership of Tr·∫ßn Quƒ© at first gained some advances, yet as
Tr·∫ßn Quƒ© executed two top commanders out of suspicion, a rift widened within
his ranks and resulted in his defeat in 1413. In 1418, a wealthy farmer, L√™
L·ª£i, led the Lam S∆°n uprising against the Ming from his base of Lam S∆°n
(Thanh H√≥a province). Overcoming many early setbacks and with strategic
advices from Nguy·ªÖn Tr√£i, L√™ L·ª£i's movement finally gathered momentum,
marched northward, and launched a siege at ƒê√¥ng Quan (now Hanoi), the capital
of the Ming occupation. The Ming Emperor sent a reinforcement force, but L√™
L·ª£i staged an ambush and killed the Ming commander, Li·ªÖu ThƒÉng (Liu
Sheng), in Chi LƒÉng. Ming troops at ƒê√¥ng Quan surrendered. The Lam S∆°n
revolution killed 300,000 Ming soldiers. In 1428, L√™ L·ª£i ascended to the
throne and began the H·∫≠u L√™ Dynasty (Posterior or Later L√™). L√™ L·ª£i
renamed the country back to ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát and moved the capital back to ThƒÉng
Long. The L√™ Dynasty carried out land reforms to revitalize the economy after
the war. Unlike the L√Ω and Tr·∫ßn kings, who were more influenced by Buddhism,
the L√™ kings leaned toward Confucianism. A comprehensive set of laws, the
H·ªìng ƒê·ª©c code was introduced with some strong Confucian elements, yet also
included some progressive rules, such as the rights of women. Art and
architecture during the L√™ Dynasty also became more influenced by Chinese
styles than during the L√Ω and Tr·∫ßn Dynasty. The L√™ Dynasty commissioned the
drawing of national maps and had Ng√¥ Sƒ© Li√™n continue the task of writing
ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát's history up to the time of L√™ L·ª£i. King L√™ Th√°nh T√¥ng
opened hospitals and had officials distribute medicines to areas affected with
epidemics. Overpopulation and land shortages stimulated Vietnamese expansion
south. In 1471, Le troops led by king L√™ Th√°nh T√¥ng invaded Champa in the
1471 Vietnamese invasion of Champa and captured its capital Vijaya. This event
effectively ended Champa as a powerful kingdom, although some smaller surviving
Cham states lasted for a few centuries more. It initiated the dispersal of the
Cham people across Southeast Asia. With the kingdom of Champa mostly destroyed
and the Cham people exiled or suppressed, Vietnamese colonization of what is
now central Vietnam proceeded without substantial resistance. However, despite
becoming greatly outnumbered by Kinh (Vi·ªát) settlers and the integration of
formerly Cham territory into the Vietnamese nation, the majority of Cham people
nevertheless remained in Vietnam and they are now considered one of the key
minorities in modern Vietnam. Vietnamese armies also raided the Mekong Delta,
which the decaying Khmer Empire could no longer defend. The city of Hu·∫ø,
founded in 1600 lies close to where the Champa capital of Indrapura once stood.
In 1479, King L√™ Th√°nh T√¥ng also campaigned against Laos and captured its
capital Luang Prabang. He made further incursions westwards into the Irrawaddy
River region in modern-day Burma before withdrawing. Divided period (1527 ‚Äì
1802). M·∫°c & Restored L√™ dynasties. The L√™ dynasty was overthrown by its
general named M·∫°c ƒêƒÉng Dung in 1527. He killed the L√™ emperor and
proclaimed himself emperor, starting the M·∫°c Dynasty. After defeating many
revolutions for two years, M·∫°c ƒêƒÉng Dung adopted the Tr·∫ßn Dynasty's
practice and ceded the throne to his son, M·∫°c ƒêƒÉng Doanh, and he became
Th√°i Th∆∞·ª£ng Ho√ ng. Meanwhile, Nguy·ªÖn Kim, a former official in the L√™
court, revolted against the M·∫°c and helped king L√™ Trang T√¥ng restore the
L√™ court in the Thanh H√≥a area. Thus a civil war began between the Northern
Court (M·∫°c) and the Southern Court (Restored L√™). Nguy·ªÖn Kim's side
controlled the southern part of ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát (from Thanhhoa to the south),
leaving the north (including ƒê√¥ng Kinh-Hanoi) under M·∫°c control. When
Nguy·ªÖn Kim was assassinated in 1545, military power fell into the hands of
his son-in-law, Tr·ªãnh Ki·ªÉm. In 1558, Nguy·ªÖn Kim's son, Nguy·ªÖn Ho√ ng,
suspecting that Tr·ªãnh Ki·ªÉm might kill him as he had done to his brother to
secure power, asked to be governor of the far south provinces around present-
day Qu·∫£ng B√¨nh to B√¨nh ƒê·ªãnh. Hoang pretended to be insane, so Kiem was
fooled into thinking that sending Hoang south was a good move as Hoang would be
quickly killed in the lawless border regions. However, Hoang governed the south
effectively while Tr·ªãnh Ki·ªÉm, and then his son Tr·ªãnh T√πng, carried on
the war against the M·∫°c. Nguy·ªÖn Ho√ ng sent money and soldiers north to
help the war but gradually he became more and more independent, transforming
their realm's economic fortunes by turning it into an international trading
post. The civil war between the L√™/Tr·ªãnh and M·∫°c dynasties ended in 1592,
when the army of Tr·ªãnh T√πng conquered Hanoi and executed king M·∫°c M·∫≠u
H·ª£p. Survivors of the M·∫°c royal family fled to the northern mountains in
the province of Cao B·∫±ng and continued to rule there until 1677 when Tr·ªãnh
T·∫°c conquered this last M·∫°c territory. The L√™ kings, ever since Nguy·ªÖn
Kim's restoration, only acted as figureheads. After the fall of the M·∫°c
Dynasty, all real power in the north belonged to the Tr·ªãnh Lords. Meanwhile,
the Ming court reluctantly decided on a military intervention into the
Vietnamese civil war, but M·∫°c ƒêƒÉng Dung offered ritual submission to the
Ming Empire, which was accepted. Tr·ªãnh & Nguy·ªÖn lords. In the year 1600,
Nguy·ªÖn Ho√ ng also declared himself Lord (officially "V∆∞∆°ng", popularly
"Ch√∫a") and refused to send more money or soldiers to help the Tr·ªãnh. He
also moved his capital to Ph√∫ Xu√¢n, modern-day Hu·∫ø. Nguy·ªÖn Ho√ ng died in
1613 after having ruled the south for 55 years. He was succeeded by his 6th
son, Nguy·ªÖn Ph√∫c Nguy√™n, who likewise refused to acknowledge the power of
the Tr·ªãnh, yet still pledged allegiance to the L√™ king. Tr·ªãnh Tr√°ng
succeeded Tr·ªãnh T√πng, his father, upon his death in 1623. Tr√°ng ordered
Nguy·ªÖn Ph√∫c Nguy√™n to submit to his authority. The order was refused twice.
In 1627, Tr·ªãnh Tr√°ng sent 150,000 troops southward in an unsuccessful
military campaign. The Tr·ªãnh were much stronger, with a larger population,
economy and army, but they were unable to vanquish the Nguy·ªÖn, who had built
two defensive stone walls and invested in Portuguese artillery. The Tr·ªãnh-
Nguy·ªÖn War lasted from 1627 until 1672. The Tr·ªãnh army staged at least
seven offensives, all of which failed to capture Ph√∫ Xu√¢n. For a time,
starting in 1651, the Nguy·ªÖn themselves went on the offensive and attacked
parts of Tr·ªãnh territory. However, the Tr·ªãnh, under a new leader, Tr·ªãnh
T·∫°c, forced the Nguy·ªÖn back by 1655. After one last offensive in 1672,
Tr·ªãnh T·∫°c agreed to a truce with the Nguy·ªÖn Lord Nguy·ªÖn Ph√∫c T·∫ßn.
The country was effectively divided in two. Advent of the Europeans & southward
expansion. The West's exposure in Vietnam and Vietnam's exposure to Westerners
dated back to 166 AD with the arrival of merchants from the Roman Empire, to
1292 with the visit of Marco Polo, and the early 16th century with the arrival
of Portuguese in 1516 and other European traders and missionaries. Alexandre de
Rhodes, a French Jesuit priest, improved on earlier work by Portuguese
missionaries and developed the Vietnamese romanized alphabet Qu·ªëc Ng·ªØ in
"Dictionarium Annamiticum Lusitanam et Latinum" in 1651. Various European
efforts to establish trading posts in Vietnam failed, but missionaries were
allowed to operate for some time until the mandarins began concluding that
Christianity (which had succeeded in converting up to a tenth of the population
by 1700) was a threat to the Confucian social order since it condemned ancestor
worship as idolatry. Vietnamese attitudes to Europeans and Christianity
hardened as they began to increasingly see it as a way of undermining society.
Between 1627 and 1775, two powerful families had partitioned the country: the
Nguy·ªÖn Lords ruled the South and the Tr·ªãnh Lords ruled the North. The
Tr·ªãnh-Nguy·ªÖn War gave European traders the opportunities to support each
side with weapons and technology: the Portuguese assisted the Nguy·ªÖn in the
South while the Dutch helped the Tr·ªãnh in the North. The Tr·ªãnh and the
Nguy·ªÖn maintained a relative peace for the next hundred years, during which
both sides made significant accomplishments. The Tr·ªãnh created centralized
government offices in charge of state budget and producing currency, unified
the weight units into a decimal system, established printing shops to reduce
the need to import printed materials from China, opened a military academy, and
compiled history books. Meanwhile, the Nguy·ªÖn Lords continued the southward
expansion by the conquest of the remaining Cham land. Vi·ªát settlers also
arrived in the sparsely populated area known as "Water Chenla", which was the
lower Mekong Delta portion of Chenla (present-day Cambodia). Between the mid-
17th century to mid-18th century, as Chenla was weakened by internal strife and
Siamese invasions, the Nguy·ªÖn Lords used various means, political marriage,
diplomatic pressure, political and military favors, to gain the area around
present day Saigon and the Mekong Delta. The Nguy·ªÖn army at times also
clashed with the Siamese army to establish influence over Chenla. T√¢y S∆°n
Dynasty. In 1771, the T√¢y S∆°n revolution broke out in Quy Nh∆°n, which was
under the control of the Nguy·ªÖn. The leaders of this revolution were three
brothers named Nguy·ªÖn Nh·∫°c, Nguy·ªÖn L·ªØ, and Nguy·ªÖn Hu·ªá, not related
to the Nguy·ªÖn lords. By 1776, the T√¢y S∆°n had occupied all of the Nguy·ªÖn
Lord's land and killed almost the entire royal family. The surviving prince
Nguy·ªÖn Ph√∫c √Ånh (often called Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh) fled to Siam, and obtained
military support from the Siamese king. Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh came back with 50,000
Siamese troops to regain power, but was defeated at the Battle of R·∫°ch
G·∫ßm‚ÄìXo√ i M√∫t and almost killed. Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh fled Vietnam, but he did
not give up. The T√¢y S∆°n army commanded by Nguy·ªÖn Hu·ªá marched north in
1786 to fight the Tr·ªãnh Lord, Tr·ªãnh Kh·∫£i. The Tr·ªãnh army failed and
Tr·ªãnh Kh·∫£i committed suicide. The T√¢y S∆°n army captured the capital in
less than two months. The last L√™ emperor, L√™ Chi√™u Th·ªëng, fled to Qing-
controlled China and petitioned the Manchu-Qing Emperor for help. The Qing
emperor Qianlong supplied L√™ Chi√™u Th·ªëng with a massive army of around
200,000 troops to regain his throne from the usurper. Nguy·ªÖn Hu·ªá proclaimed
himself Emperor Quang Trung and defeated the Qing troops with 100,000 men in a
surprise 7 day campaign during the lunar new year (T·∫øt). During his reign,
Quang Trung envisioned many reforms but died by unknown reason on the way march
south in 1792, at the age of 40. During the reign of Emperor Quang Trung,
ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát was in fact divided into three political entities. The T√¢y S∆°n
leader, Nguy·ªÖn Nh·∫°c, ruled the centre of the country from his capital Qui
Nh∆°n. Emperor Quang Trung ruled the north from the capital Ph√∫ Xu√¢n Hu·∫ø.
In the South, Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh, assisted by many talented recruits from the South,
captured Gia ƒê·ªãnh (present day Saigon) in 1788 and established a strong base
for his force. After Quang Trung's death, the T√¢y S∆°n Dynasty became unstable
as the remaining brothers fought against each other and against the people who
were loyal to Nguy·ªÖn Hu·ªá's infant son. Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh sailed north in 1799,
capturing T√¢y S∆°n's stronghold Qui Nh∆°n. In 1801, his force took Ph√∫ Xu√¢n,
the T√¢y S∆°n capital. Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh finally won the war in 1802, when he
sieged ThƒÉng Long (Hanoi) and executed Nguy·ªÖn Hu·ªá's son, Nguy·ªÖn Quang
To·∫£n, along with many T√¢y S∆°n generals and officials. Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh
ascended the throne and called himself Emperor Gia Long. Gia is for Gia
ƒê·ªãnh, the old name of Saigon; Long is for ThƒÉng Long, the old name of
Hanoi. Hence Gia Long implied the unification of the country. The Nguy·ªÖn
dynasty lasted until B·∫£o ƒê·∫°i's abdication in 1945. As China for centuries
had referred to ƒê·∫°i Vi·ªát as Annam, Gia Long asked the Manchu Qing emperor
to rename the country, from Annam to Nam Vi·ªát. To prevent any confusion of
Gia Long's kingdom with Tri·ªáu ƒê√ 's ancient kingdom, the Manchu emperor
reversed the order of the two words to Vi·ªát Nam. The name Vietnam is thus
known to be used since Emperor Gia Long's reign. Recently historians have found
that this name had existed in older books in which Vietnamese referred to their
country as Vietnam. The Period of Division with its many tragedies and dramatic
historical developments inspired many poets and gave rise to some Vietnamese
masterpieces in verse, including the epic poem "The Tale of Ki·ªÅu" ("Truy·ªán
Ki·ªÅu") by Nguy·ªÖn Du, "Song of a Soldier's Wife" ("Chinh Ph·ª• Ng√¢m") by
ƒê·∫∑ng Tr·∫ßn C√¥n and ƒêo√ n Th·ªã ƒêi·ªÉm, and a collection of satirical,
erotically charged poems by a female poet, H·ªì Xu√¢n H∆∞∆°ng. Nguy·ªÖn Dynasty
& French protectorate (1802 ‚Äì 1945). In 1784, during the conflict between
Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh, the surviving heir of the Nguy·ªÖn Lords, and the T√¢y S∆°n
Dynasty, a French Roman Catholic prelate, Pigneaux de Behaine, sailed to France
to seek military backing for Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh. At Louis XVI's court, Pigneaux
brokered the Little Treaty of Versailles which promised French military aid in
exchange for Vietnamese concessions. However, the French Revolution caused
Pigneaux's plan failed to materialize. He went to the French territory of
Pondicherry (India), and secured two ships, a regiment of Indian troops, and a
handful of volunteers and returned to Vietnam in 1788. One of Pigneaux's
volunteers, Jean-Marie Dayot, reorganized Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh's navy along European
lines and defeated the T√¢y S∆°n at Qui Nh∆°n in 1792. A few years later,
Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh's forces captured Saigon, where Pigneaux died in 1799. Another
volunteer, Victor Olivier de Puymanel would later build the Gia ƒê·ªãnh fort in
central Saigon. After Nguy·ªÖn √Ånh established the Nguy·ªÖn Dynasty in 1802,
he tolerated Catholicism and employed some Europeans in his court as advisors.
His successors were more conservative Confucians and resisted Westernization.
The next Nguy·ªÖn emperors, Minh M·∫°ng, Thi·ªáu Tr·ªã, and T·ª± ƒê·ª©c
brutally suppressed Catholicism and pursued a 'closed door' policy, perceiving
the Westerners as a threat, following events such as the L√™ VƒÉn Kh√¥i revolt
when a French missionary, Fr. Joseph Marchand, encouraged local Catholics to
revolt in an attempt to install a Catholic emperor. Catholics, both Vietnamese
and foreign-born, were persecuted in retaliation. Trade with the West slowed
during this period. There were frequent uprisings against the Nguy·ªÖns, with
hundreds of such events being recorded in the annals. These acts were soon
being used as excuses for France to invade Vietnam. The early Nguy·ªÖn Dynasty
had engaged in many of the constructive activities of its predecessors,
building roads, digging canals, issuing a legal code, holding examinations,
sponsoring care facilities for the sick, compiling maps and history books, and
exerting influence over Cambodia and Laos. Under the orders of Napoleon III of
France, Rigault de Genouilly's gunships attacked the port of ƒê√  N·∫µng in
1858, causing significant damage, yet failed to gain any foothold, in the
process being afflicted by the humidity and tropical diseases. De Genouilly
decided to sail south and captured the poorly defended city of Gia ƒê·ªãnh
(present-day Ho Chi Minh City). From 1859‚Äì67, French troops expanded their
control over all six provinces on the Mekong delta and formed a colony known as
Cochinchina. A few years later, French troops landed in northern Vietnam (which
they called Tonkin) and captured H√  N·ªôi twice in 1873 and 1882. The French
managed to keep their grip on Tonkin although, twice, their top commanders
Francis Garnier and Henri Rivi√®re, were ambushed and killed fighting pirates
of the Black Flag Army hired by the mandarins. France assumed control over the
whole of Vietnam after the Tonkin Campaign (1883‚Äì1886). French Indochina was
formed in October 1887 from Annam (Trung K·ª≥, central Vietnam), Tonkin (B·∫Øc
K·ª≥, northern Vietnam), Cochinchina (Nam K·ª≥, southern Vietnam, and Cambodia,
with Laos added in 1893). Within French Indochina, Cochinchina had the status
of a colony, Annam was nominally a protectorate where the Nguy·ªÖn Dynasty
still ruled, and Tonkin had a French governor with local governments run by
Vietnamese officials. After Gia ƒê·ªãnh fell to French troops, many Vietnamese
resistance movements broke out in occupied areas, some led by former court
officers, such as Tr∆∞∆°ng ƒê·ªãnh, some by peasants, such as Nguy·ªÖn Trung
Tr·ª±c, who sank the French gunship L'Esperance using guerilla tactics. In the
north, most movements were led by former court officers and lasted decades,
with Phan ƒê√¨nh Ph√πng fighting in central Vietnam until 1895. In the northern
mountains, the former bandit leader Ho√ ng Hoa Th√°m fought until 1911. Even
the teenage Nguy·ªÖn Emperor H√ m Nghi left the Imperial Palace of Hu·∫ø in
1885 with regent T√¥n Th·∫•t Thuy·∫øt and started the C·∫ßn V∆∞∆°ng, or "Save
the King", movement, trying to rally the people to resist the French. He was
captured in 1888 and exiled to French Algeria. Decades later, two more Nguy·ªÖn
kings, Th√ nh Th√°i and Duy T√¢n were also exiled to Africa for having anti-
French tendencies. The former was deposed on the pretext of insanity and Duy
T√¢n was caught in a conspiracy with the mandarin Tr·∫ßn Cao V√¢n trying to
start an uprising. However, lack of modern weapons and equipment prevented
these resistance movements from being able to engage the French in open combat.
The various anti-French revolts started by mandarins were carried out with the
primary goal of restoring the old feudal society. However, by 1900 a new
generation of Vietnamese were coming of age who had never lived in precolonial
Vietnam. These young activists were as eager as their grandparents to see
independence restored, but they realized that returning to the feudal order was
not feasible and that modern technology and governmental systems were needed.
Having been exposed to Western philosophy, they aimed to establish a republic
upon independence, departing from the royalist sentiments of the C·∫ßn V∆∞∆°ng
movements. Some of them set up Vietnamese independence societies in Japan,
which many viewed as a model society (i.e. an Asian nation that had modernized,
but retained its own culture and institutions). There emerged two parallel
movements of modernization. The first was the "ƒê√¥ng Du" ("Go East") Movement
started in 1905 by Phan B·ªôi Ch√¢u. Ch√¢u's plan was to send Vietnamese
students to Japan to learn modern skills, so that in the future they could lead
a successful armed revolt against the French. With Prince C∆∞·ªùng ƒê·ªÉ, he
started two organizations in Japan: "Duy T√¢n H·ªôi" and "Vi·ªát Nam C√¥ng
Hi·∫øn H·ªôi". Due to French diplomatic pressure, Japan later deported Ch√¢u to
China. Phan Ch√¢u Trinh, who favored a peaceful, non-violent struggle to gain
independence, led a second movement, "Duy T√¢n" ("Modernization"), which
stressed education for the masses, modernizing the country, fostering
understanding and tolerance between the French and the Vietnamese, and peaceful
transitions of power. The early part of the 20th century saw the growing in
status of the Romanized "Qu·ªëc Ng·ªØ" alphabet for the Vietnamese language.
Vietnamese patriots realized the potential of "Qu·ªëc Ng·ªØ" as a useful tool
to quickly reduce illiteracy and to educate the masses. The traditional Chinese
scripts or the "N√¥m" script were seen as too cumbersome and too difficult to
learn. The use of prose in literature also became popular with the appearance
of many novels; most famous were those from the "T·ª± L·ª±c VƒÉn ƒêo√ n"
literary circle . As the French suppressed both movements, and after witnessing
revolutionaries in action in China and Russia, Vietnamese revolutionaries began
to turn to more radical paths. Phan B·ªôi Ch√¢u created the Vi·ªát Nam Quang
Ph·ª•c H·ªôi in Guangzhou, planning armed resistance against the French. In
1925, French agents captured him in Shanghai and spirited him to Vietnam. Due
to his popularity, Ch√¢u was spared from execution and placed under house
arrest until his death in 1940. In 1927, the Vi·ªát Nam Qu·ªëc D√¢n ƒê·∫£ng
(Vietnamese Nationalist Party), modeled after the Kuomintang in China, was
founded. In 1930, the party launched the armed Yen Bai mutiny in Tonkin which
resulted in its chairman, Nguy·ªÖn Th√°i H·ªçc and many other leaders captured
and executed by the guillotine. Marxism was also introduced into Vietnam with
the emergence of three separate Communist parties; the Indochinese Communist
Party, Annamese Communist Party and the Indochinese Communist Union, joined
later by a Trotskyist movement led by T·∫° Thu Th√¢u. In 1930, the Communist
International (Comintern) sent Nguy·ªÖn √Åi Qu·ªëc to Hong Kong to coordinate
the unification of the parties into the Vietnamese Communist Party with Tr·∫ßn
Ph√∫ as the first Secretary General. Later the party changed its name to the
Indochinese Communist Party as the Comintern, under Stalin, did not favor
nationalistic sentiments. Nguy·ªÖn √Åi Qu·ªëc was a leftist revolutionary
living in France since 1911. He participated in founding the French Communist
Party and in 1924 traveled to the Soviet Union to join the Comintern. Through
the late 1920s, he acted as a Comintern agent to help build Communist movements
in Southeast Asia. During the 1930s, the Vietnamese Communist Party was nearly
wiped out under French suppression with the execution of top leaders such as
Ph√∫, L√™ H·ªìng Phong, and Nguy·ªÖn VƒÉn C·ª´. In 1940, during World War II,
Japan invaded Indochina, keeping the Vichy French colonial administration in
place as a Japanese puppet. In 1941 Nguy·ªÖn √Åi Qu·ªëc, now known as H·ªì Ch√≠
Minh, arrived in northern Vietnam to form the Vi·ªát Minh Front, short for
"Vi·ªát Nam ƒê·ªôc L·∫≠p ƒê·ªìng Minh H·ªôi" (League for the Independence of
Vietnam). The Vi·ªát Minh Front was supposed to be an umbrella group for all
parties fighting for Vietnam's independence, but was dominated by the Communist
Party. The Vi·ªát Minh had a modest armed force and during the war worked with
the American Office of Strategic Services to collect intelligence on the
Japanese. From China, other non-Communist Vietnamese parties also joined the
Vi·ªát Minh and established armed forces with backing from the Kuomintang.
Between 1944-1945, millions of Vietnamese people starved to death in the
Japanese occupation of Vietnam. Republic (from 1945). Communist North &
capitalist South (1945 ‚Äì 1975). Japan's defeat by the Allies of World War II
created a power vacuum for Vietnamese communists to seize power in August 1945
before French authorities were able to return to reclaim control of the
government. Their initial success in staging uprisings and in seizing control
of most of the country by September 1945 was partially undone, however, by the
return of the French a few months later. Emperor B·∫£o √ê·∫°i abdicated in
August 1945, ending the Nguy·ªÖn Dynasty. In September 1945, H·ªì Ch√≠ Minh
declared Vietnam independent under the new name of the Democratic Republic of
Vietnam (DRVN) and held the position of Chairman (Ch·ªß T·ªãch). Communist rule
was cut short, however, by nationalist Chinese and British occupation forces
whose presence tended to support the Communist Party's political opponents. In
1946, Vietnam had its first National Assembly election (won by the Viet Minh in
central and northern Vietnam), which drafted the first constitution, but the
situation was still precarious: the French tried to regain power by force; some
Cochinchinese politicians formed a seceding government the Republic of
Cochinchina (C·ªông h√≤a Nam K·ª≥) while the non-Communist and Communist forces
were engaging each other in sporadic battle. Stalinists purged Trotskyists.
Religious sects and resistance groups formed their own militias. The Communists
eventually suppressed all non-Communist parties but failed to secure a peace
deal with France. Full-scale war broke out between the Vi·ªát Minh and France
in late 1946 and the First Indochina War officially began. Realizing that
colonialism was coming to an end worldwide, France fashioned a semi-independent
State of Vietnam, within the French Union, with B·∫£o ƒê·∫°i as Head of State.
France finally persuaded to relinquish its colonies in Indochina in 1954, when
Vietnamese forces defeated the French at Dien Bien Phu. The 1954 Geneva
Conference left Vietnam a divided nation, with H·ªì Ch√≠ Minh's communist
government ruling the North from Hanoi and Ng√¥ ƒê√¨nh Di·ªám's regime,
supported by the United States, ruling the South from Saigon (later H·ªì Ch√≠
Minh City). the communist government massacred landowners and peasant rebels in
a series of purges, with upper estimates of the death toll ranging between
100,000 and 900,000. As a result of the Vietnam (Second Indochina) War
(1954‚Äì75), Viet Cong and regular People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) forces from
the North unified Vietnam under communist rule. In this conflict, the
insurgents‚Äîwith logistical support from the Soviet Union‚Äîultimately
defeated the Army of the Republic of Vietnam, which sought to maintain South
Vietnamese independence with the support of the U.S. military, whose troop
strength peaked at 540,000 during the communist-led Tet Offensive in 1968. The
North did not abide by the terms of the 1973 Paris Agreement, which officially
settled the war by calling for free elections in the South and peaceful
reunification. Two years after the withdrawal of the last U.S. forces in 1973,
Saigon, the capital of South Vietnam, fell to the communists, and the South
Vietnamese army surrendered on 30 April 1975. In 1976, the government of united
Vietnam renamed Saigon as H·ªì Ch√≠ Minh City in honor of H·ªì, who died in
September 1969. The Vietnamese government in 1995 claimed that 2,000,000
Vietnamese civilians on both sides died in the war; overall estimates of the
number of Vietnamese soldiers and civilians killed vary from fewer than one
million to more than three million. Socialism after 1975. In the post-1975
period, it was immediately apparent that the effectiveness of Vietnamese
Communist Party (VCP) policies did not necessarily extend to the party's
peacetime nation-building plans. Having unified North and South politically,
the VCP still had to integrate them socially and economically. In this task,
VCP policy makers were confronted with the South's resistance to communist
transformation, as well as traditional animosities arising from cultural and
historical differences between North and South. Up to 155,000 refugees fleeing
the final NVA Spring Offensive were killed or abducted on the road to Tuy Hoa
in 1975. Sources have estimated that 165,000 South Vietnamese died in the re-
education camps out of 1-2.5 million sent, while the number executed could have
been as high as 200,000. The number of Vietnamese boat people who died is
estimated between 100,000 and 500,000, out of the 2.5 million that fled. In
1988, Vietnam suffered a famine that afflicted millions. The harsh postwar
crackdown on remnants of capitalism in the South led to the collapse of the
economy during the 1980s. With the economy in shambles, Vietnam's government
altered its course and adopted consensus policies that bridged the divergent
views of pragmatists and communist traditionalists. In 1986, Nguy·ªÖn VƒÉn
Linh, who was elevated to VCP general secretary the following year, launched a
campaign for political and economic renewal (ƒê·ªïi M·ªõi). His policies were
characterized by political and economic experimentation that was similar to
simultaneous reform agenda undertaken in the Soviet Union. Reflecting the
spirit of political compromise, Vietnam phased out its reeducation effort. The
government stopped promoting agricultural and industrial cooperatives. Farmers
were permitted to till private plots alongside state-owned land, and in 1990
the government passed a law encouraging the establishment of private
businesses. Compounding economic difficulties were new military challenges. In
the late 1970s, two countries‚ÄîCambodia and China‚Äîposed threats to Vietnam.
Clashes between Vietnamese and Cambodian communists at the common border began
in 1975. To neutralize the threat, Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978
and overran Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, driving out the incumbent Khmer
Rouge regime and initiating a prolonged military occupation of the country. In
February and March 1979, China retaliated against Vietnam's incursion into
Cambodia by launching a limited invasion of Vietnam, but the Chinese foray was
quickly rebuffed. Relations between the two countries had been deteriorating
for some time. Territorial disagreements along the border and in the South
China Sea that had remained dormant during the Vietnam War were revived at the
war's end, and a postwar campaign engineered by Hanoi against the ethnic
Chinese Hoa community elicited a strong protest from Beijing. China was
displeased with Vietnam's alliance with the Soviet Union. During its incursion
into Cambodia in 1978‚Äì89, Vietnam's international isolation extended to
relations with the United States. The United States, in addition to citing
Vietnam's minimal cooperation in accounting for Americans who were missing in
action (MIAs) as an obstacle to normal relations, barred normal ties as long as
Vietnamese troops occupied Cambodia. Washington also continued to enforce the
trade embargo imposed on Hanoi at the conclusion of the war in 1975. Throughout
the 1980s, Vietnam received nearly $3 billion a year in economic and military
aid from the Soviet Union and conducted most of its trade with the USSR and
other COMECON (Council for Mutual Economic Assistance) countries. In 1986, the
Vietnamese government initiated market reforms called ƒê·ªïi M·ªõi. Changing
names. Almost all Vietnamese dynasties are named after the king's family name,
unlike the Chinese dynasties, whose names are dictated by the dynasty founders
and often used as the country's name. The H·ªìng B√ ng Dynasty was a dynasty of
the ancient Vietnamese nation before recorded history. The Th·ª•c, Tri·ªáu,
Anterior L√Ω, Ng√¥, ƒêinh, Anterior L√™, L√Ω, Tr·∫ßn, H·ªì, L√™, M·∫°c, T√¢y
S∆°n, and Nguy·ªÖn are usually regarded by historians as formal dynasties.
Nguy·ªÖn Hu·ªá's "T√¢y S∆°n Dynasty" is rather a name created by historians to
avoid confusion with Nguy·ªÖn Anh's Nguy·ªÖn Dynasty.
