History of Austria The history of Austria covers the history of Austria and its
predecessor states, from the farming communities of the early Stone Age,
through to the present sovereign state. The name "Ostarrîchi" (Austria) has
been in use since 996 CE when it was a margravate of the Duchy of Bavaria and
from 1156 an independent archduchy of the Holy Roman Empire of the German
nation ("Heiliges Römisches Reich" 962–1806). During this time Austria was
dominated by the Austrian House of Habsburg ("Haus Österreich") from 1273 to
1806 when the empire came to an end. Austria then emerged in to the nineteenth
century as the Austrian Empire, a part of the German Confederation until the
Austro-Prussian War of 1866 excluded her, after which Austria continued as the
Austro-Hungarian Empire (1867–1918) as a dual kingdom with Hungary. When this
empire collapsed in 1918 after the end of World War I, Austria was reduced to
the main German speaking areas of the empire corresponding to its current
frontiers and adopted the name German Austria, since it wanted to join the new
German Weimar Republic. This union was forbidden by the victorious Allies at
the Treaty of Versailles. Following the First Republic (1918-1933)
Austrofascism tried to keep Austria independent from the German Reich and in
1938 was annexed by Nazi Germany with the support of a large part of the
Austrian people. After the Second World War Austria again became an independent
republic as the Second Republic in 1955 and joined the European Union in 1995.
Historiography. The history of Austria creates a number of problems. For
instance, should it be confined to the current relatively small Republic of
German-Austria, dating from the end of the First World War, or to all lands
that fell under the various rulers of what is now known as Austria? Should
Austrian history include 1938-1945 when it no longer existed, having been
annexed to the German Third Reich? Of the lands now encompassed in modern
Austria, many were added over time and only two of the nine provinces or
"Länder" are strictly 'Austria', namely the 'core' provinces of Lower Austria
and Upper Austria, while other parts are now included in surrounding countries
such as Italy or the Czech Republic. Within Austria there are large regional
variations, and parts of Austria have at various times wished to become part of
adjacent countries. (Beller 2006, 2-9). Overview. Human habitation of current
Austria can be traced back to the first farming communities of the early Stone
Age (Paleolithic era). In the late Iron Age it was occupied by a Celtic culture
(ca. 800 BCE), the first organised nation state being the Celtic Kingdom of
Noricum dating from ca. 800-400 BCE. This subsequently became incorporated into
the Roman Empire's lands to the south of the Danube at the end of the first
century BC, and was incorporated as the Province of Noricum around 40 AD. The
most important Roman settlement was that at Carnuntum. Later, in the sixth
century, another Celto-Germanic people, the Bavarii occupied these lands until
it fell under the Frankish Empire in the ninth century. Around 800 AD
Charlemagne established an the outpost of Avar March ("Awarenmark") in what is
now Lower Austria, to hold back advances from Slavs and Avars from the East. In
the tenth century an eastern (east of the River Enns) outpost of the Duchy of
Bavaria, bordering Hungary, was established as the "Marchia orientalis" (March
of the East) or 'Margraviate of Austria' in 976, ruled by the Margraves of
Babenberg. This 'Eastern March' (borderland), in German was known as
"Ostarrîchi" or 'Eastern Realm', hence 'Austria'. The first mention of
"Ostarrîchi" occurs in a document of that name dated 996 CE. From 1156 the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa created an independent duchy (Privilegium Minus)
under the House of Babenberg, until its extinction in 1246, corresponding to
modern Lower Austria. Following the Babenberg dynasty and a brief interregnum,
Austria came under the rule of the German king Rudolf I of Habsburg (1276 –
1282), beginning a dynasty that would last through seven centuries becoming
progressively distinct from neighbouring Bavaria, within the Holy Roman Empire.
The fifteenth and early sixteenth century saw considerable extension of the
Habsburg territories through diplomatic means and marriage ties to include
Spain, the Netherlands and parts of Italy. This expansionism, together with
French aspirations and the resultant Habsburg-French or Bourbon-Habsburg
rivalry were important factors shaping European History for 200 years (1516-
1756). By the Treaty of Worms ("Wormser Vertrag") of April 28 1521 the Emperor
Charles V (Archduke of Austria 1519–1521) split the dynasty, bestowing the
hereditary Austrian lands ("Österreichische Länder") on his brother,
Ferdinand I (1521–1564) and the first central administrative structures were
established. By 1526 Ferdinand had also inherited the kingdoms of Bohemia, and
Hungary after the Battle of Mohács which partitioned the latter. However the
Ottoman Empire now lay directly adjacent to the Austrian lands. Even after the
unsuccessful first Siege of Vienna by the Turks in 1529, the Ottoman threat
persisted for another one and a half centuries. The 16th Century also saw the
spread of the Reformation through the Austrian lands. From around 1600 the
Habsburg policy of recatholicisation or Catholic Renewal ("Rekatholisierung")
was to eventually lead to the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648), initially a
protestant-catholic struggle. However it was also a struggle for power in
central Europe, particularly the French opposition to the consolidation of
power by the Habsburg Holy Roman Empire. Eventually the pressure of the anti-
Habsburg coalition of France, Sweden, and most Protestant German states
contained their authority to the Austrian and Czech lands in 1648. In 1683, the
Ottoman forces were beaten back from Vienna a second time and eventually, in
the Great Turkish War (1683–1699), pushed back behind Belgrade. When the main
(Spanish) line of the Habsburgs died out in 1700, it precipitated the War of
Spanish Succession (1701–1714) between the Habsburgs and King Louis XIV of
France. Subsequently Austria gained control, through the 1713 Treaty of
Utrecht, of the Spanish Netherlands, Naples and Lombardy. These acquisitions
together with conquests in the Balkans gave Austria its greatest territorial
extent to date. 1713 also saw the Pragmatic Sanction, designed to prevent any
further division of the territory. But when Charles VI (Archduke 1711 – 1740)
died and was succeeded by his daughter, Maria Theresa (1740-1780) Austria was
perceived as weak by her neighbours since she could not be Empress in her own
right, leading to the War of Austrian Succession (1740 – 1748) and the Seven
Years' War (1756-1763). Subsequently Austria lost Silesia to Prussia. These
Silesian Wars initiated a long standing tension between Austria and Prussia
over imperial policy. Maria Theresa effectively reigned as Empress through her
husband, Francis Stephen of Lorraine (d. 1765) and they therefore founded the
new dynasty of Habsburg-Lorraine. During her reign extensive reforms were
initiated, and when Francis died in 1765, these were continued by her son,
Joseph II (Emperor 1765-1790; Archduke 1780-1790). However his brother, Leopold
II (1790-1792), who succeeded him was much more conservative. Austria remained
part of the Holy Roman Empire until its dissolution in 1806. Following the
coronation of Napoleon I in 1804, the then emperor and archduke Francis II
(1792-1835) responded by proclaiming the Empire of Austria. In 1806 he resigned
the imperial crown of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation, which then
ceased to exist. Following the Congress of Vienna, which restored order to
Europe following the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, Austria became part of the German
Confederation till the Austro-Prussian war of 1866, and then the Austro-
Hungarian Empire which collapsed at the end of World War I. Austria was briefly
independent (First Republic) till annexation by the German Third Reich,
partitioned after the Second World War and then became the independent
sovereign state (Second Republic) that has existed to the present day. More
information on Austrian history can be found in History of Europe. Geography
and geology. The modern state of Austria is considered to have three major
zones. The Austrian Alps which cover the majority (62%) of Austria's land mass,
consists of most of the Eastern Alps together with the northern edge of the
Southern Alps in the west and south of the country. To the north of the Danube
lies the Austrian (southern) portion of the Bohemian Massif known as the
Bohemian Forest ("Böhmerwald"), a relatively lower mountain range of granite
(10% of the Austrian land area). In German, this area is also known as the
Granite and Gneiss Plateau ("Granit- und Gneisplateau"). The remaining third of
the country consists of the foothills and lower lying areas along the Danube
valley between the two mountain ranges in the centre, and the eastern plains
along the Hungarian border, forming the western edge of the Pannonian Basin.
The Bohemian Massif and its foothills were formed in the Variscan orogeny of
the late Paleozoic era. Another important element of Austrian geology and
geography is the late Mesozoic Alpine orogeny, and the subsequent formation of
the Paratethys ocean and Molasse Basin in the Cretaceous era. The extensive
alpine regions are sparsely populated, and form a barrier to passage of peoples
apart from strategic passes which have provided access to Italy. Austria is
positioned between the eastern European countries and central-western Europe, a
position that has dictated much of its history. The Danube Valley has always
been an important corridor from the West to the Balkans and the Orient.
Prehistory. Paleolithic. The Alps were inaccessible during the Ice Age, so
human habitation dates no earlier than the Middle Paleolithic era, during the
time of the Neanderthals. The oldest traces of human habitation in Austria,
more than 250,000 years ago, were found in the Repolust Cave at Badl, near
Peggau in the Graz-Umgebung district of Styria. These include stone tools, bone
tools and pottery fragments together with mammalian remains. Some 70,000 year-
old evidence was found in the Gudenus Cave in northwestern Lower Austria. Upper
Paleolithic remains are more numerous. The best known are in the Wachau region,
including the sites of the two oldest pieces of art in Austria. These are
figurative representations of women, the Venus of Galgenberg found near
Stratzing and thought to be 32,000 years old, and the nearby Venus of
Willendorf (26,000 years old) found at Willendorf, near Krems an der Donau. In
2005 in the same area in 2005, a double infant burial site was discovered at
Krems-Wachtberg, dating from Gravettian culture (27,000 years old), the oldest
burial ground found in Austria to date. Neolithic. During the Neolithic era,
the territory of modern-day Austria was home to the Linear pottery culture, one
of the first agrarian cultures in Europe. Chalcolithic. Ötzi the Iceman, a
well-preserved mummy of a man frozen in Austrian Alps, is dated around 3300 BC.
Iron Age. The Iron Age in Austria is represented by the Hallstatt culture.
Celtic and Roman. Noricum, in ancient geography, was a Celtic kingdom (perhaps
better described as a federation of, by tradition, twelve tribes) stretching
over the area of today's Austria and a part of Slovenia. It became a province
of the Roman Empire. It was bounded on the north by the Danube, on the west by
Raetia and Vindelicia, on the east and southeast by Pannonia, on the south by
Region 10, "Venetia et Histria". Early Middle Ages. During the Migration
Period, the Slavic tribe of the Carantanians migrated into the Alps in the wake
of the expansion of their Avar overlords during the 7th century, mixed with the
Celto-Romanic population, and established the realm of Carantania, which
covered much of eastern and central Austrian territory. In the meantime, the
Germanic tribe of the Bavarians had developed in the 5th and 6th century in the
west of the country and in Bavaria, while what is today Vorarlberg had been
settled by the Alemans. Those groups mixed with the Rhaeto-Romanic population
and pushed it up into the mountains. Carantania, under pressure of the Avars,
lost its independence to Bavaria in 745 and divided between Bavaria (western
part) and Avar Khaganate (eastern part). Bavarian part of it became a
margraviate. During the following centuries, Bavarian settlers went down the
Danube and up the Alps, a process through which Austria was to become the
mostly German-speaking country it is today. The Bavarians themselves came under
the overlordship of the Carolingian Franks and subsequently became a duchy of
the Holy Roman Empire. Duke Tassilo III, who wanted to maintain Bavarian
independence, was defeated and displaced by Charlemagne in 789. An eastern
march (military borderland), the Avar March, was established in Charlemagne's
time, but it was overrun by the Hungarians in 909. Babenberg Austria. After the
defeat of the Hungarians by Emperor Otto the Great in the Battle of Lechfeld
(955), new marches were established in what is today Austria. The one known as
the "marchia orientalis" was to become the core territory of Austria and was
given to Leopold of Babenberg in 976 after the revolt of Henry II, Duke of
Bavaria. The marches were overseen by a "comes" or "dux" as appointed by the
emperor. These titles are usually translated as count or duke, but these terms
conveyed very different meanings in the Early Middle Ages, so the Latin
versions are to be preferred. In lumbardi-speaking countries, the title was
eventually regularized to "margrave" (German: "markgraf") i.e. "count of the
mark". The first recorded instance of the name Austria appeared in 996, written
as "Ostarrîchi", referring to the territory of the Babenberg March. The term
Ostmark is not historically certain and appears to be a translation of "marchia
orientalis" that came up only much later. The following centuries were
characterized first by the settlement of the country, when forests were cleared
and towns and monasteries were founded. In 1156 the Privilegium Minus elevated
Austria to the status of a duchy. In 1192, the Babenbergs also acquired the
Duchy of Styria through the Georgenberg Pact. At that time, the Babenberg Dukes
came to be one of the most influential ruling families in the region, peaking
in the reign of Leopold VI (1198–1230). However, with the slaughter of his
son Frederick II in 1246, the line went extinct, which resulted in the
"interregnum", a period of several decades during which the status of the
country was disputed. Otakar II Přemysl of Bohemia effectively controlled the
duchies of Austria, Styria and Carinthia. His reign came to an end with his
defeat in the battle of Dürnkrut and Jedenspeigen at the hand of Rudolf of
Habsburg in 1278. Following the extinction of the Babenbergs in the 13th
century, Austria came briefly under the rule of the Czech King Ottokar II of
Bohemia. Contesting the election of Rudolf I of Habsburg as emperor, Ottokar
was defeated and killed by Rudolf, who took Austria with the assistance of King
Ladislaus IV of Hungary. The beginnings of the Habsburg Monarchy (1278–1526).
Emperor Rudolf I of Habsburg gave Austria to his sons in 1278. Austria was
ruled by the Habsburgs for the next 640 years (13th century–1918). In the
14th and 15th centuries, the Habsburgs began to accumulate other provinces in
the vicinity of the Duchy of Austria, which remained a small territory along
the Danube, and Styria, which they had acquired from Ottokar along with
Austria. Carinthia and Carniola came under Habsburg rule in 1335, Tyrol in
1363. These provinces, together, became known as the Habsburg Hereditary Lands,
although they were sometimes all lumped together simply as Austria. Following
the notable but short reign of Rudolf IV (the first to claim the title of
Archduke of Austria), his brothers Albert III and Leopold III split the realms
in the Treaty of Neuberg in 1379. Albert retained Austria proper, while Leopold
took the remaining territories. In 1402, there was another split in the
"Leopoldian line", when Ernest the Iron took Inner Austria (Styria, Carinthia
and Carniola) and Frederick IV became ruler of Tyrol and Further Austria. The
territories were only reunified by Ernest's son Frederick V (Frederick III as
Holy Roman Emperor), when the "Albertinian line" (1457) and the "Elder Tyrolean
line" (1490) had become extinct. In 1438, Duke Albert V of Austria was chosen
as the successor to his father-in-law, Emperor Sigismund. Although Albert
himself only reigned for a year, from then on, every emperor was a Habsburg,
with only one exception, and Austria's rulers wee also the Holy Roman Emperors,
till 1806. The Habsburgs began also to accumulate lands far from the Hereditary
Lands. In 1477, the Archduke Maximilian, only son of Emperor Frederick III,
married the heiress of Burgundy, thus acquiring most of the Low Countries for
the family. His son Philip the Fair married the heiress of Castile and Aragon,
and thus acquired Spain and its Italian, African, and New World appendages for
the Habsburgs. The Habsburgs' hereditary territories, however, were soon
separated from this enormous empire when, in 1520, Emperor Charles V left them
to the rule of his brother, Ferdinand. Austria in the Reformation
(1526–1618). In 1526, following the Battle of Mohács, in which Ferdinand's
brother-in-law Louis II, King of Hungary and Bohemia, was killed, Ferdinand
expanded his territories, bringing Bohemia and that part of Hungary not
occupied by the Ottomans under his rule. Habsburg expansion into Hungary,
however, led to frequent conflicts with the Turks, particularly the so-called
Long War of 1593 to 1606. Austria and the other Habsburg hereditary provinces
(and Hungary and Bohemia, as well) were much affected by the Reformation.
Although the Habsburg rulers themselves remained Catholic, the provinces
themselves largely converted to Lutheranism, which Ferdinand I and his
successors, Maximilian II, Rudolf II, and Mathias largely tolerated. In the
late 16th century, however, the Counter-Reformation and the Society of Jesus
began to make its influence felt, and the Jesuit-educated Archduke Ferdinand of
Austria, who ruled over Styria, Carinthia, and Carniola before becoming Holy
Roman Emperor, was energetic in suppressing heresy in the provinces which he
ruled. Austria in the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648). When, in 1619, he was
elected Emperor to succeed his cousin Mathias, the ultra-pious and intransigent
Ferdinand II, as he became known, embarked on an energetic attempt to re-
Catholicize not only the Hereditary Provinces, but Bohemia and Habsburg Hungary
as well as most of Protestant Europe within the Holy Roman Empire. Outside his
lands, his reputation for strong headed uncompromising intolerance had
triggered the Thirty Years' War in May 1618 in the polarizing first phase,
known as the Revolt in Bohemia. After several initial reverses, he became
accommodating but as the Catholics turned things around and began to enjoy a
long string of successes at arms he set forth the Edict of Restitution in 1629
vastly complicating the politics of settlement negotiations and prolonging the
rest of the war; encouraged by the mid-war successes, he became even more
forceful leading to infamies by his armies such as the Sack of Magdeburg. His
forced conversions or evictions carried out in the midst of the Thirty Years'
War, which with the later general success of the Protestants therefore had
greatly negative consequences for Habsburg control of the Holy Roman Empire
itself, while these campaigns within the Habsburg hereditary lands were largely
successful in religiously purifying his demesnes, leaving the Austrian Emperors
thereafter with much greater control within their hereditary power base—
although Hungary was never successfully re-Catholicized—but one much reduced
in population and economic might while less vigorous and weakened as a nation-
state. In terms of human costs, the Thirty Years' wars many economic, social,
and population dislocations caused by the hardline methods adopted by
Ferdinand's strict counter-reformation measures and almost continual employment
of mercenary field armies contributed significantly to the loss of life and
tragic depopulation of all the German states, during a war which some estimates
put the civilian loss of life as high as fifty-percent overall. Studies mostly
cite the causes of death due to starvation or as caused (ultimately by the
lack-of-food induced) weakening of resistance to endemic diseases which
repeatedly reached epidemic proportions amongst the general Central European
population—the German states were the battle ground and staging areas for the
largest mercenary armies theretofore, and the armies foraged amongst the many
provinces stealing the food of those people forced onto the roads as refugees,
or still on the lands, regardless of their faith and allegiances. Both townsmen
and farmers were repeatedly ravaged and victimized by the armies on both sides
leaving little for the populations already stressed by the refugees from the
war or fleeing the Catholic counter-reformation repressions under Ferdinand's
governance. Austria's rise to power (1657–1714). The culmination of the
Austrian conflict with the Turks came during the long reign of Leopold I
(1657–1705). Following the successful defense of Vienna in 1683 led by King
of Poland John III Sobieski, a series of campaigns resulted in the return of
all of Hungary to Austrian control by the Treaty of Carlowitz in 1699. At the
same time, Austria was becoming more involved in competition with France in
Western Europe, with Austria fighting the French in the Third Dutch War
(1672–1679), the War of the League of Augsburg (1688–1697) and finally the
War of the Spanish Succession (1701–1714), in which the French and Austrians
(along with their British, Dutch and Catalonian allies) fought over the
inheritance of the vast territories of the Spanish Habsburgs. Although the
French secured control of Spain and its colonies for a grandson of Louis XIV,
the Austrians also ended up making significant gains in Western Europe,
including the former Spanish Netherlands (now called the Austrian Netherlands,
including most of modern Belgium), the Duchy of Milan in Northern Italy, and
Naples and Sardinia in Southern Italy. (The latter was traded for Sicily in
1720). Charles VI and Maria Theresa (1711–1780). The later part of the reign
of Emperor Charles VI (1711–1740) saw Austria relinquish many of these fairly
impressive gains, largely due to Charles's apprehensions at the imminent
extinction of the House of Habsburg. Charles was willing to offer concrete
advantages in territory and authority in exchange for other powers' worthless
recognitions of the Pragmatic Sanction that made his daughter Maria Theresa his
heir. The most notable instance of this was in the War of the Polish Succession
whose settlement saw Austria cede Naples and Sicily to the Spanish Infante Don
Carlos in exchange for the tiny Duchy of Parma and Spain and France's adherence
to the Pragmatic Sanction. The latter years of Charles's reign (1736–1739)
also saw an unsuccessful war against the Turks, which resulted in the Austrian
loss of Belgrade and other border territories. And, as many had anticipated,
when Charles died in 1740, all those assurances from the other powers proved of
little worth to Maria Theresa. The peace was initially broken by King Frederick
II of Prussia, who invaded Silesia. Soon other powers began to exploit
Austria's weakness. The Elector of Bavaria claimed the inheritance to the
hereditary lands and Bohemia, and was supported by the King of France, who
desired the Austrian Netherlands. The Spanish and Sardinians hoped to gain
territory in Italy, and the Saxons hoped to gain territory to connect Saxony
with the Elector's Polish Kingdom. Austria's allies—Britain, Holland, and
Russia, were all wary of getting involved in the conflict. Thus began the War
of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748), one of the more confusing and less
eventful wars of European history, which ultimately saw Austria holding its
own, despite the permanent loss of most of Silesia to the Prussians. In 1745,
following the reign of the Bavarian Elector as Emperor Charles VII, Maria
Theresa's husband Francis of Lorraine, Grand Duke of Tuscany, was elected
Emperor, restoring control of that position to the Habsburgs (or, rather, to
the new composite house of Habsburg-Lorraine). For the eight years following
the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle that ended the War of the Austrian Succession,
Maria Theresa plotted revenge on the Prussians. The British and Dutch allies
who had proved so reluctant to help her in her time of need were dropped in
favour of the French in the so-called Reversal of Alliances of 1756. That same
year, war once again erupted on the continent as Frederick, fearing
encirclement, launched a pre-emptive invasion of Saxony. The Seven Years' War,
too, was indecisive, and saw Prussia holding onto Silesia, despite Russia,
France, and Austria all combining against him, and with only Hanover as a
significant ally on land. The end of the war saw Austria, exhausted, continuing
the alliance with France (cemented in 1770 with the marriage of Maria Theresa's
daughter Archduchess Maria Antonia to the Dauphin), but also facing a dangerous
situation in Central Europe, faced with the alliance of Frederick the Great of
Prussia and Catherine the Great of Russia. The Russo-Turkish War of 1768–1774
caused a serious crisis in east-central Europe, with Prussia and Austria
demanding compensation for Russia's gains in the Balkans, ultimately leading to
the First Partition of Poland in 1772, in which Maria Theresa took Galicia from
Austria's traditional ally. Over the next several years, Austro-Russian
relations began to improve. When the War of Bavarian Succession erupted between
Austria and Prussia in 1777 following the extinction of the Bavarian line of
the Wittelsbach dynasty, Russia refused to support its ally, and the war was
ended, after almost no bloodshed, on May 13, 1779 when Russian and French
mediators at the Congress of Teschen negotiated an end to the war. In the
agreement Austria receive the Innviertel from Bavaria. Joseph II and Leopold II
(1780–1792). Joseph II (1780-1790). On Maria Theresa's death in 1780, she was
succeeded by her son Joseph II, already Holy Roman Emperor since Francis I's
death in 1765. A reformer herself, Maria Theresa always acted with a cautious
respect for the conservatism of the political and social elites and the
strength of local traditions. Her cautious approach repelled Joseph, who always
sought the decisive, dramatic intervention to impose the one best solution,
regardless of traditions or political opposition. He was the archetypical
embodiment of The Enlightenment spirit of the 18th-century reforming monarchs
known as the "enlightened despots". Joseph and his mother were typically at
odds on policy, and their quarrels were usually mediated by the chancellor,
Prince Wenzel Anton von Kaunitz (1711–94), who served nearly 40 years as the
principal minister to Maria Theresa and Joseph. When Maria Theresa died in
1780, Joseph became the absolute ruler over the most extensive realm of Central
Europe. There was no parliament to deal with. Joseph was always positive that
the rule of reason, as propounded in the Enlightenment, would produce the best
possible results in the shortest time. He issued edicts—6,000 in all, plus
11,000 new laws designed to regulate and reorder every aspect of the empire.
The spirit was benevolent and paternal. He intended to make his people happy,
but strictly in accordance with his own criteria. "Josephism," as his policies
were called, is notable for the very wide range of reforms designed to
modernize the creaky empire in an era when France and Prussia were rapidly
upgrading. Josephism elicited grudging compliance at best, and more often
vehement opposition from all sectors in every part of his empire. Failure
characterized most of his projects. Joseph set about building a rational,
centralized, and uniform government for his diverse lands, a pyramid with
himself as supreme autocrat. He expected government servants to all be
dedicated agents of Josephism and selected them without favor for class or
ethnic origins; promotion was solely by merit. To impose uniformity, he made
German the compulsory language of official business throughout the Empire. The
Hungarian assembly was stripped of its prerogatives, and not even called
together As privy finance minister, Count Karl von Zinzendorf (1739–1813)
introduced a uniform system of accounting for state revenues, expenditures, and
debts of the territories of the Austrian crown. Austria was more successful
than France in meeting regular expenditures and in gaining credit. However, the
events of Joseph II's last years also suggest that the government was
financially vulnerable to the European wars that ensued after 1792. Joseph
reformed the traditional legal system, abolished brutal punishments and the
death penalty in most instances, and imposed the principle of complete equality
of treatment for all offenders. He ended censorship of the press and theatre.
In 1781-82 he extended full legal freedom to serfs. Rentals paid by peasants
were to be regulated by imperial (not local) officials and taxes were levied
upon all income derived from land. The landlords saw a grave threat to their
status and incomes, and eventually reversed the policy. In Hungary and
Transylvania, the resistance of the landed nobility was so great that Joseph
compromised with halfway measures—one of the few times he backed down. After
the great peasant revolt of Horea, 1784–85, however, the emperor imposed his
will by fiat. His Imperial Patent of 1785 abolished serfdom but did not give
the peasants ownership of the land or freedom from dues owed to the landowning
nobles. It did give them personal freedom. Emancipation of the Hungarian
peasantry promoted the growth of a new class of taxable landholders, but it did
not abolish the deep-seated ills of feudalism and the exploitation of the
landless squatters. To equalize the incidence of taxation, Joseph ordered a
fresh appraisal of the value of all properties in the empire; his goal was to
impose a single and egalitarian tax on land. The goal was to modernize the
relationship of dependence between the landowners and peasantry, relieve some
of the tax burden on the peasantry, and increase state revenues. Joseph looked
on the tax and land reforms as being interconnected and strove to implement
them at the same time. The various commissions he established to formulate and
carry out the reforms met resistance among the nobility, the peasantry, and
some officials. Most of the reforms were abrogated shortly before or after
Joseph's death in 1790; they were doomed to failure from the start because they
tried to change too much in too short a time, and tried to radically alter the
traditional customs and relationships that the villagers had long depended
upon. In the cities the new economic principles of the Enlightenment called for
the destruction of the autonomous guilds, already weakened during the age of
mercantilism. Joseph II's tax reforms and the institution of Katastralgemeinde
(tax districts for the large estates) served this purpose, and new factory
privileges ended guild rights while customs laws aimed at economic unity. The
intellectual influence of the Physiocrats led to the inclusion of agriculture
in these reforms. Education and medicine. To produce a literate citizenry,
elementary education was made compulsory for all boys and girls, and higher
education on practical lines was offered for a select few. He created
scholarships for talented poor students, and allowed the establishment of
schools for Jews and other religious minorities. In 1784 he ordered that the
country change its language of instruction from Latin to German, a highly
controversial step in a multilingual empire. By the 18th century,
centralization was the trend in medicine because more and better educated
doctors requesting improved facilities; cities lacked the budgets to fund local
hospitals; and the monarchy's wanted to end costly epidemics and quarantines.
Joseph attempted to centralize medical care in Vienna through the construction
of a single, large hospital, the famous Allgemeines Krankenhaus, which opened
in 1784. Centralization worsened sanitation problems causing epidemics a 20%
death rate in the new hospital. which undercut Joseph's plan, but the city
became preeminent in the medical field in the next century. Religion. Joseph's
goals were to weaken the power of the Catholic Church and introduce a policy of
religious toleration that was the most advanced of any state in Europe. In 1789
he issued a charter of religious toleration for the Jews of Galicia, a region
with a large Yiddish-speaking traditional Jewish population. The charter
abolished communal autonomy whereby the Jews controlled their internal affairs;
it promoted Germanization and the wearing of non-Jewish clothing. Probably the
most unpopular of all his reforms was his attempted modernization of the highly
traditional Roman Catholic Church. Calling himself the guardian of Catholicism,
Joseph II struck vigorously at papal power. He tried to make the Catholic
Church in his empire the tool of the state, independent of Rome. Clergymen were
deprived of the tithe and ordered to study in seminaries under government
supervision, while bishops had to take a formal oath of loyalty to the crown.
He financed the large increase in bishoprics, parishes, and secular clergy by
extensive sales of monastic lands. As a man of the Enlightenment he ridiculed
the contemplative monastic orders, which he considered unproductive.
Accordingly, he suppressed a third of the monasteries (over 700 were closed)
and reduced the number of monks and nuns from 65,000 to 27,000. Church courts
were abolished and marriage was defined as a civil contract outside the
jurisdiction of the Church. Josph sharply cut the number of holy days and
reduced ornamentation in churches. He greatly simplified the manner of
celebration. The results of these reforms included a deepening crisis of faith;
the disappearance of piety; and the decline of morality. Opponents of the
reforms blamed them for revealing Protestant tendencies, with the rise of
Enlightenment rationalism and the emergence of a liberal class of bourgeois
officials. Anti-clericalism emerged and persisted, while the traditional
Catholics were energized in opposition to the emperor. Foreign policy. The
Habsburg Empire developed a policy of war and trade as well as intellectual
influence across the borders. While opposing Prussia and Turkey, Austria was
friendly to Russia though trying to remove Romania from Russian influence. In
foreign policy, there was no Enlightenment, only hunger for more territory and
a willingness to undertake unpopular wars to get the land. Joseph was a
belligerent, expansionist leader, who dreamed of making his Empire the greatest
of the European powers. Joseph's plan was to acquire Bavaria, if necessary in
exchange for Belgium (the Austrian Netherlands), but in 1778 and again in 1785
he was thwarted by King Frederick II of Prussia, who had a much stronger army.
This failure caused Joseph to seek territorial expansion in the Balkans, where
he became involved in an expensive and futile war with the Turks 1787-1791,
which was the price to be paid for friendship with Russia. The Balkan policy of
both Maria Theresa and Joseph II reflected the Cameralism promoted by Prince
Kaunitz, stressing consolidation of the border lands by reorganization and
expansion of the military frontier. Transylvania was incorporated into the
frontier in 1761 and the frontier regiments became the backbone of the military
order, with the regimental commander exercising military and civilian power.
"Populationistik" was the prevailing theory of colonization, which measured
prosperity in terms of labor. Joseph II also stressed economic development.
Habsburg influence was an essential factor in Balkan development in the last
half of the 18th century, especially for the Serbs and Croats. Reaction. The
nobility throughout his empire hated Joseph: they hated his taxes, his
egalitarianism, his despotism and his puritanism. In Belgium and Hungary
everyone resented the way he tried to do away with all regional government, and
to subordinate everything to his own personal rule in Vienna. The ordinary
people were not happy. They loathed the Emperor's interference in every detail
of their daily lives. Why should they be forbidden to bake ginger-bread just
because Joseph thought it bad for the stomach? Why the Imperial edict demanding
the breast-feeding of infants? Why the banning of corsets? From these and a
thousand other petty regulations, enforced by a secret police, it looked to the
Austrians as though Joseph were trying to reform their characters as well as
their institutions Only a few weeks before Joseph's death, the director of the
Imperial Police reported to him: "All classes, and even those who have the
greatest respect for the sovereign, are discontented and indignant." In
Lombardy (in northern Italy) the cautious reforms of Maria Theresa in Lombardy
enjoyed support from local reformers. Joseph II, however, by creating a
powerful imperial officialdom directed from Vienna, undercut the dominant
position of the Milanese principate and the traditions of jurisdiction and
administration. In the place of provincial autonomy he established an unlimited
centralism, which reduced Lombardy politically and economically to a fringe
area of the Empire. As a reaction to these radical changes the middle class
reformers shifted away from cooperation to strong resistance. From this basis
appeared the beginnings of the later Lombard liberalism. By 1790 rebellions had
broken out in protest against Joseph's reforms in Belgium and Hungary, and his
other dominions were restive under the burdens of his war with Turkey. His
empire was threatened with dissolution, and he was forced to sacrifice some of
his reform projects. His health shattered by disease, alone, and unpopular in
all his lands, the bitter emperor died February 20, 1790. He was not yet forty-
nine. Joseph II rode roughshod over age-old aristocratic privileges, liberties,
and prejudices, thereby creating for himself many enemies, and they triumphed
in the end. Joseph's attempt to reform the Hungarian lands illustrates the
weakness of absolutism in the face of well-defended feudal liberties. Behind
his numerous reforms lay a comprehensive program influenced by the doctrines of
enlightened absolutism, natural law, mercantilism, and physiocracy. With a goal
of establishing a uniform legal framework to replace heterogeneous traditional
structures, the reforms were guided at least implicitly by the principles of
freedom and equality and were based on a conception of the state's central
legislative authority. Joseph's accession marks a major break since the
preceding reforms under Maria Theresa had not challenged these structures, but
there was no similar break at the end of the Josephinian era. The reforms
initiated by Joseph II had merit despite the way they were introduced. They
were continued to varying degrees under his successors. They gained
comprehensive "Austrian" form in the Allgemeine Bürgerliche Gesetzbuch of 1811
and have been seen as providing a foundation for subsequent reforms extending
into the 20th century. Leopold II (1790-1792). Joseph's death proved a boon for
Austria, as he was succeeded by his more sensible brother, Leopold II,
previously the reforming Grand Duke of Tuscany. Leopold knew when to cut his
losses, and soon cut deals with the revolting Netherlanders and Hungarians. He
also managed to secure a peace with Turkey in 1791, and negotiated an alliance
with Prussia, which had been allying with Poland to press for war on behalf of
the Ottomans against Austria and Russia. Leopold's reign also saw the
acceleration of the French Revolution. Although Leopold was sympathetic to the
revolutionaries, he was also the brother of the French queen. Furthermore,
disputes involving the status of the rights of various imperial princes in
Alsace, where the revolutionary French government was attempting to remove
rights guaranteed by various peace treaties, involved Leopold as Emperor in
conflicts with the French. The Declaration of Pillnitz, made in late 1791
jointly with the Prussian King Frederick William II and the Elector of Saxony,
in which it was declared that the other princes of Europe took an interest in
what was going on in France, was intended to be a statement in support of Louis
XVI that would prevent the need from taking any kind of action. However, it
instead inflamed the sentiments of the revolutionaries against the Emperor.
Although Leopold did his best to avoid war with the French, he died in March
1792. The French declared war on his inexperienced son Francis II a month
later. The Arts. Vienna and Austria dominated European music during the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, typified by the First Viennese
School ("Wiener Klassik"). Initially the monarchy were the major patrons of the
arts, till rising middle class aspirations incorporated music into the lives of
the bourgeoisie. French Revolution and Napoleon (1792–1815). The war with
France, which lasted until 1797, proved unsuccessful for Austria. After some
brief successes against the utterly disorganized French armies in early 1792,
the tide turned, and the French overran the Austrian Netherlands in the last
months of 1792. While the Austrians were so occupied, their erstwhile Prussian
allies stabbed them in the back with the Second Partition of Poland, from which
Austria was entirely excluded. This led to the dismissal of Francis's chief
minister, Philipp von Cobenzl, and his replacement with Franz Maria Thugut. At
around the same time, the increasing radicalization of the French Revolution,
as well as the French occupation of the Low Countries, brought Britain, the
Dutch Republic, and Spain into the war, which became known as the War of the
First Coalition. Once again, there were initial successes against the
disorganized armies of the French Republic, and the Netherlands were recovered.
But in 1794 the tide turned once more, and Austrian forces were driven out of
the Netherlands again—this time for good. Meanwhile, the Polish Crisis again
became critical, resulting in a Third Partition (1795), in which Austria
managed to secure important gains. The war in the west continued to go badly,
as most of the coalition made peace, leaving Austria with only Britain and
Piedmont-Sardinia as allies. In 1796, the French Directory planned a two-
pronged campaign in Germany to force the Austrians to make peace, with a
secondary thrust planned into Italy. Although Austrian forces under Archduke
Charles, the Emperor's brother, were successful in driving the French back in
Germany, the French Army of Italy, under the command of the young Corsican
General Napoleon Bonaparte, was brilliantly successful, forcing Piedmont out of
the war, driving the Austrians out of Lombardy and besieging Mantua. Following
the capture of Mantua in early 1797, Bonaparte advanced north through the Alps
against Vienna, while new French armies moved again into Germany. Austria sued
for peace. By the terms of the Treaty of Campo Formio of 1797, Austria
renounced its claims to the Netherlands and Lombardy, in exchange for which it
partitioned the territories of the Republic of Venice with the French. The
Austrians also provisionally recognized the French annexation of the Left Bank
of the Rhine, and agreed in principle that the German princes of the region
should be compensated with ecclesiastical lands on the other side of the Rhine.
The peace did not last for long. Soon, differences emerged between the
Austrians and French over the reorganization of Germany, and Austria joined
Russia, Britain, and Naples in the War of the Second Coalition in 1799.
Although Austro-Russian forces were initially successful in driving the French
from Italy, the tide soon turned—the Russians withdrew from the war after a
defeat at Zürich (1799) which they blamed on Austrian recklessness, and the
Austrians were defeated by Bonaparte, now First Consul at Marengo, which forced
them to withdraw from Italy, and then in Germany at Hohenlinden. These defeats
forced Thugut's resignation, and Austria, now led by Ludwig Cobenzl, to make
peace at Lunéville in early 1801. The terms were surprisingly mild—the terms
of Campo Formio were largely reinstated, but now the way was clear for a
reorganization of the Empire on French lines. By the Imperial Deputation Report
of 1803, the Holy Roman Empire was entirely reorganized, with nearly all of the
ecclesiastical territories and free cities, traditionally the parts of the
Empire most friendly to the House of Austria, eliminated. With Bonaparte's
assumption of the title of Emperor of the French in 1804, Francis, seeing the
writing on the wall for the old Empire, took the new title of "Emperor of
Austria" as Francis I, in addition to his title of Holy Roman Emperor. Soon,
Napoleon's continuing machinations in Italy, including the annexation of Genoa
and Parma, led once again to war in 1805—the War of the Third Coalition, in
which Austria, Britain, Russia, and Sweden took on Napoleon. The Austrian
forces began the war by invading Bavaria, a key French ally in Germany, but
were soon outmaneuvered and forced to surrender by Napoleon at Ulm, before the
main Austro-Russian force was defeated at Austerlitz on December 2. By the
Treaty of Pressburg, Austria was forced to give up large amounts of
territory—Dalmatia to France, Venetia to Napoleon's Kingdom of Italy, the
Tyrol to Bavaria, and Austria's various Swabian territories to Baden and
Württemberg, although Salzburg, formerly held by Francis's younger brother,
the previous Grand Duke of Tuscany, was annexed by Austria as compensation. The
defeat meant the end of the old Holy Roman Empire. Napoleon's satellite states
in southern and Western Germany seceded from the Empire in the summer of 1806,
forming the Confederation of the Rhine, and a few days later Francis proclaimed
the Empire dissolved, and renounced the old imperial crown. Over the next three
years Austria, now led by Philipp Stadion, attempted to maintain peace with
France, but the overthrow of the Spanish Bourbons in 1808 was deeply disturbing
to the Habsburgs, who rather desperately went to war once again in 1809, the
War of the Fifth Coalition this time with no continental allies, but the United
Kingdom. Stadion's attempts to generate popular uprisings in Germany were
unsuccessful, and the Russians honored their alliance with France, so Austria
was once again defeated at the Battle of Wagram, although at greater cost than
Napoleon, who had suffered his first battlefield defeat in this war, at Aspern-
Essling, had expected. The terms of the subsequent Treaty of Schönbrunn were
quite harsh. Austria lost Salzburg to Bavaria, some of its Polish lands to
Russia, and its remaining territory on the Adriatic (including much of
Carinthia and Styria) to Napoleon's Illyrian Provinces. Klemens von Metternich,
the new Austrian foreign minister, aimed to pursue a pro-French policy. The
Emperor's daughter, Marie Louise, was married to Napoleon, and Austria
contributed an army to Napoleon's invasion of Russia in 1812. With Napoleon's
disastrous defeat in Russia at the end of the year, and Prussia's defection to
the Russian side at the beginning of 1813, Metternich began slowly to shift his
policy. Initially he aimed to mediate a peace between France and its
continental enemies, but when it became apparent that Napoleon was not
interested in compromise, Austria joined the allies and declared war on France
in August 1813. The Austrian intervention was decisive. Napoleon was defeated
at Leipzig in October, and forced to withdraw into France itself. As 1814
began, the Allied forces invaded France. Initially, Metternich remained unsure
as to whether he wanted Napoleon to remain on the throne, a Marie Louise
regency for Napoleon's young son, or a Bourbon restoration, but he was
eventually brought around by British Foreign Secretary Lord Castlereagh to the
last position. Napoleon abdicated on April 3, 1814, and Louis XVIII was
restored, soon negotiating a peace treaty with the victorious allies at Paris
in June. The nineteenth century (1815–1914). Biedermaier period (1815-1848).
Under the control of Metternich, the Austrian Empire entered a period of
censorship and a police state in the period between 1815 and 1848
("Biedermaier" or "Vormärz" period). The latter term (Before March) referring
to the period prior to the revolution of March 1848. Metternich kept a firm
hand on government resisting the constitutional freedoms demanded by the
liberals. Government was by custom and by imperial decree
("Hofkanzleidekrete"). However, both liberalism and nationalism were on the
rise, which resulted in the Revolutions of 1848. Metternich and the mentally
handicapped Emperor Ferdinand I were forced to resign to be replaced by the
emperor's young nephew Franz Joseph. Franz Joseph I and the Belle Époque
(1848-1914). Post revolutionary Austria 1848-1866. Separatist tendencies
(especially in Lombardy and Hungary) were suppressed by military force. A
constitution was enacted in March 1848, but it had little practical impact,
although elections were held in June. The 1850s saw a return to neoabsolutism
and abrogation of constitutionalism. However, one of the concessions to
revolutionaries with a lasting impact was the freeing of peasants in Austria.
This facilitated industrialization, as many flocked to the newly
industrializing cities of the Austrian domain (in the industrial centers of
Bohemia, Lower Austria, Vienna, and Upper Styria). Social upheaval led to
increased strife in ethnically mixed cities, leading to mass nationalist
movements. On the foreign policy front, Austria with its non-German
constituencies, was faced with a dilemma in 1848 when Germany's Constituent
National Assembly ("Deutsche Konstituierende Nationalversammlung"), of which
Austria was a member, stated that members could not have a state connection
with non-German states, leaving Austria to decide between Germany or its Empire
and Hungarian union. However these plans came to nothing for the time being,
but the concept of a smaller Germany that excluded Austria ("Kleindeutschland")
was to re-emerge as the solution in 1866. Austria's neutrality during the
Crimean War (1853-1856), while the emperor was preoccupied with his wedding,
antagonized both sides and left Austria dangerously isolated, as subsequent
events proved (Hamann 1986). The Italian question 1859 - 1860. While Austria
and the Hapsburgs held hegemony over northern Italy, the south was the Kingdom
of the Two Sicilies, with the Papal States intervening. Italy had been in a
turmoil since the Congress of Vienna in 1815, with insurrections starting in
1820 ("Carbonari"). King Ferdinand II of the Two Sicilies, an absolutist
monarch, sought to strengthen his position by a further dynastic alliance with
Austria. He already had a connection through his second wife, Maria Theresa,
granddaughter of the emperor Leopold II This he achieved by marrying his son,
Francis II, to Duchess Maria Sophie of Bavaria in February 1859. Marie was a
younger sister of the Empress Elisabeth of Austria, making Francis brother in
law to the Emperor. Ferdinand died a few months later in May, and Francis and
Maria Sophie ascended the throne. In the meantime Austria had fallen into a
trap set by the Italian "risorgimento". Piedmont, jointly ruled with Sardinia
had been the site of earlier insurrections. This time they formed a secret
alliance with France ("Patto di Plombières"), whose emperor, Napoleon III was
a previous "Carbonari". Piedmont then proceeded to provoke Vienna with a series
of military manoeuvres, successfully triggering an ultimatum to Turin on April
23. its rejection was followed by an Austrian invasion, and precipitated war
with France (Second Italian War of Independence 1859). Austria mistakenly
expected support and received none, and the country was ill prepared for war,
which went badly. The Hapsburg rulers in Tuscany and Modena were forced to flee
to Vienna. In May 1859 Austria suffered a military defeat at the Battle of
Varese and in June at Magenta against the combined forces of France and
Sardinia. The emperor refused to to acknowledge the seriousness of the
situation which was causing great hardship at home, and took over direct
command of the army, though not a professional soldier. Later that month a
further defeat at Solférino sealed Austria's fate, and the emperor found
himself having to accept Napoleon's terms at Villafranca. Austria agreed to
cede Lombardy, and the rulers of the central Italian states were to be
restored. However the latter never happened, and the following year in
plebiscites, all joined the Kingdom of Sardinia-Piedmont. By April 1860
Garibaldi had invaded and quickly subdued Sicily, and by February 1861 the
Kingdom of the Two Sicilies ceased to exist, Francis and Maria fled to Austria.
Aftermath - constitutional concessions. These events severely weakened the
emperor's position. The government's absolutist policies were unpopular and
these setbacks led to domestic unrest, Hungarian secessionism, criticism of
Austria's governance and allegation's of corruption. The first casualties were
the emperor's ministers. The Finance Minister, Karl Ludwig von Bruck killed
himself. Other casualties were Count Karl Ferdinand von Buol (Foreign
Minister), Interior Minister Baron Alexander von Bach, Police Minister Johann
Freiherr von Kempen von Fichtenstamm, Adjutant General Karl Ludwig von Grünne,
together with army generals. The result was a reluctant undertaking by the
emperor and his chief advisor Goluchowski to return to constitutional
government, culminating in the October Diploma (October 1960) establishing
constitutional monarchy through a legislative assembly and provincial autonomy.
This was never completely implemented due to Hungarian resistance, demanding
the full autonomy lost in 1849. Consequently the October Diploma
("Oktoberdiplom") was replaced by the February Patent ("Februarpatent"), in
1861 establishing a bicameral legislative body, the Reichsrat. The upper house
("Herrenhaus") consisted of appointed and hereditary positions, while the lower
house, the House of Deputies ("Abgeordnetenhaus") was appointed by the
provincial diets. The "Reichsrat" would meet with or without the Hungarians,
depending on the issues being considered. This was a first step towards the
establishment of a separate Cisleithanian legislature, on the other hand the
more limited role of the diets in the February Patent, compared to the October
Diploma, angered the champions of regionalism. The "Reichsrat" was dominated by
liberals, who where to be the dominant political force for the next two
decades. The Danish Question 1864-6. Prussia and Denmark had already fought one
war in 1848-51 over the territories that lined their common border, Schleswig-
Holstein which resulted in Denmark retaining them. By 1864 Austria was at war
again, this time allying itself with Prussia against Denmark in the Second
Schleswig War, which although successful this time, turned out to be Austria's
last military victor. The war concluded with the Treaty of Vienna by which
Denmark ceded the territories. The following year the Gastein Convention
resolved the control of the new territories, Holstein being allocated to
Austria, after initial conflicts between the allies. However this did little to
ease Austria–Prussia rivalry over the German question. The ongoing efforts by
Otto von Bismarck, the Prussian Minister President, to revoke the agreement and
wrest control of the territories would soon lead to all out out conflict
between the two powers and achieve the desired weakening of Austria's position
in central Europe. The Hungarian question. From the 1848 revolution, in which
much of the Hungarian aristocracy had participated, Hungary remained restless,
pressing for more autonomy, restoration of the constitution, opposing the
centralism of Vienna and refusing to pay taxes (Hamann 144). Hungary had little
support in the court at Vienna which was strongly Bohemian and considered the
Hungarians as revolutionaries. From the loss of the Italian territories in
1859, the Hungarian question became more prominent. Hungary was negotiating
with foreign powers to support it, and most significantly with Prussia.
Therefore Hungary represented a threat to Austria in any opposition to Prussia
within the German Confederation over the German Question. Therefore cautious
discussions over concessions, referred to as "Conciliation" by the Hungarians
(Hamann 146), started to take place. Emperor Franz Joseph traveled to Budapest
in June 1865 and made a few concessions, such as abolishing the military
jurisdiction, and granting an amnesty to the press. However these fell far
short of the demands of the Hungarian liberals whose minimal demands were
restoration of the constitution and the emperor's separate coronation as King
of Hungary. Chief among these were Gyula Andrássy and Ferenc Deák, who
endeavoured to improve their influence at the court in Vienna. (Hamann 146-
147). In January 1866 a delegation of the Hungarian parliament traveled to
Vienna to invite the imperial family to make an official visit to Hungary,
which they did, at some length from January to March. (Hamann 150-151). Austro-
Prussian War 1866. While Andrássy was making frequent visits to Vienna from
Budapest during early 1866, relations with Prussia were deteriorating. There
was talk of war. Prussia had signed a secret treaty with the relatively new
Kingdom of Italy on April 8, while Austria concluded one with France on June
12, in exchange for Venetia. While the motives for the war, Prussian masterplan
or opportunism, are disputed, the outcome was a radical re-alignment of power
in Central Europe. Austria brought the continuing dispute over Holstein before
the German diet and also decided to convene the Holstein diet. Prussia,
declaring that the Gastein Convention had thereby been nullified, invaded
Holstein. When the German diet responded by voting for a partial mobilization
against Prussia, Bismarck declared that the German Confederation was ended.
Thus this may be considered a Third Schleswig War. Hostilities broke out on
June 14 as the Austro-Prussian War (June - August 1866), in which Prussia and
the north German states faced not only Austria but much of the rest of Germany,
especially the southern states. Unfortunately for Austria, three days later
Italy declared was on Austria in the Third Italian War of Independence, Italy
now being Prussia's ally. Thus Austria had to fight on two fronts. Their first
engagement resulted in a minor victory against the Italians at Custoza near
Verona on June 24. However on the northern front Austria suffered a major
military defeat at the Battle of Königgrätz in Bohemia on July 3. Although
Austria had a further victory against the Italians in a naval battle at Lissa
on July 20, it was clear by then that the war was over for Austria, Prussian
armies threatening Vienna itself, forcing the evacuation of the court to
Budapest. Napoleon III intervened resulting in an armistice at Nikolsburg on
July 21 and a peace treaty in Prague on August 23. In the meantime the Italians
who had had a series of successes throughout July, and signed an armistice at
Cormons on August 12 rather than face the remaining Austrian army freed from
its northern front. As a result of these wars Austria had now lost all its
Italian territory and was now excluded from further German affairs, that were
now reorganised under Prussian dominance in the new North German Confederation.
The "Kleindeutschland" concept had prevailed. For the Austrians in Italy, the
war had been tragically pointless, since Venetia had already been ceded. Dual
Monarchy 1867-1918. Conciliation. While Austria was reeling from the effects of
war, the Hungarians increased the pressure for their demands. Andrassy was
regularly in Vienna, as was Deak and the Hungarian position was backed by
constitutionalists and liberals. While anti-Hungarian sentiments ran high at
the court, the Emperor's position was becoming increasingly untenable, with the
Prussian army now at Pressburg (Bratislava), and Vienna crammed with exiles,
while hope for French intervention proved to be fruitless. The Hungarians
recruited Empress Elisabeth who became a strong advocate for their cause.
György Klapka had organised a legion fighting for the Prussians, which
Bismarck had supported, that entered Hungary and agitated for Hungarian
independence. However the needs of the other provinces had to be considered
before entering into any form of Hungarian dualism which would give Hungary
special privileges, and started to fan the flames of Czech nationalism, since
Slavic interests were likely to be submerged. People started to talk about the
events of 1848 again. By February 1867 Count Belcredi resigned as Minister
President over his concerns about Slavic interests, and was succeeded by
foreign minister Ferdinand Beust, who promptly pursued the Hungarian option
which had become a reality by the end of the month. "Ausgleich" (Compromise)
1867. Austria-Hungary was created through the mechanism of the Austro-Hungarian
Compromise of 1867 ("Ausgleich"). Thus the Hungarians finally achieved their
aims of autonomy, indeed citizenship of one half of the realm was not
recognised by the other. The western half of the realm known as (Cisleithania)
and the eastern Hungarian (Transleithania), that is the realms lying on each
side of the Leitha tributary of the Danube river, now became two realms with
different interior policy, but with a common ruler and a common foreign and
military policy. The empire now had two capitals, two cabinets and two
parliaments. Only three cabinet positions served both halves of the monarchy,
war, foreign affairs and finance (when both sectors were involved). Costs were
assigned 70:30 to Cisleithania, however the Hungarians represented a single
nationality while Cisleithania included all the other kingdoms and provinces.
Andrassy was appointed as the first Minister President of the new Hungary on
February 17th. Feelings ran high in the provinces, and the Diets in Moravia and
Bohemia were shut down in March. (Hamann 172) Emperor Franz Joseph made a
speech from the throne in May to the "Reichsrat" (Imperial Council) asking for
retroactive ratification and promising further constitutional reforms and
increased autonomy to the provinces. This was a major retreat from absolutism.
(Hamann 173) On June 8 the Emperor and Empress were crowned King and Queen of
Hungary in a ceremony whose pomp and splendour seemed out of keeping with
Austria's recent military and political humiliation and the extent of financial
reparations. (Hamann 174ff) As part of the celebrations the emperor announced
further concessions that aggravated relationships between Hungary and the rest
of the monarchy. An amnesty was declared for all political offences since 1848
(including Klapka and Kossuth) and reversal of the confiscation of estates. In
addition the coronation Gift was directed to the families and veterans of the
revolutionary Honved, which was revived as the Royal Hungarian Militia. (Hamann
178) In return for the Liberals support of the "Ausgleich", concessions were
made to parliamentary prerogatives in the new constitutional law. The law of 21
December 1867, although frequently amended, was the foundation of Austrian
governance for the remaining 50 years of the empire, and was largely based on
the February Patent, the Imperial Council and included a bill of rights.
Ultimately the political balance of the dual monarchy represented a compromise
between authoritarianism ("Obrigkeitsstaat") and parliamentarianism "
(Rechtsstaat)" (Hacohen 2002). Like most compromises it was rejected by
extremists on both sides, including Kossuth. Austria-Hungary 1867-1914. 1873
marked the Silver Jubilee of Franz Joseph, and provided not only an occasion
for celebration but also one of reflection on the progress of the monarchy
since 1848. Vienna had grown from a population of 500,000 to over a million,
the walls and fortifications had been demolished and the "Ringstrasse"
constructed with many magnificent new buildings along it. The Danube was being
regulated to reduce the risk of flooding, a new aqueduct constructed to bring
fresh water into the city, and many new bridges, schools, hospitals, churches
and a new university built. (Hamann 211) Foreign policy The second half of the
nineteenth century saw a lot of construction, expansion of cities and railway
lines, and development of industry. During the earlier part of this period,
known as "Gründerzeit", Austria became an industrialized country, even though
the Alpine regions remained characterized by agriculture. Austria was able to
celebrate its new found grandeur in the Vienna World Exhibition
("Weltausstellung") of 1873, attended by all the crowned heads of Europe, and
beyond. This period of relative prosperity was followed by the 1873 Stock
market crash. Politics and governance. Liberalism in Cisleithania 1867-1879.
Political parties became legitimate entities in Austria from 1848, apart from a
brief lapse in the 1850s. However the structure of the legislative body created
by the 1861 February Patent provided little scope for party organisation.
Initial political organisation resembled the cleavages in Austrian culture.
Since the time of the Counter-Reformation the Catholic Church had assumed a
major role in the political life of the empire, in conjunction with the
aristocracy and conservative rural elements. Allied against these forces were a
more secular urban middle class, reflecting the Enlightenment and the French
Revolution with its anti-clericism "(Kulturkampf)". Other elements on the left
were German nationalism, defending Greater German interests against the Slavs,
and found support amongst urban intelligentsia. However party structure was far
from cohesive and both groupings contained factions which either supported or
opposed the government of the day. These parties reflected the traditional
right/left split of political vision. The left, or Liberal ("Deutschliberale
Partei") factions were known as the Constitutional Party ("Verfassungspartei"),
but both left and right were fragmented into factions ("Klubs"). Without direct
elections there was no place for constituency organisation, and affinities were
intellectual not organisational. Nor, without ministerial responsibility, was
there a need for such organisation. The affinities were driven by respective
visions of the representative institutions. The left derived its name from its
support in principle of the 1861-7 constitution and were the driving elements
of the 1848 revolution, the right supported historic rights. The left drew its
support from the propertied bourgeoisie ("Besitzbürgertum"), affluent
professionals and the civil service. These were longstanding ideological
differences (Pulzer 1969). The 1867 elections saw the Liberals take control of
the lower house under Karl Auersperg (1867-1868) and were instrumental in the
adoption of the 1867 constitution and in abrogating the 1855 Concordat (1870).
Suffrage progressively improved during the period 1860-1882. The selection of
deputies to the "Reichsrat" by provincial legislatures proved unworkable
particularly once the Bohemian diet effectively boycotted the Reichsrat in an
attempt to acquire equal status with the Hungarians in a tripartite monarchy.
As a result suffrage was changed to direct election to the "Reichsrat" in 1873.
Even then by 1873 only six percent of the adult male population were franchised
(Hacohen 2002). The initial divisions into Catholic, liberal, national, radical
and agrarian parties differed across ethnic grounds further fragmenting the
political culture. However there was now emerging the presence of extra-
parliamentary parties whereas previously parties were purely intra-
parliamentary. This provided an opportunity for the disenfranchised to find a
voice. These changes were taking place against a rapidly changing backdrop of
an Austrian economy that was modernising and industrialising and economic
crises such as that of 1873 and its resultant depression (1873-1879), and the
traditional parties were slow to respond to the demands of the populace. By the
election of 1901, the last election under the defined classes of franchisement
("Curia") extraparliamentary parties won 76 of the 118 seats. This era saw
anti-liberal sentiments and declining fortunes of the Liberal party which had
held power since 1867 apart from a brief spell of conservative government in
1870-1. In 1870 Liberal support for Prussia in the 1870 Franco-Prussian War
displeased the Emperor and he turned to the Conservatives to form a government
under Count Karl Sigmund von Hohenwart (1871-1871). Hohenwart was the
conservative leader in parliament, and the Emperor believed his more
sympathetic views to Slavic aspirations and federalism would weaken the Austro-
German Liberals. Hohenwart appointed Albert Schäffle as his commerce minister
and drew up a policy known as the Fundamental Articles of 1871
("Fundamentalartikel"). The policy failed, the Emperor withdrew his support and
the Liberals regained power. The Liberal party became progressively unliberal
and more nationalistic, and against whose social conservatism the progressive
intellectuals would rebel (Hacohen 2002). During their 1870-1 opposition they
blocked attempts to extend the dual monarchy to a tripartite monarchy including
the Czechs, and promoted the concept of "Deutschtum" (the granting of all
rights of citizenship to those who displayed the characteristics of the solid
German "Bürger"). They also opposed the extension of suffrage because
restricted suffrage favoured their electoral base (Hacohen 2002). In 1873 the
party fragmented, with a radical faction of the Constitutional Party forming
the Progressive Club ("Fortschrittsklub"), while a right-wing faction formed
the conservative Constitutionalist Landlordism ("Verfassungstreue
Grossgrundbesitz") leaving a rump of 'Old Liberals' ("Altliberale"). The result
was a proliferation of German Liberal ("Deutschfreiheitlichkeit") and German
National ("Deutschnationalismus") groups. Political realignment 1879. While
Liberal achievements had included economic modernisation, expanding secular
education and rebuilding the fabric and culture of Vienna, while collaborating
with the Administration "(Verwaltung)", after 1873 a progressive series of
schisms and mergers continued to weaken the party which effectively disappeared
by 1911. The Liberal cabinet of Adolf Auersperg (1871-1879) was dismissed in
1879 over its opposition to Foreign Minister Gyula Andrássy's (1871-1879)
Balkan policy and the annexation of Bosnia-Herzogovina, which would have added
more Slavs and further diluted German nationalism and identity
("Staatsnation"). In the ensuing elections the Liberals lost control of
parliament and went into opposition, the incoming government under Count Edward
Taaffe (1879-1893) basically consisting of a group of factions, the "Iron Ring"
("Der eiserne Ring"), united in a determination to keep the Liberals out of
power. However the latter filibustered leading the government to seek electoral
reform as a strategy to weaken their position, which was enacted in 1882.
Despite this, the coalition, nominally conservative and committed to anti-
socialism passed a series of social reforms over the decade 1880-1890,
following the examples of Germany and Switzerland. These were reforms which the
Liberals had been unable to get past a government strongly tied to the concept
of individual's rights to self-determination free from government interference
(Grandner 1997). Such measures had the support of both the Liberals, now the
United Left ("Vereinigte Linke" 1881) and the German National Party ("Deutsche
Nationalpartei" 1891), an offshoot of the German National Movement
("Deutschnationale Bewegung"). The electoral reforms of 1882 were the most
influential in that it enfranchised proportionally more Germans. Social reform
now moved to become a platform of conservative Catholics like Prince Aloys de
Paula Maria of Liechtenstein, Baron Karl von Vogelsang, and Count Egbert
Belcredi (Boyer 1995). The era of electoral reform saw the emergence of Georg
von Schonerer’s Pan-German League ("Alldeutsche Vereinigung") (1882),
appealing to an anti-clerical middle class, and Catholic social reformers such
as L. Psenner and A. Latschka created the Christian Social Association
("Christlich-Sozialer Verein") (1887). Around the same time F. Piffl, F.
Stauracz, Ae. Schoepfer, A. Opitz, Karl Lueger and Prince Aloys Liechtenstein
formed the United Christians ("Vereinigten Christen") to advocate Christian
social reform. These two organisations merged in 1891 under Karl Lueger to form
the Christian Socialist Party ("Christlichsoziale Partei", CS). However the
Taaffe government's policy of ethnic inclusiveness fuelled nationalism amongst
the German speaking population. The Liberals had maintained the strong
centralism of the absolutist era (with the exception of Galicia in 1867) while
the Conservatives attempted a more federalist state that ultimately led to the
fall of the Taaffe government in 1893, including a second attempt at Bohemian
"Ausgleich" (Tripartite monarchy) in 1890 (Grandner 1997). On the left the
spread of anarchical ideas and oppressive government saw the emergence of a
Marxist Social Democratic Party ("Sozialdemokratische Arbeiterpartei
Österreichs", SDAPÖ) in 1889 which succeeded in winning seats in the 1897
elections which followed further extension of suffrage in 1896 to include
peasants and the working classes. Universal male suffrage 1907. The universal
male suffrage introduced in 1907 by Minister-President Freiherr von Beck
changed the balance of power, formally tilted towards German Austrians, and
revealed that they were now a minority in a predominantly Slavic empire. In the
1900 census, Germans were 36% of the Cisleithanian population but the largest
single group, but never acted as a cohesive group (nor did any other national
group), although they were the dominant group in the political life of the
monarchy. Germans were followed by Czechs and Slovaks (23%), Poles (17),
Ruthenians (13), Slovenes (5), Serbo-Croats (3), Italians (3) and Romanians 1%.
However these national groups, especially the Germans were often scattered
geographically. The Germans also dominated economically, and in level of
education. The post reform 1907 parliament ("Reichsrat") was elected along
national lines, with only the Christian-Social and Social Democrat parties
predominantly German. However Austria was governed by the Emperor who appointed
the Imperial Council of Ministers ("Ministerrat"), who in turn answered to him,
parliament being left free to criticise government policy. Technically it had
the power to legislate from 1907, but in practice the Imperial government
generated its own legislation, and the Emperor could veto his own minister's
bills. The major parties were divided geographically and socially, with the
social democrats base being the towns, predominantly Vienna, and having a very
different perspective to the devout but illiterate peasantry in the
countryside. The latter were joined by the aristocracy and bourgeoisie in
supporting the "status quo" of the monarchy. The 1911 elections elected a
parliament that would carry Austria through the war and the end of the empire
in 1918. However, the effectiveness of parliamentarism was hampered by
conflicts between parties representing different ethnic groups, and meetings of
the parliament ceased altogether during World War I. The Arts. The initial
years of the nineteenth century following the Congress of Vienna, up till the
revolution of 1848 was characterised by the Biedermeier period of design and
architecture, partly fuelled by the repressive domestic scene that diverted
attention to domesticity and the arts. With the reign of Franz Joseph (1848-
1916) came a new era of grandeur, typified by the Belle Époque style, with
extensive building and the construction of the Ringstrasse in Vienna with its
monumental buildings (officially opened May 1 1865, after seven years).
Architects of the period included Heinrich Ferstel (Votivkirche, Museum für
angewandte Kunst Wien), Friedrich von Schmidt (Rathaus), Theophil Hansen
(Parliament), Gottfried Semper (Kunsthistorisches Museum, Kunsthistorisches
Museum, Burgtheater), Eduard van der Nüll (Opera) and August Sicardsburg
(Opera). 1897 saw the resignation of a group of artists from the Association of
Austrian Artists ("Gesellschaft bildender Künstler Österreichs"), headed by
Gustav Klimt who became the first president of this group which became known as
the Vienna Secession or Wiener Secession ("Vereinigung Bildender Künstler
Österreichs"). The movement was a protest against the historicism and
conservatism of the former organisation, following similar movements in Berlin
and Munich. Partly this was a revolt against the perceived excesses of the
earlier "Ringstrasse" era, and a yearning to return to the relative simplicity
of Biedermaier. From this group Josef Hoffman and Koloman Moser formed the
Vienna Arts and Crafts Workshop ("Wiener Werkstätte") in 1903 to promote the
development of applied arts. The Secession became associated with a specific
building, the Secession Building ("Wiener Secessionsgebäude") built in 1897
and which housed their exhibitions, starting in 1898. The Secession as
originally conceived splintered in 1905 when Klimt and others left over
irreconcilable differences. The group however lasted till 1939 and the outbreak
of the Second World War. Architecturally this was the era of Jugendstil (Art
Nouveau) and the contrasting work of men like Otto Wagner (Kirche am Steinhof)
known for embellishment and Adolf Loos, who represented restraint. Art Nouveau
and the modern style came relatively late to Austria, around 1900, and was
distinguishable from the earlier movement in other European capitals. One of
the prominent literary figures was Karl Kraus, the essayist and satirist, known
for his newspaper "The Torch" ("Die Fackel"), founded in 1899. On the musical
scene, Johan Strauss and his family dominated the Viennese scene over the
entire period, which also produced Franz Schubert, Ludwig van Beethoven, Anton
Bruckner, Johannes Brahms, Arnold Schoenberg, Franz Lehár and Gustav Mahler
amongst others. By the opening years of the twentieth century (Fin de siècle)
the avant garde were beginning to challenge traditional values, often shocking
Viennese society, such as Arthur Schnitzler's play "Reigen", the paintings of
Klimt, and the music of Schoenberg, Anton Webern and Alban Berg and the Second
Viennese School ("Zweite Wiener Schule"). Austria in the First World War 1914-
1918. Nationalist strife increased during the decades until 1914. The
assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, who was the presumed heir of Franz
Joseph as Emperor, in Sarajevo by a Serb nationalist group helped to trigger
World War I. In November 1916 the Emperor dies, leaving the relatively
inexperienced Charles (Karl) in command. The defeat of the Central Powers in
1918 resulted in the disintegration of Austria-Hungary, and the Emperor went
into exile. German Austria and the First Republic (1918–1933). Republic of
German-Austria 1918-1919. 1918. The First World War effectively ended for
Austria (technically Austria-Hungary, but Hungary had withdrawn on October 31,
1918, and most other states within the empire, e.g., Czechoslovakia, and South
Slavs, had already withdrawn) on November 3, 1918, when the defeated army
signed the Armistice of Villa Giusti at Padua following the Battle of Vittorio
Veneto. Austria was forced to cede all territory occupied since 1914, and in
addition a considerable amount of other territory and the allies were given
access to Austria. The empire was thus dissolved. The Provisional National
Assembly ("Provisorische Nationalversammlung für Deutschösterreich") met in
Vienna from 21 October 1918 to 19 February 1919, as the first parliament of the
new Austria, in the Lower Austria parliamentary buildings
("Niederösterreichische Landhaus"). It consisted of those members of the
"Reichsrat" (Imperial Council) elected in 1911 from German speaking territories
with three presidents, Franz Dinghofer (German National Movement, GDVP), Jodok
Fink (Christian Social Party, CS) and Karl Seitz (Social Democratic Workers'
Party of Austria, SDAPÖ). The National Assembly continued its work till 16
February 1919 when elections were held. On 30 October it adopted a provisional
constitution and on November 12 it adopted German Austria
("Deutschösterreich") as the name of the new state. Since the Emperor, Charles
I (Karl I) had stated on November 11 that he no longer had ""auf jeden Anteil
an den Staatsgeschäften"" (any share in the affairs of state), although he
always said that he never abdicated. Austria was now a republic. However the
provisional constitution stated that it was to be part of the new German
Republic proclaimed three days earlier. Article 2 stated: "Deutschösterreich
ist ein Bestandteil der Deutschen Republik" (German Austria is part of the
German Republic). Karl Renner was proclaimed Chancellor of Austria, succeeding
Heinrich Lammasch and led the first three cabinets (12 November 1918-7 July
1920) as a grand coalition of the SDAPÖ, CS, and GDVP. The latter was composed
of a large number of splinter groups of the German National and German Liberal
movements, and were numerically the largest group in the assembly. On November
22 Austria also unsuccessfully laid claim to all the former German speaking
territories of the former Hapsburg Empire in Czechoslovakia (German Bohemia and
parts of Moravia), Poland (Austrian Silesia) and the South Tyrol, annexed by
Italy. However Austria was in no position to enforce its claims against either
the victorious allies or the new nation states that emerged from the
dissolution of empire. 1919. On 19 February elections were held for what was
now called the Constituent National Assembly ("Konstituierende
Nationalversammlung"). Although the Social Democrats won the most seats (41%)
they did not have an absolute majority and formed a grand coalition with the
second largest party, the Christian Socialists. On 12 March the National
Assembly declared "German Austria" to the part of the "German Republic". Thus,
in the aftermath of the war the Empire was broken up based loosely on national
grounds. In the words of the then French Prime Minister, Georges Clemenceau -
"Ce qui reste, c'est l'Austriche" (The rest is Austria). Austria, with its
modern borders, was created out of the main German speaking areas. From an
Empire of 50 million people it was reduced to a country with a population of
6.5 million. Large sections of the population and most representatives of
political parties were of the opinion that this "residual" or "rump state" -
without its previous Hungarian agricultural sector and Bohemian industry would
not be economically viable. The journalist Hellmut Andics (1922-1998) expressed
this sentiment in his book entitled "Der Staat, den keiner wollte" (The state
that nobody wanted) in 1962. Austria's exact future remained uncertain till
formal treaties were signed and ratified. This process began with the opening
of the Peace Conference in Paris on 18 January 1919 and culminated in the
signing of the Treaty of Saint Germain on 10 September that year, although the
National Assembly initially rejected the draft treaty on 7 June. The First
Republic 1919-1933. Treaty of Saint Germain 1919. The fledgling Republic of
German-Austria was to prove short lived. The proposed merger with the German
Empire (Weimar Republic) was vetoed by the Allied victors in the Treaty of
Saint-Germain-en-Laye (10 September 1919) under Article 88 which prohibited
economic or political union. The allies were fearful of the long held
"Mitteleuropa" dream - a union of all German speaking populations. The treaty
was ratified by parliament on 21 October 1919. Austria was to remain
independent, and was obliged to be so for at least 20 years. The treaty also
obliged the country to change its name from the "Republic of German Austria" to
the "Republic of Austria" ("Republik Österreich"), i.e., the First Republic, a
name that persists to this day. The German-speaking bordering areas of Bohemia
and Moravia (later called the "Sudetenland") were allocated to the newly
founded Czechoslovakia. Many Austrians and Germans regarded this as hypocrisy
since U.S. president Woodrow Wilson had proclaimed in his famous "Fourteen
Points" the "right of self-determination" for all nations. In Germany, the
constitution of the Weimar Republic explicitly stated this in article 61:
"Deutschösterreich erhält nach seinem Anschluß an das Deutsche Reich das
Recht der Teilnahme am Reichsrat mit der seiner Bevölkerung entsprechenden
Stimmenzahl. Bis dahin haben die Vertreter Deutschösterreichs beratende
Stimme." - "German Austria has the right to participate in the German Reichsrat
(the constitutional representation of the federal German states) with a
consulting role according to its number of inhabitants until unification with
Germany". In Austria itself, almost all political parties together with the
majority of public opinion continued to cling to the concept of unification
laid out in Article 2 of the 1918 constitution. Although Austria-Hungary had
been one of the Central Powers, the allied victors were much more lenient with
a defeated Austria than either Germany or Hungary. Representatives of the new
Republic of Austria convinced them that it was unfair to penalize Austria for
the actions of a now dissolved Empire, especially as other areas of the Empire
were now perceived to be on the "victorious" side, simply because they had
renounced the Empire at the end of the war. Austria never did have to pay
reparations because allied commissions determined that the country could not
afford to pay. However, the Treaty of Saint Germain also meant that Austria
lost significant German-speaking territories, in particular the southern part
of the County of Tyrol (now South Tyrol) to Italy and the German-speaking areas
within Bohemia and Moravia to Czechoslovakia. End of grand coalition and new
constitution 1920-1933. The grand coalition was dissolved on 10 June 1920,
being replaced by a CS- SDAPÖ coalition under Michael Mayr as Chancellor (7
July 1920-21 June 1921), necessitating new elections which were held on 17
October, for what now became the National Council ("Nationalrat"), under the
new constitution of 1 October. This resulted in the Christian Socialists now
emerging as the strongest party, with 42% of the votes and subsequently forming
Mayr's second government on 22 October as a CS minority government (with the
support of the GDVP) without the Social Democrats. The CS were to continue in
power till end of the first republic, in various combinations of coalitions
with the GDVP and Landbund (founded 1919). The borders continued to be somewhat
uncertain because of plebiscites in the tradition of Woodrow Wilson.
Plebiscites in the regions of Tyrol and Salzburg between 1919–21 (Tyrol 24
April 1921, Salzburg 29 May 1921) yielded majorities of 98 and 99% in favour of
a unification with Germany, fearing that small Austria was not economically
viable. However such mergers were not possible under the treaty. On 20 October
1920, a plebiscite in the Austrian state of Carinthia was held in which the
population chose to remain a part of Austria, rejecting the territorial claims
of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes to the state. The German-speaking
parts of western Hungary, now christened Burgenland, joined Austria as a new
state in 1921, with the exception of the city of Sopron, whose population
decided in a referendum (which is sometimes considered by Austrians to have
been rigged) to remain with Hungary. The area had been discussed as the site of
a Slavic corridor uniting Czechoslovakia to Yugoslavia. This made Austria the
only defeated country to acquire additional territory as part of border
adjustments. Despite the absence of reparations, Austria under the coalition
suffered hyperinflation similar to that of Germany, destroying some of the
financial assets of the middle and upper classes, and disrupting the economy.
Adam Ferguson attributes hyperinflation to the existence of far too many people
on the government payroll, failure to tax the working class, and numerous money
losing government enterprises. The fascists blamed the left for the
hyperinflation; Ferguson blames policies associated with the left. Massive
riots ensued in Vienna in which the rioters demanded higher taxes on the rich
and reduced subsidies to the poor. In response to the riots, the government
increased taxes but failed to reduce subsidies. The terms of the Treaty of
Saint Germain were further underlined by the Geneva Protocols of the League of
Nations (which Austria joined on 16 December 1920) on 4 October 1922 between
Austria and the Allies. Austria was given a guarantee of sovereignty provided
it did not unite with Germany over the following 20 years. Austria also
received a loan of 650 million Goldkronen which was successful in halting
hyperinflation, but required major restructuring of the Austrian economy. The
Goldkrone was replaced by the more stable Schilling, but resulted in
unemployment and new taxes, loss of social benefits and major attrition of the
public service. Politics and government. Emerging from the war, Austria had two
main political parties on the right and one on the left. The right was split
between clericalism and nationalism. The Christian Socialist Party,
("Christlichsoziale Partei", CS), had been founded in 1891 and achieved
plurality from 1907-1911 before losing it to the socialists. Their influence
had been waning in the capital, even before 1914, but became the dominant party
of the First Republic, and the party of government from 1920 onwards. The CS
had close ties to the Roman Catholic Church and was headed by a Catholic priest
named Ignaz Seipel (1876–1932), who served twice as Chancellor (1922–1924
and 1926–1929). While in power, Seipel was working for an alliance between
wealthy industrialists and the Roman Catholic Church. The CS drew its political
support from conservative rural Catholics. In 1920 the Greater German People's
Party ("Großdeutsche Volkspartei", GDVP) was founded from the bulk of liberal
and national groups and became the junior partner of the CS. On the left the
Social Democratic Workers' Party of Austria ("Sozialdemokratische
Arbeiterpartei Österreichs", SDAPÖ) founded in 1898, which pursued a fairly
left-wing course known as Austromarxism at that time, could count on a secure
majority in "Red Vienna" (as the capital was known from 1918-1934), while
right-wing parties controlled all other states. The SDAPÖ were the strongest
voting bloc from 1911-1918. Between 1918 and 1920, there was a grand coalition
government including both left and right-wing parties, the CS and the Social
Democratic Workers' Party ("Sozialdemokratische Arbeiterpartei Österreichs",
SDAPÖ). This gave the Social Democrats their first opportunity to influence
Austrian politics. The coalition enacted progressive socio-economic and labour
legislation such as the vote for women on 27 November 1918, but collapsed on 22
October 1920. In 1920, the modern Constitution of Austria was enacted, but from
1920 onwards Austrian politics were characterized by intense and sometimes
violent conflict between left and right. The bourgeois parties maintained their
dominance but formed unstable governments while socialists remained the largest
elected party numerically. Both right-wing and left-wing paramilitary forces
were created during the 20s. The "Heimwehr" (Home Resistance) first appeared on
12 May 1920 and became progressively organised over the next three years and
the "Republikanischer Schutzbund" was formed in response to this on 19 February
1923. From 2 April 1923 to 30 September there were violent clashes between
Socialists and Nazis in Vienna. That on 2 April, referred to as "Schlacht auf
dem Exelberg" (Battle of Exelberg), involved 300 Nazis against 90 Socialists
(Steininger 2008). Further episodes occurred on 4 May and 30 September 1923. A
clash between those groups in Schattendorf, Burgenland, on 30 January 1927 led
to the death of a man and a child. Right-wing veterans were indicted at a court
in Vienna, but acquitted in a jury trial. This led to massive protests and a
fire at the "Justizpalast" in Vienna. In the July Revolt of 1927, 89 protesters
were killed by the Austrian police forces. Political conflict escalated until
the early 1930s. The elections of 1930 which returned the Social Democrats as
the largest bloc turned out to be the last till after World War II. On May 20,
1932 Engelbert Dollfuß Christian Social Party Agriculture Minister became
Chancellor, with a majority of one. Dictatorship: Federal State of Austria
(1933–1938). Engelbert Dollfuss (1933-1934). 1933: Dissolution of parliament
and the formation of the Patriotic Front. Dollfuss and the Christian Social
Party, moved Austria rapidly towards centralized power in the Fascist model. He
was concerned that German National Socialist leader Adolf Hitler had become
Chancellor of Germany on January 30, 1933, after his party had become the
largest group in the parliament and was quickly assuming absolute power.
Similarly the Austrian National Socialists (DNSAP) could easily become a
significant minority in future Austrian elections. Fascism scholar Stanley G.
Payne, estimated that if elections had been held in 1933, the DNSAP could have
secured about 25% of the votes. "Time" magazine suggested an even higher level
of support of 50%, with a 75% approval rate in the Tyrol region bordering Nazi
Germany. The events in Austria during March 1933 echoed those of Germany, where
Hitler also effectively installed himself as dictator in the same month. March
coup d'etat. On March 4, 1933 there occurred an irregularity in the
parliamentary voting procedures. Karl Renner (Social Democratic Party of
Austria, "Sozialdemokratische Partei Österreichs" SPÖ), president of the
National Council ("Nationalrat": lower house of parliament) resigned in order
to be able to cast a vote on a controversial proposal to deal with the railroad
strike that was likely to pass by a very margin, which he was not able to do
while holding that office. Consequently the two vice-presidents representing
the other parties, Rudolf Ramek (Christian Social Party) and Sepp Straffner
(Greater German People's Party) also resigned for the same reason. In the
absence of the President the session could not be concluded. Although there
were procedural rules which could have been followed in this unprecedented and
unforeseen event, the Dolfuss cabinet seized the opportunity to declare the
parliament unable to function. While Dolfuss described this event as "self-
elimination of Parliament" ("Selbstausschaltung des Parlaments") it was
actually the beginning of a coup d'etat that would establish the "Ständestaat"
(Austrofascism, "Austrofaschismus") lasting to 1938. Using an emergency
provision enacted during the First World War, the Economic War Powers Act
("Kriegswirtschaftliches Ermächtigungsgesetz", KWEG 24. Juli 1917 RGBl. Nr.
307) the executive assumed legislative power on March 7 and advised President
Wilhelm Miklas to issue a decree adjourning it indefinitely. The First Republic
and democratic government therefore effectively ended in Austria, leaving
Dollfuss to govern as a dictator with absolute powers. Immediate measures
included removing the right of public assembly and freedom of the press. The
opposition accused him of violating the constitution. An attempt by the Greater
German People's Party and the Social Democrats to reconvene the Council on
March 15 was prevented by barring the entrance with police and advising
President Wilhelm Miklas to adjourn it indefinitely. Dollfuss would have been
aware that Nazi troops had seized power in neighbouring Bavaria on March 9.
Finally, on March 31, the Republikanischer Schutzbund (paramilitary arm of the
Social Democratic Party) was dissolved (but continued illegally). Subsequent
events. Dolfuss then met with Benito Mussolini for the first time in Rome on
April 13. On the 23rd, the National Socialists (DNSAP) gained 40 per cent of
the vote in the Innsbruck communal elections, becoming the largest voting bloc,
so in May all State and Communal elections were banned. On May 20, 1933,
Dollfuss replaced the "Democratic Republic" with a new entity, merging his
Christian Social Party with elements of other nationalist and conservative
groups, including the Heimwehr, which encompassed many workers who were unhappy
with the radical leadership of the socialist party, to form the "Patriotic
Front" ("Vaterländische Front"), though the Heimwehr continued to exist as an
independent organization until 1936, when Dollfuss' successor Kurt von
Schuschnigg forcibly merged it into the Front, instead creating the unabidingly
loyal "Frontmiliz" as a paramilitary task force. The new entity was allegedly
bipartisan and represented those who were "loyal to the government". The DNSAP
was banned in June 1933. Dollfuss was also aware of the Soviet Union's
increasing influence in Europe throughout the 1920s and early 1930s, and also
banned the communists, establishing a one-party Austrofascist dictatorship
largely modeled after Italian fascism, tied to Catholic corporatism and anti-
secularism. He dropped all pretence of Austrian reunification with Germany so
long as the Nazi Party remained in power there. Although all Austrian parties,
including the Social Democratic Labour Party (SDAPÖ) were banned, Social
Democrats continued to exist as an independent organization, including its
paramilitary "Republikaner Schutzbund", which could muster tens of thousands
against Dollfuss' government. In August 1933, Mussolini's government issued a
guarantee of Austrian independence ("if necessary, Italy would defend
Austria’s independence by force of arms"). Dollfuss also exchanged 'Secret
Letters' with Benito Mussolini about ways to guarantee Austrian independence.
Mussolini was interested in Austria forming a buffer zone against Nazi Germany.
Dollfuss always stressed the similarity of the regimes of Hitler in Germany and
Joseph Stalin in the Soviet Union, and was convinced that Austrofascism and
Italian fascism could counter totalitarian national socialism and communism in
Europe. Dollfuss escaped an assassination attempt in October 1933 by Rudolf
Dertill, a 22-year old who had been ejected from the military for his national
socialist views. 1934: Civil war and assassination. Despite the putsch, the
SPÖ continued to seek a peaceful resolution but the new Austrofascist regime
ordered the headquarters of the party to be searched on 12 February 1934,
provoking the Austrian Civil War, in which the weakened party and its
supporters were quickly defeated and the party and its various ancillary
organisations were banned. On 1 May 1934, the Dollfuss cabinet approved a new
constitution that abolished freedom of the press, established one party system
and created a total state monopoly on employer-employee relations. This system
remained in force until Austria became part of the Third Reich in 1938. The
Patriotic Front government frustrated the ambitions of pro-Hitlerite
sympathizers in Austria who wished both political influence and unification
with Germany, leading to the assassination of Dollfuss on 25 July 1934. Kurt
Schuschnigg (1934-1938). His successor Kurt Schuschnigg maintained the ban on
pro-Hitlerite activities in Austria, but was forced to resign on 11 March 1938
following a demand by Adolf Hitler for power-sharing with pro-German circles.
Following Schuschnigg's resignation, German troops occupied Austria with no
resistance. Anschluss and unification with Germany (1938–1945). Although the
Treaty of Versailles and the Treaty of St. Germain had explicitly forbidden the
unification of Austria and Germany, the native Austrian Hitler was vastly
striving to annex Austria during the late 1930s, which was fiercely resisted by
the Austrian Schuschnigg dictatorship. When the conflict was escalating in
early 1938, Chancellor Schuschnigg announced a plebiscite on the issue on March
9, which was to take place on 13 March. On 12 March, "German troops entered
Austria", who met celebrating crowds, in order to install Nazi puppet Arthur
Seyss-Inquart as Chancellor. With a Nazi administration already in place and
the country integrated into the Third Reich as so-called Ostmark, a referendum
on 10 April approved of the annexation with a majority of 99.73%. As a result,
Austria ceased to exist as an independent country. This annexation was enforced
by military invasion but large parts of the Austrian population were in favour
of the Nazi regime, many Austrians participated in its crimes. The Jews,
Communists, Socialist and hostile politicians were sent to concentration camps,
murdered or forced into exile. Just before the end of the war, on 28 March
1945, American troops set foot on Austrian soil and the Soviet Union's Red Army
crossed the eastern border two days later, taking Vienna on 13 April. American
and British forces occupied the western and southern regions, preventing Soviet
forces from completely overrunning and controlling the country. The Second
Republic (since 1945). Allied occupation. In April 1945 Karl Renner, an
Austrian elder statesman, declared Austria separate from Germany and set up a
government which included socialists, conservatives and communists. A
significant number of these were returning from exile or Nazi detention, having
thus played no role in the Nazi government. This contributed to the Allies
treating Austria more as a liberated, rather than defeated, country, and the
government was recognized by the Allies later that year. The country was
occupied by the Allies from 9 May 1945 and under the Allied Commission for
Austria established by an agreement on 4 July 1945, it was divided into Zones
occupied respectively by American, British, French and Soviet Army personnel,
with Vienna being also divided similarly into four sectors—with an
International Zone at its heart. Though under occupation, this Austrian
government was officially permitted to conduct foreign relations with the
approval of the Four Occupying Powers under the agreement of 28 June 1946. As
part of this trend, Austria was one of the founding members of the Danube
Commission formed on 18 August 1948. Austria would benefit from the Marshall
Plan but economic recovery was slow. Unlike the First Republic, which had been
characterized by sometimes violent conflict between the different political
groups, the Second Republic became a stable democracy. The two largest leading
parties, the Christian-conservative Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) and the
Social Democratic Party (SPÖ) remained in a coalition led by the ÖVP until
1966. The Communist Party of Austria (KPÖ), who had hardly any support in the
Austrian electorate, remained in the coalition until 1950 and in parliament
until 1959. For much of the Second Republic, the only opposition party was the
Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ), which included German national and liberal
political currents. It was founded in 1955 as a successor organisation to the
short-lived Federation of Independents (VdU). The United States, although only
one of the four occupying powers, had the resources and the intention of
restructuring Austrian popular culture. In journalism, for example, it sent in
hundreds of experts (and controlled the newsprint), closed down the old party-
line newspapers, introduced advertising and wire services, and trained
reporters and editors, as well as production workers. It founded the "Wiener
Kurier," which became popular, as well as many magazines such as "Medical News
from the United States," which informed doctors on new treatments and drugs.
The Americans also thoroughly revamped the radio stations, in part with the
goal of countering the Soviet-controlled stations. On an even larger scale the
education system was modernized and democratized by American experts.
Independence and political development during the Second Republic. The two
major parties strove towards ending allied occupation and restoring a fully
independent Austria. The Austrian State Treaty was signed on 15 May 1955. Upon
the termination of allied occupation, Austria was proclaimed a neutral country,
and "everlasting" neutrality was incorporated into the Constitution on 26
October 1955. The political system of the Second Republic came to be
characterized by the system of "Proporz", meaning that posts of some political
importance were split evenly between members of the SPÖ and ÖVP. Interest
group representations with mandatory membership (e.g., for workers,
businesspeople, farmers etc.) grew to considerable importance and were usually
consulted in the legislative process, so that hardly any legislation was passed
that did not reflect widespread consensus. The Proporz and consensus systems
largely held even during the years between 1966 and 1983, when there were non-
coalition governments. The ÖVP-SPÖ coalition ended in 1966, when the ÖVP
gained a majority in parliament. However, it lost it in 1970, when SPÖ leader
Bruno Kreisky formed a minority government tolerated by the FPÖ. In the
elections of 1971, 1975 and 1979 he obtained an absolute majority. The 70s were
then seen as a time of liberal reforms in social policy. Today, the economic
policies of the Kreisky era are often criticized, as the accumulation of a
large national debt began, and non-profitable nationalized industries were
strongly subsidized. Following severe losses in the 1983 elections, the SPÖ
entered into a coalition with the FPÖ under the leadership of Fred Sinowatz.
In Spring 1986, Kurt Waldheim was elected president amid considerable national
and international protest because of his possible involvement with the Nazis
and war crimes during World War II. Fred Sinowatz resigned, and Franz Vranitzky
became chancellor. In September 1986, in a confrontation between the German-
national and liberal wings, Jörg Haider became leader of the FPÖ. Chancellor
Vranitzky rescinded the coalition pact between FPÖ and SPÖ, and after new
elections, entered into a coalition with the ÖVP, which was then led by Alois
Mock. Jörg Haider's populism and criticism of the Proporz system allowed him
to gradually expand his party's support in elections, rising from 4% in 1983 to
27% in 1999. The Green Party managed to establish itself in parliament from
1986 onwards. Recent years. The SPÖ–ÖVP coalition persisted until 1999.
Austria joined the European Union in 1995 (Video of the signing in 1994), and
Austria was set on the track towards joining the Eurozone, when it was
established in 1999. In 1993, the Liberal Forum was founded by dissidents from
the FPÖ. It managed to remain in parliament until 1999. Viktor Klima succeeded
Vranitzky as chancellor in 1997. In 1999, the ÖVP fell back to third place
behind the FPÖ in the elections. Even though ÖVP chairman and Vice Chancellor
Wolfgang Schüssel had announced that his party would go into opposition in
that case, he entered into a coalition with the FPÖ – with himself as
chancellor – in early 2000 under considerable national and international
protest. Jörg Haider resigned as FPÖ chairman, but retained his post as
governor of Carinthia and kept substantial influence within the FPÖ. In 2002,
disputes within the FPÖ resulting from losses in state elections caused the
resignation of several FPÖ government members and a collapse of the
government. Wolfgang Schüssel's ÖVP emerged as the winner of the subsequent
election, ending up in first place for the first time since 1966. The FPÖ lost
more than half of its voters, but reentered the coalition with the ÖVP.
Despite the new coalition, the voter support for the FPÖ continued to dwindle
in all most all local and state elections. Disputes between "nationalist" and
"liberals" wings of the party resulted in a split, with the founding of a new
liberal party called the Alliance for the Future of Austria (BZÖ) and led by
Jörg Haider. Since all FPÖ government members and most FPÖ members of
parliament decided to join the new party, the Schüssel coalition remained in
office (now in the constellation ÖVP–BZÖ, with the remaining FPÖ in
opposition) until the next elections. On 1 October 2006 the SPÖ won a head on
head elections and negotiated a grand coalition with the ÖVP. This coalition
started its term on 11 January 2007 with Alfred Gusenbauer as Chancellor of
Austria. For the first time, the Green Party of Austria became the third
largest party in a nation-wide election, overtaking the FPÖ by a narrow margin
of only a few hundred votes. The grand coalition headed by Alfred Gusenbauer
collapsed in the early summer of 2008 over disagreements about the country's EU
policy. The early elections held on September 28 resulted in extensive losses
for the two ruling parties and corresponding gains for Heinz-Christian
Strache's FPÖ and Jörg Haider's BZÖ (the Green Party was relegated to the
5th position). Nevertheless, SPÖ and ÖVP renewed their coalition under the
leadership of the new SPÖ party chairman Werner Faymann. In 2008 Jörg Haider
died in a car accident and was succeeded as BZÖ party chairman by Herbert
Scheibner and as governor of Carinthia by Gerhard Dörfler.
