History of Zambia This article deals with the history of the country now called
Zambia from prehistoric times to the present. Early history. The original
inhabitants of all of modern day Zambia were the Khoisans. They were bushman,
and hunters and gatherers who lived a nomadic life, with stone age technology.
Mainly they gathered fruits and nuts, but they also hunted antelope and other
animals. The Khoisans were the only inhabitants of most of Zambia until the 4th
century, when Bantu started to migrate from the north. They had far more
developed technology - they were farmers and had iron and copper tools and
weapons, as well as knowledge about pottery They were sedentary and lived in
small self-sufficient villages with a few houses, growing sorghum and beans, as
well as keeping cattle and goats. Since the early farmers practised slash and
burn agriculture, they had to constantly move further south when the soil was
exhausted. The indigenous khoisans were either assimilated into the new culture
or pushed aside into areas not suitable for agriculture. With the introduction
of agriculture the population grew, and more and more land became cultivated.
By the 11th and 12th centuries a more advanced society was beginning to emerge.
Even though most villages still were self-sufficient, long distance trade was
developing. Copper mining was intensified, and copper crosses were probably
used as a currency. Ivory carvings and cotton textiles were other export
commodities. One of the most famous archaeological sites for this period is
Ing-ombe Ilede. The increase in trade resulted in larger political units and
more complex social structures. From 1500 to 1900. The period between the 16th
and the 19th centuries saw the emergence of organised Iron Age kingdoms as well
as widespread immigration. Four kingdoms were established in this period -
among the Kazembe-Lunda in the north centered around the lower Luapula River,
the Bemba in the north east, the Chewa in the east and the Lozi in the west
centered around the upper Zambezi River. The territory of the present Zambia,
being far inland, did not have direct contact with non-Africans until
relatively recently in its history. Arab and Portuguese traders were visiting
by the 18th Century. The first recorded visits by Europeans to Zambia were the
Portuguese Manuel Caetano Pereira (a trader of mixed Goanese and Portuguese
descent) in 1796 and Francisco de Lacerda (an explorer) in 1798. Both came via
Tete in Mozambique to Mwata Kazembe's capital to try to get the chief's
agreement to a Portuguese trade route between their territories of Mozambique
and Angola. Lacerda died within a few weeks of arriving at Kazembeâ€™s but left
a valuable journal which was carried back to Tete by his priest and which was
later translated into English by the explorer Sir Richard Burton. However, it
is believed the Portuguese first settled in Zumbo, Mozambique, in 1720, which
is just across the Luangwa River from Zambia, at the confluence with the
Zambezi River. Around 1820 they had settled on the Zambian side at Feira (now
Luangwa). So it is very likely they were visiting Zambian territory between
1720 and 1820. The first Briton to set his foot on Zambian soil was David
Livingstone. In 1851 he started his famous exploration of the upper Zambezi
River, and in 1855 he became the first European to see Mosi-oa-Tunya, the
waterfalls on the Zambezi River, which he named after Queen Victoria, and the
Zambian town near the falls is named after him. Livingstone later died in
Zambia in 1873. When the first Europeans arrived, the most powerful states in
precolonial Zambia were the kingdom of Barotseland in the upper Zambezi, and
the kingdom of Mwata Kazembe on the Luapula. The Lozi people of Barotseland had
prevented access to their land by Arab and Portuguese traders. When the kingdom
was first established is uncertain, but it was certainly in existence by the
18th century, the Lozi calling themselves Aluya and their country Ngulu. Its
ruler was called the Litunga, and had two capitals: in the dry season he stayed
at Lealui, while in the rainy season he moved to Limulunga, a move that is
still celebrated in the Kuomboka annual festival. The first certain historical
fact concerning Barotseland is in the early 19th century the trek of the
Makololo, a clan of the South-African Basotho or Tswana people. Utterly
defeated by Shaka's new Zulu Kingdom in the 1820s, the Makololo under the guide
of Sebetwane were forced to march north until they conquered the Lozi and
became the aristocracy of Barotseland, with Sebitwane as new "Litunga".
Sebetwane proved an able leader, and is spoken of with warm respect by David
Livingstone, who met him in 1851 shortly before his death. He was succeeded by
his daughter Mamochisane, who early stepped down in favour of her half-brother
Sekeletu. With him the Makololo empire appears to have started to fall to
pieces, especially after his death in 1863: a year later internal dissension in
the ruling class brought to a revolt by the Lozi that is said to have
exterminated the Makololo aristocracy and forced the survivors to migrate to
present-day Malawi. By the 18th century, British settlers came in. Colonial
Period. In 1888, Cecil Rhodes, spearheading British commercial and political
interests in Central Africa, obtained a mineral rights concession from local
chiefs. In the same year, Northern and Southern Rhodesia, now Zambia and
Zimbabwe, were proclaimed a British sphere of influence. To start with the
territory was administered by Rhodes' British South Africa Company (BSAC),
which showed little interest for the province and used it mainly as a supplier
of cheap labour. The most important factor in the colony's economy was copper.
The discovery of copper is owed partly to an American scout, Frederick Russell
Burnham, who in 1895 lead and oversaw the massive Northern Territories (BSA)
Exploration Co. expedition which established for the Western world that major
copper deposits existed in Central Africa. Along the Kafue River in then
Northern Rhodesia, Burnham saw many similarities to copper deposits he had
worked in the United States, and he encountered natives wearing copper
bracelets. Later, the BSAC built railroad to transport the copper through
Mozambique. In 1923 the British government decided not to renew the company's
charter; as a result, Southern Rhodesia was annexed formally and granted self-
government in 1923. After negotiations the administration of Northern Rhodesia
was transferred to the British Colonial Office in 1924 as a protectorate, with
Livingstone as capital. It was later transferred to Lusaka in 1935. A
Legislative Council was established, of which five members were elected by the
small European minority (only 4,000 people), but none by the African
population. In 1928 important discoveries were made in the region from then on
called Copperbelt - enormous copper deposits were found, transforming Northern
Rhodesia from a prospective land of colonization for white farmers to a copper
exporter. Already in 1938 it produced 13% of world's copper extracted. The
sector was immediately monopolized by the Anglo American Corporation (AAC,
North-American) and the Rhodesian Selection Trust (RST, South African), who
would control the sector till independence. The bad security conditions and
increased taxes helped to trigger a strike of African mineworkers in 1935,
known as the Copperbelt strike. The strike was crushed by the authorities that
killed 13 miners in the repression. During the Second World War white miners
came out on strike in 1940. Realising the importance of their products for the
war, they demanded higher salaries. This strike was followed by another by
African mineworkers. Even before the war, there had been talks about merging
the two Rhodesias, but the process had been halted by the British authorities,
and brought to an absolute stop by the war. Finally, in 1953, both Rhodesias
were joined with Nyasaland (now Malawi) to form the Federation of Rhodesia and
Nyasaland. Northern Rhodesia was the centre of much of the turmoil and crisis
that characterized the federation in its last years. At the core of the
controversy were insistent African demands for greater participation in
government and European fears of losing political control. A two-stage election
held in October and December 1962 resulted in an African majority in the
legislative council and an uneasy coalition between the two African nationalist
parties. The council passed resolutions calling for Northern Rhodesia's
secession from the federation and demanding full internal self-government under
a new constitution and a new national assembly based on a broader, more
democratic franchise. On 31 December 1963, the federation was dissolved, and
Northern Rhodesia became the Republic of Zambia on 24 October 1964.
Independence and Cold War. At independence, despite its considerable mineral
wealth, Zambia faced major challenges. Domestically, there were few trained and
educated Zambians capable of running the government, and the economy was
largely dependent on foreign expertise. Abroad many of Zambia's neighbouring
countries were still colonies or under white minority rule. The United National
Independence Party (UNIP) won the pre-independence elections, gaining 55 of the
75 seats. The Zambian African National Congress won 10 seats, and the National
Progressive Party won all the 10 seats reserved for whites. Kenneth Kaunda was
elected Prime Minister, and later the same year president, as the country
adopted a presidential system. Kaunda adopted an ideology of African socialism,
close to that of Julius Nyerere in Tanzania. Economical policies focused on
central planning and nationalisation, and a system of one party rule was put in
place. Towards one party rule. In 1968 Kaunda was re-elected as president,
running unopposed. During the following years Zambia adopted a one party
system. In 1972 all political parties except UNIP were banned, and this was
formalised in a new constitution that was adopted in 1973. The constitution
framed a system called "one-party participatory democracy", which in practise
meant that UNIP became the sole political factor in the country. It provided
for a strong president and a unicameral National Assembly. National policy was
formulated by the Central Committee of UNIP. The cabinet executed the central
committee's policy. In legislative elections, only candidates running for UNIP
was allowed to participate. Even though inter-party competition was out of
question, the contest for seats within UNIP was energetic. In the presidential
elections, the only candidate allowed to run was the one elected as president
of UNIP at the party's general conference. In this way Kaunda was re-elected
unopposed with a yes or no vote in 1973, 1978, 1983 and 1988. This did not,
however, mean that there was no dissension to the imposition of a one-party
rule in the country or within UNIP. Sylvester Mwamba Chisembele who was Cabinet
Minister for Western Province (previously Barotse Province) together with UNIP
leaders from 7 out of the 8 Provinces established a Committee of 14. The
objective of the Committee of 14 which consisted two leaders from each of the 7
provinces was the establishment of a democratically elected council of two
leaders from each province to rule the country by consensus with the President
as Head of State. If this had been achieved, it would have meant the curtailing
of the absolute power residing in President Kaunda. The Committee of 14
attended a meeting in State House at which President Kaunda agreed to consider
their proposals. However, later he banned the Committee of 14 and this action
was followed by the suspension of Sylvester Chisembele and several leaders were
sacked. Chisembele later rejoined the Cabinet as Minister for Eastern Province
and two years later in 1977 he was transferred in the same position to the
Copperbelt Province, where the political situation was tense, especially so
because of the forthcoming General Elections. Simon M. Kapwepwe and Harry
Mwaanga Nkumbula who before the declaration of a One Party State had been
leaders of the UPP and ANC political parties respectively, had joined UNIP with
the intention of challenging for the Presidency. However, their attempt to
challenge President Kaunda for the Presidency on the UNIP ticket failed as both
were prevented and disqualified by the manipulations of President Kaunda, who
stood unopposed. Simon Kapwepwe and Harry Nkumbula challenged the resultant
1978 election of President Kaunda in the High Court, but their action was
unsurprisingly unsuccessful. The economy and the copper crisis. After
independence Zambia adopted a left-wing economic policy. The economy was to
some extent run by central planning, under five year plans, private companies
were nationalised and incorporated into large state-owned conglomerates. The
government's goal was to be self-sufficient, which it sought to achieve through
import substitution. At first the plan worked out and the economy grew
steadily, but in the mid 1970s the economy started to decline drastically.
During the period between 1975 and 1990 Zambia's economy dropped by
approximately 30%. The reason for this was that the Zambian economy was heavily
dependent on the copper industry, which had previously been nationalised.
During the 1970s the price of copper sank drastically, resulting in a large
deficit for the state owned enterprise. Another reason for the drop was
Zambia's involvement in the neighbouring countries politics, and the
transportation problems that resulted. To deal with the crisis Zambia took big
loans from the International Monetary Fund and the Worldbank, hoping that
copper prices would rise again soon, instead of issuing structural reforms.
Foreign policy. Internationally, Zambia's sympathies lay with forces opposing
colonial or white-dominated rule. During the next decade, it actively supported
movements such as the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola
(UNITA) under the independence war and under the subsequent civil war, the
Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) and in Southern Rhodesia, the African
National Congress (ANC) in their struggle against apartheid in South African
Republic, and the South-West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) in their
struggle for independence for Namibia. Zambia also hosted some of the
movements. For instance, the ANC exile head quarters were in Lusaka, and ZAPU
had a military base in Zambia. This resulted in security problems, as the South
Africa and South Rhodesia raided targets inside Zambia on several occasions.
Rhodesian counterinsurgency operation extended into Zambia after ZIPRA rebels
shot down two unarmed Vickers Viscount civilian airliners (Air Rhodesia Flight
825 on 3 September 1978 and Air Rhodesia Flight 827 on 12 February 1979) with
Soviet supplied SAM-7 heat-seeking missiles. In retaliation for the shooting
down of Flight 825 in September 1978, Rhodesian Air Force attacked the ZIPRA
guerrilla base at Westlands farm near Lusaka in October 1978, warning Zambian
forces by radio not to interfere. Conflicts with Rhodesia resulted in the
closing of Zambia's borders with that country and severe problems with
international transport and power supply. However, the Kariba hydroelectric
station on the Zambezi River provided sufficient capacity to satisfy the
country's requirements for electricity. TAZARA, a railroad to the Tanzanian
port of Dar es Salaam, built with Chinese assistance, reduced Zambian
dependence on railroad lines south to South Africa and west through an
increasingly war ravaged Angola. Civil strife in neighbouring Mozambique and
Angola created large amounts of refugees, large numbers of whom fled to Zambia.
Internationally, Zambia was an active member of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM),
and hosted a summit in Lusaka in 1970 and Kenneth Kaunda served as the
movements chairman 1970-1973. Among the NAM countries Zambia was especially
close to Yugoslavia. Outside the NAM Zambia also had close relations with the
Peoples Republic of China. In the Second Congo War, Zambia backed Zimbabwe and
the Congo but did not participate as a belligerent . Multi-party democracy. The
end of one party rule. One party rule and the declining economy created
disappointment among the people. Several strikes hit the country in 1981. The
government responded by arresting several union leaders, among them Frederick
Chiluba. In 1986 and 1987 protests arose again in Lusaka and the Copperbelt.
These were followed by riots over rising food prices in 1991, in which at least
30 people were killed. The same year the state owned radio claimed that Kaunda
had been removed from office by the army. This was not true, and the coup
attempt failed. These extensive protests made Kaunda realise the need for
reform. He promised a referendum on multiparty democracy, and lifted the ban on
political parties. This resulted in the quick formation of eleven new parties.
Among these Movement for Multiparty Democracy (MMD), led by former union leader
Frederick Chiluba, was the most important. After pressure for the new parties
the referendum was canceled in favour for direct multiparty election. Frederick
Chiluba and the MMD. After a new constitution had been drafted, elections were
held in 1991. They were generally regarded to have been free and fair, and
Chiluba won 76% of the presidential vote, and the MMD 125 of the 150 seats in
the National Assembly, with the UNIP taking the remaining 25. Economically
Chiluba, despite being a former union leader, stood to the right of Kaunda.
With support from the International Monetary Fund and World Bank, to which
Zambia was heavily indebted, he liberalised the economy by restricting
government interference, privatising state owned enterprise, such as the
important copper mining industry, and removing subsidies on different
commodities, most notably on corn meal. When one party rule was first abolished
in 1991, many expected a more democratic future for Zambia. These expectations
were however clouded by the MMD's treatment of the opposition. Questionable
amendments of the constitution and detentions of political opponents caused
major criticism, and some donor countries, i.e., the United Kingdom and
Denmark, withdrew their aid. Coups and emergencies. In 1993 the government
owned newspaper "The Times of Zambia" reported a story about a secret UNIP plan
to take control of government by unconstitutional means, called the "Zero
Operation Plan". The plan included industrial unrest, promotion of violence and
organisations of mass protests. The UNIP did not deny the existence of such a
plan, but underlined that it was not a part of their official policy, but the
views of extremists within the party. The government responded by declaring a
state of emergency and putting 26 people into detention. Of these seven,
including Kenneth Kaunda's son Wezi Kaunda were charged with offences against
the security of the state. The rest were released. Prior to the 1996 elections,
the UNIP formed an alliance with six other opposition parties. Kenneth Kaunda
had earlier retired from politics, but after internal turbulence in the party,
due to the "Zero Operation Plan" scandal, he returned, replacing his own
successor Kebby Musokotwane. Chiluba's government then amended the
constitution, banning people whose parents were not both Zambian citizens from
becoming president. This was directly aimed at Kaunda, whose parents were both
from Malawi. In protest the UNIP and its allies boycotted the elections, which
were then easily won by Chiluba and the MMD. In 1997 matters escalated. On 28
October a coup d'Ã©tat took place, as a group of army commanders took control
over the national radio station, broadcasting a message stating that Chiluba
was no longer president. The coup was brought to an end by regular forces,
after Chiluba had again declared a state of emergency. One person was killed
during the operation. After the failed coup the police arrested at least 84
people accused of involvement. Among these were Kenneth Kaunda and Dean
Mungomba, leader of the opposition party the Zambia Democratic Congress. The
arrests were condemned and criticised as illegal inside as well as outside
Zambia, and accusations of torture were made as well. Kaunda was released in
June the following year, but 44 of the soldiers who took part in the coup were
sentenced to death in 2003. 2001 elections. Prior to the elections in 2001
Chiluba tried to change the constitution to allow him to run for a third term.
He was forced to step back on this point after protest from within the party as
well as from the Zambian public.
