Historiography Historiography refers either to the study of the methodology and
development of "history" (as a discipline), or to a body of historical work on
a specialized topic. Scholars discuss historiography topicallyÂ â€“ such as the
"historiography of Catholicism", the "historiography of early Islam", or the
"historiography of China"Â â€“ as well as specific approaches and genres, such
as political history and social history. Beginning in the nineteenth century,
with the ascent of academic history, a corpus of historiographic literature
developed. The research interests of historians change over time, and in recent
decades there has been a shift away from traditional diplomatic, economic and
political history toward newer approaches, especially social and cultural
studies. From 1975 to 1995, the proportion of professors of history in American
universities identifying with social history rose from 31% to 41%, while the
proportion of political historians fell from 40% to 30%. In the history
departments of British universities in 2007, of the 5,723 faculty members,
1,644 (29%) identified themselves with social history while political history
came next with 1,425 (25%). In the early modern period, the term
"historiography" tended to be used in a more basic sense, to mean simply "the
writing of history". "Historiographer" therefore meant "historian", and it is
in this sense that certain official historians were given the title
"Historiographer Royal", in Sweden (from 1618), England (from 1660), and
Scotland (from 1681). The Scottish post is still in existence. Defining
historiography. Furay and Salevouris (1988) define historiography as "the study
of the way history has been and is written â€” the history of historical
writing... When you study 'historiography' you do not study the events of the
past directly, but the changing interpretations of those events in the works of
individual historians." Narrative. According to Lawrence Stone, narrative has
traditionally been the main rhetorical device used by historians. In 1979, at a
time when the new Social History was demanding a social-science model of
analysis, Stone detected a move back toward the narrative. Stone defined
narrative as follows: it is organized chronologically; it is focused on a
single coherent story; it is descriptive rather than analytical; it is
concerned with people not abstract circumstances; and it deals with the
particular and specific rather than the collective and statistical. He reported
that, "More and more of the 'new historians' are now trying to discover what
was going on inside people's heads in the past, and what it was like to live in
the past, questions which inevitably lead back to the use of narrative."
Historians committed to a social science approach, however, have criticized the
narrowness of narrative and its preference for anecdote over analysis, and its
use of clever examples rather than statistically verified empirical
regularities. The history of written history. Understanding the past appears to
be a universal human need, and the telling of history has emerged independently
in civilisations around the world. What constitutes history is a philosophical
question (see philosophy of history). The earliest chronologies date back to
Mesopotamia and ancient Egypt, though no historical writers in these early
civilizations were known by name. For the purposes of this article, history is
taken to mean written history recorded in a narrative format for the purpose of
informing future generations about events. Some experts have advised against
the tendency to extrapolate trends for historical patterns that do not align
with expectations about the future. Hellenic world. The earliest known
systematic historical thought emerged in ancient Greece, a development which
would be an important influence on the writing of history elsewhere around the
Mediterranean region. Greek historians greatly contributed to the development
of historical methodology. The earliest known critical historical works were
"The Histories", composed by Herodotus of Halicarnassus (484 BCâ€“c.Â 425 BC)
who later became known as the "father of history" (Cicero). Herodotus attempted
to distinguish between more and less reliable accounts, and personally
conducted research by travelling extensively, giving written accounts of
various Mediterranean cultures. Although Herodotus' overall emphasis lay on the
actions and characters of men, he also attributed an important role to divinity
in the determination of historical events. The generation following Herodotus
witnessed a spate of local histories of the individual city-states ("poleis"),
written by the first of the local historians who employed the written archives
of city and sanctuary. Dionysius of Halicarnassus characterized these
historians as the forerunners of Thucydides, and these local histories
continued to be written into Late Antiquity, as long as the city-states
survived. Two early figures stand out: Hippias of Elis, who produced the lists
of winners in the Olympic Games that provided the basic chronological framework
as long as the pagan classical tradition lasted, and Hellanicus of Lesbos, who
compiled more than two dozen histories from civic records, all of them now
lost. Thucydides largely eliminated divine causality in his account of the war
between Athens and Sparta, establishing a rationalistic element which set a
precedent for subsequent Western historical writings. He was also the first to
distinguish between cause and immediate origins of an event, while his
successor Xenophon (c.Â 431â€“355Â BC) introduced autobiographical elements and
character studies in his Anabasis. The proverbial Philippic attacks of the
Athenian orator Demosthenes (384â€“322Â BC) on PhilipÂ II of Macedon marked the
height of ancient political agitation. The now lost history of Alexander's
campaigns by the diadoch PtolemyÂ I (367â€“283Â BC) may represent the first
historical work composed by a ruler. Polybius (c.Â 203â€“120 BC) wrote on the
rise of Rome to world prominence, and attempted to harmonize the Greek and
Roman points of view. The Chaldean priest Berossus (fl. 3rd century) composed a
Greek-language "History of Babylonia" for the Seleucid king AntiochusÂ I,
combining Hellenistic methods of historiography and Mesopotamian accounts to
form a unique composite. Reports exist of other near-eastern histories, such as
that of the Phoenician historian Sanchuniathon; but he is considered semi-
legendary and writings attributed to him are fragmentary, known only through
the later historians Philo of Byblos and Eusebius, who asserted that he wrote
before even the Trojan war. Roman world. The Romans adopted the Greek
tradition, writing at first in Greek, but eventually chronicling their history
in a freshly non-Greek language. While early Roman works were still written in
Greek, the "Origines", composed by the Roman statesman Cato the Elder
(234â€“149 BC), was written in Latin, in a conscious effort to counteract Greek
cultural influence. It marked the beginning of Latin historical writings.
Hailed for its lucid style, Julius Caesar's (100 BCâ€“44 BC) "Bellum Gallicum"
exemplifies autobiographical war coverage. The politician and orator Cicero
(106â€“43 BC) introduced rhetorical elements in his political writings. Strabo
(63 BCâ€“c.Â AD 24) was an important exponent of the Greco-Roman tradition of
combining geography with history, presenting a descriptive history of peoples
and places known to his era. Livy (59 BCâ€“ADÂ 17) records the rise of Rome
from city-state to empire. His speculation about what would have happened if
Alexander the Great had marched against Rome represents the first known
instance of alternate history. Biography, although popular throughout
antiquity, was introduced as a branch of history by the works of Plutarch
(c.Â 46â€“127) and Suetonius (c.Â 69â€“after 130) who described the deeds and
characters of ancient personalities, stressing their human side. Tacitus
(c.Â 56â€“c.Â 117) denounces Roman immorality by praising German virtues,
elaborating on the topos of the Noble savage. China. In China, the "Classic of
History" is one of the Five Classics of Chinese classic texts and one of the
earliest narratives of China. The "Spring and Autumn Annals", the official
chronicle of the State of Lu covering the period from 722 BC to 481 BC, is
among the earliest surviving Chinese historical texts to be arranged on
annalistic principles. It is traditionally attributed to Confucius. The "Zuo
Zhuan", attributed to Zuo Qiuming in the 5thÂ century BC, is the earliest
Chinese work of narrative history and covers the period from 722 BC to 468Â BC.
"Zhan Guo Ce" was a renowned ancient Chinese historical compilation of sporadic
materials on the Warring States Period compiled between the 3rd and 1st
centuries BC. Sima Qian (around 100 BC) was the first in China to lay the
groundwork for professional historical writing. His written work was the
"Shiji" ("Records of the Grand Historian"), a monumental lifelong achievement
in literature. Its scope extends as far back as the 16th century BC, and it
includes many treatises on specific subjects and individual biographies of
prominent people, and also explores the lives and deeds of commoners, both
contemporary and those of previous eras. His work influenced every subsequent
author of history in China, including the prestigious Ban family of the Eastern
Han Dynasty era. Traditional Chinese historiography describes history in terms
of dynastic cycles. In this view, each new dynasty is founded by a morally
righteous founder. Over time, the dynasty becomes morally corrupt and
dissolute. Eventually, the dynasty becomes so weak as to allow its replacement
by a new dynasty. Christendom. Christian historiography began early, perhaps as
early as Luke-Acts, which is the primary source for the Apostolic Age, though
its historical reliability is disputed. In the first Christian centuries, the
New Testament canon was developed. The growth of Christianity and its enhanced
status in the Roman Empire after ConstantineÂ I (see State church of the Roman
Empire) led to the development of a distinct Christian historiography,
influenced by both Christian theology and the nature of the Christian Bible,
encompassing new areas of study and views of history. The central role of the
Bible in Christianity is reflected in the preference of Christian historians
for written sources, compared to the classical historians' preference for oral
sources and is also reflected in the inclusion of politically unimportant
people. Christian historians also focused on development of religion and
society. This can be seen in the extensive inclusion of written sources in the
"Ecclesiastical History" written by Eusebius of Caesarea around 324 and in the
subjects it covers. Christian theology considered time as linear, progressing
according to divine plan. As God's plan encompassed everyone, Christian
histories in this period had a universal approach. For example, Christian
writers often included summaries of important historical events prior to the
period covered by the work. Writing history was popular among Christian monks
and clergy in the Middle Ages. They wrote about the history of Jesus Christ,
that of the Church and that of their patrons, the dynastic history of the local
rulers. In the Early Middle Ages historical writing often took the form of
annals or chronicles recording events year by year, but this style tended to
hamper the analysis of events and causes. An example of this type of writing is
the Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, which were the work of several different writers:
it was started during the reign of Alfred the Great in the late 9thÂ century,
but one copy was still being updated in 1154. Some writers in the period did
construct a more narrative form of history. These included Gregory of Tours,
and more successfully Bede who wrote both secular and ecclesiastical history
and is known for writing the "Ecclesiastical History of the English People".
During the Renaissance, history was written about states or nations. The study
of history changed during the Enlightenment and Romanticism. Voltaire described
the history of certain ages that he considered important, rather than
describing events in chronological order. History became an independent
discipline. It was not called "philosophia historiae" anymore, but merely
history ("historia"). Islamic world. Muslim historical writings first began to
develop in the 7th century, with the reconstruction of the Prophet Muhammad's
life in the centuries following his death. With numerous conflicting narratives
regarding Muhammad and his companions from various sources, it was necessary to
verify which sources were more reliable. In order to evaluate these sources,
various methodologies were developed, such as the "science of biography",
"science of hadith" and "Isnad" (chain of transmission). These methodologies
were later applied to other historical figures in the Islamic civilization.
Famous historians in this tradition include Urwah (d.Â 712), Wahb ibn Munabbih
(d.Â 728), Ibn Ishaq (d.Â 761), al-Waqidi (745â€“822), Ibn Hisham (d.Â 834),
Muhammad al-Bukhari (810â€“870) and Ibn Hajar (1372â€“1449). Historians of the
medieval Islamic world also developed an interest in world history. The
historian Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari (838â€“923) is known for writing a
detailed and comprehensive chronicle of Mediterranean and Middle Eastern
history in his "History of the Prophets and Kings" in 915. Until the
10thÂ century, history most often meant political and military history, but
this was not so with Persian historian Biruni (973â€“1048). In his "Kitab fi
Tahqiq ma l'il-Hind" ("Researches on India") he did not record political and
military history in any detail, but wrote more on India's cultural, scientific,
social and religious history. He expanded on his idea of history in another
work, "The Chronology of the Ancient Nations". Biruni is considered the father
of Indology for his detailed studies on Indian history. Archaeology in the
Middle East began with the study of the ancient Near East by Muslim historians
in the medieval Islamic world who developed an interest in learning about pre-
Islamic cultures. In particular, they most often concentrated on the
archaeology and history of pre-Islamic Arabia, Mesopotamia and ancient Egypt.
In Egyptology, the first known attempts at deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs
were made in Islamic Egypt by Dhul-Nun al-Misri and Ibn Wahshiyya in the 9th
century, who were able to at least partly understand what was written in the
ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs, by relating them to the contemporary Coptic
language used by Coptic priests in their time. Muslim historians such as Abu
al-Hassan al-Hamadani of Yemen (d. 945), Abdul Latif al-Baghdadi (1162â€“1231)
and Al-Idrisi of Egypt (d. 1251) developed elaborate archaeological methods
which they employed in their excavations and research of ancient archaeological
sites. Islamic historical writing eventually culminated in the works of the
Arab Muslim historian and historiographer Ibn Khaldun (1332â€“1406), who
published his historiographical studies in the "Muqaddimah" (translated as
"Prolegomena") and "Kitab al-I'bar" ("Book of Advice"). Among many other
things, his "Muqaddimah" laid the groundwork for the observation of the roles
of the state, in history, and he discussed the rise and fall of civilizations.
He also developed a method for the study of history, and is thus considered to
be the founder of Arab historiography, or the "father of the philosophy of
history". In the preface to the "Muqaddimah", Ibn Khaldun warned of seven
mistakes that he thought historians often committed. In this criticism, he
approached the past as strange and in need of interpretation. The originality
of Ibn Khaldun was to claim that the cultural differences of another age must
govern the evaluation of relevant historical material, to distinguish the
principles according to which it might be possible to attempt the evaluation,
and lastly, to consider the need for experience, in addition to rational
principles, in order to assess a culture of the past. Ibn Khaldun often
criticized "idle superstition and uncritical acceptance of historical data." As
a result, he introduced a method to the study of history, which was considered
something "new to his age", and he often referred to it as his "new science",
now associated with historiography. The "Muqaddimah" is also the earliest known
work to critically examine military history, criticizing certain accounts of
historical battles that appear to be exaggerated, and takes military logistics
into account when questioning the exaggerated sizes of historical armies
reported in earlier sources. Modern era. Modern historiography emerged in 19th
century German universities, where Leopold von Ranke revolutionized
historiography with his seminars and critical approach; he emphasized politics
and diplomacy, dropping the social and cultural themes Voltaire had
highlighted. Sources had to be hard, not speculations and rationalizations. His
credo was to write history the way it was. He insisted on primary sources with
proven authenticity. Hegel and Marx introduced the concept of spirit and
dialectical materialism, respectively, into the study of world historical
development. Former historians had focused on cyclical events of the rise and
decline of rulers and nations. Process of nationalization of history, as part
of national revivals in 19th century, resulted with separation of "one's own"
history from common universal history by such way of perceiving, understanding
and treating the past that constructed history as history of a nation. A new
discipline, sociology, emerged in the late 19th century and analyzed and
compared these perspectives on a larger scale. The French Annales School
radically changed the focus of historical research in France during the 20th
century. Fernand Braudel wanted history to become more scientific and less
subjective, and demanded more quantitative evidence. Furthermore, he introduced
a socio-economic and geographic framework to historical questions. Other French
historians, like Philippe AriÃ¨s and Michel Foucault, described the history of
everyday topics such as death and sexuality. Carlo Ginzburg and Natalie Zemon
Davis pioneered the genre of historical writing sometimes known as
"microhistory," which attempted to understand the mentalities and decisions of
individuals - mostly peasants - within their limited milieu using contracts,
court documents and oral histories. Foundation of important historical
journals. The historical journal, a forum where academic historians could
exchange ideas and publish newly discovered information, came into being in the
19th century. The early journals were similar to those for the physical
sciences, and were seen as a means for history to become more professional.
Journals also helped historians to establish various historiographical
approaches, the most notable example of which was "Annales. Ã‰conomies.
SociÃ©tÃ©s. Civilisations.", a publication instrumental in establishing the
Annales School. Approaches to history. How a historian approaches historical
events is one of the most important decisions within historiography. It is
commonly recognised by historians that, in themselves, individual historical
facts dealing with names, dates and places are not particularly meaningful.
Such facts will only become useful when assembled with other historical
evidence, and the process of assembling this evidence is understood as a
particular historiographical approach. Bibliography. Feminist historiography.
Indian Historiography
