History of Ukraine The territory of Ukraine was a key center of East Slavic
culture in the Middle Ages, before being divided between a variety of powers.
However, the history of Ukraine dates back many thousands of years. The
territory has been settled continuously since at least 5000 BC and is a
candidate site of the origins of the Proto-Indo-European language family. The
horse was first domesticated on the territory of Ukraine. Prehistory.
Settlement in Ukraine by members of the "homo" genus has been documented into
distant prehistory. The Neanderthals are associated with the Molodova
archaeological sites (43,000-45,000 BC) which include a mammoth bone dwelling.
Gravettian settlements dating to 32,000 BCE have been unearthed and studied in
the Buran-Kaya cave site of the Crimean Mountains. The late Neolithic Cucuteni-
Trypillian Culture flourished from about 4500â€“3000Â BC. The Copper Age people
of the Cucuteni-Trypillian Culture resided in the western part, and the Sredny
Stog Culture further east, succeeded by the early Bronze Age Yamna ("Kurgan")
culture of the steppes, and by the Catacomb culture in the 3rd millennium BC.
During the Iron Age, these were followed by the Dacians as well as nomadic
peoples like the Cimmerians, Scythians and Sarmatians. The Scythian Kingdom
existed here from 750â€“250Â BC. Along with ancient Greek colonies founded in
the 6th century BC on the northeastern shore of the Black Sea, the colonies of
Tyras, Olbia, Hermonassa, continued as Roman and Byzantine cities until the 6th
century. In the 3rd century AD, the Goths arrived in the lands of Ukraine
around 250â€“375Â AD, which they called Oium, corresponding to the
archaeological Chernyakhov culture. The Ostrogoths stayed in the area but came
under the sway of the Huns from the 370s. North of the Ostrogothic kingdom was
the Kiev culture, flourishing from the 2ndâ€“5th centuries, when it was overrun
by the Huns. After they helped defeat the Huns at the battle of Nedao in 454,
the Ostrogoths were allowed to settle in Pannonia. With the power vacuum
created with the end of Hunnic and Gothic rule, Slavic tribes, possibly
emerging from the remnants of the Kiev culture, began to expand over much of
the territory that is now Ukraine during the 5th century, and beyond to the
Balkans from the 6th century. In the 7th century, the territory of modern
Ukraine was the core of the state of the Bulgars (often referred to as Old
Great Bulgaria) with its capital city of Phanagoria. At the end of the 7th
century, most Bulgar tribes migrated in several directions and the remains of
their state were absorbed by the Khazars, a semi-nomadic people from Central
Asia. The Khazars founded the Khazar kingdom in the southeastern part of
today's Europe, near the Caspian Sea and the Caucasus. The kingdom included
western Kazakhstan, and parts of eastern Ukraine, Azerbaijan, southern Russia,
and Crimea. Around 800Â AD, the kingdom converted to Judaism. Kievan Rus'. As
Hrushevsky states, the city of Kiev was established during the time when area
around the mid- and low-Dnipro was the part of the Khazar state. He derived
that information from local legends because no written chronicles from that
period are left. The main reasons for that might be the fact that during the
Christianization of the Kievan Rus and later occupation of Ukraine, all earlier
religious and historical publications of that land were destroyed. In 882, Kiev
was conquered from the Khazars by the Varangian noble Oleg who started the long
period of rule of the Rurikid princes. During this time, several Slavic tribes
were native to Ukraine, including the Polans, the Drevlyans, the Severians, the
Ulichs, the Tiverians, the White Croats and the Dulebes. Situated on lucrative
trade routes, Kiev among the Polanians quickly prospered as the center of the
powerful Slavic state of Kievan Rus. In CE 941, the prince of Kiev invaded the
Byzantine Empire but his fleet was destroyed due to the Byzantine Greek fire.
In the 11th century, Kievan Rus' was, geographically, the largest state in
Europe, becoming known in the rest of Europe as Ruthenia (the Latin name for
Rus'), especially for western principalities of Rus' after the Mongol invasion.
The name "Ukraine", meaning "in-land" or "native-land", usually interpreted as
"border-land", first appears in historical documents of 12th century and then
on history maps of the 16th century period. The meaning of this term seems to
have been synonymous with the land of Rus' propriaâ€”the principalities of
Kiev, Chernihiv and Pereyaslav. The term, "Greater Rus'" was used to apply to
all the lands ruled by Kiev, including those that were not just Slavic, but
also Uralic in the north-east portions of the state. Local regional
subdivisions of Rus' appeared in the Slavic heartland, including, "Belarus'"
(White Ruthenia), "Chorna Rus'" (Black Ruthenia) and "Cherven' Rus'" (Red
Ruthenia) in northwestern and western Ukraine. Although Christianity had made
headway into the territory of Ukraine before the first ecumenical council, the
Council of Nicaea (325) (particularly along the Black Sea coast) and, in
western Ukraine during the time of empire of Great Moravia, the formal
governmental acceptance of Christianity in Rus' occurred at in 988. The major
cause of the Christianization of Kievan Rus' was the Grand-Duke, Vladimir the
Great ("Volodymyr"). His Christian interest was midwifed by his grandmother,
Princess Olga. Later, an enduring part of the East-Slavic legal tradition was
set down by the Kievan ruler, Yaroslav I, who promulgated the Russkaya Pravda
(Truth of Rus') which endured through the Lithuanian period of Rus'. Conflict
among the various principalities of Rus', in spite of the efforts of Grand
Prince Vladimir Monomakh, led to decline, beginning in the 12th century. In
Rus' propria, the Kiev region, the nascent Rus' principalities of Halych and
Volynia extended their rule. In the north, the name of Moscow appeared in the
historical record in the principality of Suzdal, which gave rise to the nation
of Russia. In the north-west, the principality of Polotsk increasingly asserted
the autonomy of Belarus'. Kiev was sacked by Vladimir principality (1169) in
the power struggle between princes and later by Cumans and Mongol raiders in
the 12th and 13th centuries, respectively. Subsequently, all principalities of
present-day Ukraine acknowledged dependence upon the Mongols (1239â€“1240). In
1240, the Mongols sacked Kiev, and many people fled to other countries.
Galicia-Volhynia. A successor state to Kievan Rus' on part of the territory of
today's Ukraine was the principality of Galicia-Volhynia. Previously, Vladimir
the Great had established the cities of Halych and Ladomir (later Volodimer) as
regional capitals for the western Ukrainian heartland. This new, more
exclusively Ukrainian predecessor state was based upon the Dulebe, Tiverian and
White Croat tribes. The state was ruled by the descendants of Yaroslav the Wise
and Vladimir Monomakh. For a brief period, the country was ruled by a Hungarian
nobleman. Battles with the neighboring states of Poland and Lithuania also
occurred, as well as internecine warfare with the independent Ruthenian
principality of Chernigov to the east. The nation reached its peak with the
extension of rule to neighboring Wallachia/Bessarabia, all the way to the
shores of the Black Sea. During this period (around 1200â€“1400), each
principality was independent of the other for a period of time. The state of
Halych-Volynia eventually became a vassal to the Mongolian Empire, but efforts
to gain European support for opposition to the Mongols continued. This period
marked the first "King of Rus'"; previously, the rulers of Rus' were termed,
"Grand Dukes" or "Princes." 14th Century. During the 14th century, Poland and
Lithuania fought wars against the Mongol invaders, and eventually most of
Ukraine passed to the rule of Poland and Lithuania. More particularly, the
lands of Volynia in the north and north-west passed to the rule of Lithuanian
princes, while the south-west passed to the control of Poland (Galicia) and
Hungary (Zakarpattya). Most of Ukraine bordered parts of Lithuania, and some
say that the name, "Ukraine" comes from the local word for "border," although
the name "Ukraine" was also used centuries earlier. Lithuania took control of
the state of Volynia in northern and northwestern Ukraine, including the region
around Kiev (Rus'), and the rulers of Lithuania then adopted the title of ruler
of Rus'. Poland took control of the region of Galicia. Following the union
between Poland and Lithuania, Poles, Germans, Lithuanians and Jews migrated to
the region. Polishâ€“Lithuanian Commonwealth. After the Union of Lublin in 1569
and the formation of the Polishâ€“Lithuanian Commonwealth Ukraine fell under
Polish administration, becoming part of the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland. The
period immediately following the creation of the Commonwealth saw a huge
revitalisation in colonisation efforts. Many new cities and villages were
founded. New schools spread the ideas of the Renaissance; Polish peasants
arrived in great numbers and quickly became mixed with the local population;
during this time, most of Ukrainian nobles became polonised and converted to
Catholicism, and while most Ruthenian-speaking peasants remained within the
Eastern Orthodox Church, social tension rose. Ruthenian peasants (Ukrainians
and some from other nations) who fled efforts to force them into serfdom came
to be known as Cossacks and earned a reputation for their fierce martial
spirit. Some Cossacks were hired by the Commonwealth (became 'register
Cossacks') as soldiers to protect the southeastern borders of Poland from
Tatars or took part in campaigns abroad (like Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny in
the battle of Khotyn 1621). Cossack units were also active in wars between the
Polishâ€“Lithuanian Commonwealth and Tsardom of Russia. Cossack era. The 1648
Ukrainian Cossack ("Kozak") rebellion and war of independence (Khmelnytsky
Uprising), which started an era known as the Ruin (in Polish history as The
Deluge), undermined the foundations and stability of the Commonwealth. The
nascent Cossack state, the Cossack Hetmanate, usually viewed as precursor of
Ukraine, found itself in a three-sided military and diplomatic rivalry with the
Ottoman Turks, who controlled the Tatars to the south, the Commonwealth of
Poland and Lithuania, and the rising Russia to the East. The reconstituted
Ukrainian state, having recently fought a bitter war with Poland, sought a
treaty of protection with Russia in 1654. This agreement was known as the
Treaty of Pereyaslav. Commonwealth authorities then sought compromise with the
Ukrainian Cossack state by signing the Treaty of Hadiach in 1658, but â€” after
thirteen years of incessant warfare â€” the agreement was later superseded by
1667 Polish-Russian Treaty of Andrusovo, which divided Ukrainian territory
between the Commonwealth and Russia. Under Russia, the Cossacks initially
retained official autonomy in the Hetmanate. For a time, they also maintained a
semi-independent republic in Zaporozhia, and a colony on the Russian frontier
in Sloboda Ukraine. Russian Empire and Austro-Hungary. Tsarist rule over
central Ukraine gradually replaced 'protection' over the subsequent decades.
After the Partitions of Poland in 1772, 1793 and 1795, the extreme west of
Ukraine fell under the control of the Austrians, with the rest as part of the
Russian Empire. As a result of Russo-Turkish Wars the Ottoman Empire's control
receded from south-central Ukraine, while the rule of Hungary over the
Transcarpathian region continued. Ukrainian writers and intellectuals were
inspired by the nationalistic spirit stirring other European peoples existing
under other imperial governments and became determined to revive the Ukrainian
linguistic and cultural traditions and re-establish a Ukrainian nation-state, a
movement that became known as Ukrainophilism. Russia, fearing separatism,
imposed strict limits on attempts to elevate the Ukrainian language and
culture, even banning its use and study. This led to an exodus of a number of
Ukrainian intellectuals into Western Ukraine. However, many Ukrainians accepted
their fate in the Russian Empire and some were to achieve a great success
there. Many Russian writers, composers, painters and architects of the 19th
century were of Ukrainian descent. Probably the most notable were Nikolai
Gogol, one of the greatest writers in the history of Russian literature, and
Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, one of the greatest composers in the history of
Russian music, whose father came of Ukrainian Cossack stock. The fate of the
Ukrainians was far different under the Austrian Empire where they found
themselves in the pawn position of the Russian-Austrian power struggle for the
Central and Southern Europe. Unlike in Russia, most of the elite that ruled
Galicia were of Austrian or Polish descent, with the Ruthenians being almost
exclusively kept in peasantry. During the 19th century, Russophilia was a
common occurrence among the Slavic population, but the mass exodus of Ukrainian
intellectuals escaping from Russian repression in Eastern Ukraine, as well as
the intervention of Austrian authorities, caused the movement to be replaced by
Ukrainophilia, which would then cross-over into the Russian Empire. With the
start of World War I, all those supporting Russia were rounded up and massacred
by the Austrian forces at Talerhof. First World War, the revolutions and
aftermath. When World War I and series of revolutions across the Europe
including the October Revolution in Russia shattered many existing empires such
as the Austrian and Russian ones, while people of Ukraine were caught in the
middle. Between 1917 and 1918, several separate Ukrainian republics manifested
independence, the anarchist Free Territory, the Ukrainian People's Republic,
the West Ukrainian People's Republic, and numerous Bolshevik revkoms. As the
area of Ukraine fell into warfare and anarchy, it was also fought over by
German and Austrian forces, the Red Army of Bolshevik Russia, the White Forces
of General Denikin, the Polish Army, anarchists led by Nestor Makhno. Kiev
itself was occupied by many different armies. The city was captured by the
Bolsheviks on 9 February 1918, by the Germans on 2 March 1918, by the
Bolsheviks a second time on 5 February 1919, by the White Army on 31 August
1919, by Bolsheviks for a third time on 15 December 1919, by the Polish Army on
6 May 1920, and finally by the Bolsheviks for the fourth time on 12 June 1920.
The defeat in the Polish-Ukrainian War and then the failure of the PiÅ‚sudski's
and Petliura's "Warsaw agreement of 1920" to oust the Bolsheviks during the
Kiev Operation led almost to the occupation of Poland itself. In course of the
new Polish-Soviet War purpose of which changed from the 1920 led to the signing
of the Peace of Riga in March 1921, and after which the part of Ukraine west of
Zbruch had been incorporated into Poland, and the east became part of the
Soviet Union as the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. Interbellum. Soviet
Ukraine. The Ukrainian national idea lived on during the inter-war years and
was even spread to a large territory with traditionally mixed population in the
east and south that became part of the Ukrainian Soviet republic. The Ukrainian
culture even enjoyed a revival due to Bolshevik concessions in the early Soviet
years (until early-1930s) known as the policy of Korenization
("indigenisation"). In these years, an impressive Ukrainization program was
implemented throughout the republic. The rapidly developed Ukrainian language
based education system dramatically raised the literacy of the Ukrainophone
rural population. Simultaneously, the newly-literate ethnic Ukrainians migrated
to the cities, which became rapidly largely Ukrainianisedâ€”in both population
and in education. Similarly expansive was an increase in Ukrainian language
publishing and overall eruption of Ukrainian cultural life. At the same time,
the usage of Ukrainian was continuously encouraged in the workplace and in the
government affairs as the recruitment of indigenous cadre was implemented as
part of the korenisation policies. While initially, the party and government
apparatus was mostly Russian-speaking, by the end of 1920s the ethnic
Ukrainians composed over one half of the membership in the Ukrainian communist
party, the number strengthened by accession of Borotbists, a formerly
indigenously Ukrainian "independentist" and non-Bolshevik communist party.
Despite the ongoing Soviet Union-wide antireligious campaign, the Ukrainian
national Orthodox church was created called the Ukrainian Autocephalous
Orthodox Church (UAOC). The Bolshevik government initially saw the national
church as a tool in their goal to suppress the Russian Orthodox Church always
viewed with the great suspicion by the regime for its being the cornerstone of
pre-revolutionary Russian Empire and the initially strong opposition it took
towards the regime change. Therefore, the government tolerated the new
Ukrainian national church for some time and the UAOC gained a wide following
among the Ukrainian peasantry. The change in the Soviet economic policies
towards the fast-pace industrialisation was marked by the 1928 introduction of
Joseph Stalin's first piatiletka (a five-year plan). The industrialisation
brought about a dramatic economic and social transformation in traditionally
agricultural Ukraine. In the first piatiletkas the industrial output of Ukraine
quadrupled as the republic underwent a record industrial development. The
massive influx of the rural population to the industrial centres increased the
urban population from 19% to 34%. However, the industrialisation had a heavy
cost for the peasantry, demographically a backbone of the Ukrainian nation. To
satisfy the state's need for increased food supplies and finance
industrialisation, Stalin instituted a program of collectivisation of
agriculture, which profoundly affected Ukraine, often referred to as the
"breadbasket of the USSR". In the late 1920s and early 1930s, the state
combined the peasants' lands and animals into collective farms. Starting in
1929, a policy of enforcement was applied, using regular troops and secret
police to confiscate lands and materials where necessary. Many resisted, and a
desperate struggle by the peasantry against the authorities ensued. Some
slaughtered their livestock rather than turn it over to the collectives.
Wealthier peasants were labeled "kulaks", enemies of the state. Tens of
thousands were executed and about 100,000 families were deported to Siberia and
Kazakhstan. Forced collectivisation had a devastating effect on agricultural
productivity. Despite this, in 1932 the Soviet government increased Ukraine's
production quotas by 44%, ensuring that they could not be met. Soviet law
required that the members of a collective farm would receive no grain until
government quotas were satisfied. The authorities in many instances exacted
such high levels of procurement from collective farms that starvation became
widespread. The precise number of Ukrainians murdered by Stalin's custom-made
famine and firing squads remains unknown to this day. The KGB's archives, and
recent work by Russian historians, show at least seven million died. Ukrainian
historians put the figure at nine million, or higher. Twenty-five percent of
Ukraine's population was exterminated in what is known as the "Holodomor" or
"Ukrainian Holocaust". The Soviet Union suppressed information about this
genocide, and as late as the 1980s admitted only that there was some hardship
because of kulak sabotage and bad weather. Today, its existence is accepted.
Non-Soviets maintain that the famine was an avoidable, deliberate act of
genocide. The times of industrialisation and collectivisation also brought
about a wide campaign against "nationalist deviation" which in Ukraine
translated into an assault on the national political and cultural elite. The
first wave of purges between 1929 and 1934 targeted the revolutionary
generation of the party that in Ukraine included many supporters of
Ukrainization. The next 1936â€“1938 wave of political purges eliminated much of
the new political generation that replaced those that perished in the first
wave and halved the membership of the Ukrainian communist party. The purged
Ukrainian political leadership was largely replaced by the cadre sent from
Russia that was also largely "rotated" by Stalin's purges. As the policies of
Ukrainisation were halted (1931) and replaced by massive Russification
approximately four-fifths of the Ukrainian cultural elite, intellectuals,
writers, artists and clergy, had been "eliminated", executed or imprisoned, in
the following decade. Mass arrests of the hierarchy and clergy of the Ukrainian
Autocephalous Orthodox Church culminated in the liquidation of the church in
1930. Galicia and Volhynia under Polish rule. Following the end of World War I,
the eastern part of the former Austrian province of Galicia, as well as
Volhynia, which had belonged to the Russian Empire, became the area of a
Polish-Ukrainian War. The Ukrainians claimed these lands because they made up
the majority of population there (except for cities, such as Lviv), while the
Poles saw these provinces as Eastern Borderlands, a historical part of their
country. The war was won by the Poles, and their rule over these disputed lands
was cemented after another Polish victory, in the Polish-Soviet War. In the
interbellum period, eastern Galicia was divided into three administrative units
â€” LwÃ³w Voivodeship, StanisÅ‚awÃ³w Voivodeship, and Tarnopol Voivodeship,
while in Volhynia, WoÅ‚yÅ„ Voivodeship was created. Ukrainian majority of these
lands was repressed by the Polish authorities, and the conflict escalated in
the 1930s, also due to terrorist actions of the Organization of Ukrainian
Nationalists. The tensions were further exacerbated by arrival of thousands of
osadniks, or Polish settlers, who were granted land, especially in Volhynia.
Polish rule over the provinces ended in 1939, following Nazi and Soviet attack.
After Battle of Lwow, units of the Red Army entered regional capital, Lviv, and
following Elections to the People's Assemblies of Western Ukraine and Western
Belarus, both eastern Galicia and Volhynia were annexed by the Soviet Union.
World War II. Following the Ribbentrop-Molotov pact, in September 1939, German
and Soviet troops divided the territory of Poland, including Galicia with its
Ukrainian population. Next, after France surrendered to Germany, Romania ceded
Bessarabia and northern Bukovina to Soviet demands. The Ukrainian SSR
incorporated northern and southern districts of Bessarabia, the northern
Bukovina, and additionally the Soviet-occupied Hertsa region, but ceded the
western part of the Moldavian ASSR to the newly-created Moldavian SSR. All
these territorial gains were internationally recognized by the Paris Peace
Treaties, 1947. When Nazi Germany with its allies invaded the Soviet Union in
1941, many Ukrainians and Polish people, particularly in the west where they
had experienced two years of harsh Soviet rule, initially regarded the Nazis as
liberators. Some Ukrainian activist of the national movement hoped for a
momentum to establish an independent state of Ukraine. German policies
initially gave some encouragement to such hopes through the vague promises of
sovereign 'Greater Ukraine' as the Germans were trying to take advantage of
anti-Soviet, anti-Ukrainian, anti-Polish, and anti-Jewish sentiments. A local
Ukrainian auxiliary police was formed as well as Ukrainian SS division, 14th
Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Galicia (1st Ukrainian). However, after the
initial period of a limited tolerance, the German policies soon abruptly
changed and the Ukrainian national movement was brutally crushed. Most
Ukrainians, however, utterly resisted the Nazi onslaught from its start and a
partisan movement immediately spread over the occupied territory. Some elements
of the Ukrainian nationalist underground formed a Ukrainian Insurgent Army that
fought both Soviet and Nazi forces. In some western regions of Ukraine, the
Ukrainian Insurgent Army survived underground and continued the resistance
against the Soviet authorities well into the 1950s, though many Ukrainian
civilians were murdered in this conflict by both sides. The Nazi administrators
of conquered Soviet territories made little attempt to exploit the population's
possible dissatisfaction with Soviet political and economic policies. Instead,
the Nazis preserved the collective-farm system, systematically carried out
genocidal policies against Jews, and deported many Ukrainians to forced labour
in Germany. In their active resistance to Nazi Germany, the Ukrainians
comprised a significant share of the Red Army and its leadership as well as the
underground and resistance movements. Total civilian losses during the War and
German occupation in Ukraine are estimated at seven million, including over a
million Jews shot and killed by the "Einsatzgruppen". Many civilians fell
victim to atrocities, forced labor, and even massacres of whole villages in
reprisal for attacks against Nazi forces. Of the estimated eleven million
Soviet troops who fell in battle against the Nazis, about 25% (2.7 million)
were ethnic Ukrainians. Moreover, Ukraine saw some of the biggest battles of
the war starting with the encirclement of Kiev (the city itself fell to the
Germans on 19 September 1941 and was later acclaimed as a "Hero City") where
more than 660,000 Soviet troops were taken captive, to the fierce defence of
Odessa, and on to the victorious storming across the Dnieper river. Kiev was
recaptured by the Soviet Red Army on 6 November 1943. Post-war. After World War
II some amendments to the Constitution of the Ukrainian SSR were accepted,
which allowed it to act as a separate subject of international law in some
cases and to a certain extent, remaining a part of the Soviet Union at the same
time. In particular, these amendments allowed the Ukrainian SSR to become one
of founding members of the United Nations (UN) together with the Soviet Union
and the Byelorussian SSR. This was part of a deal with the United States to
ensure a degree of balance in the General Assembly, which, the USSR opined, was
unbalanced in favor of the Western Bloc. In its capacity as a member of the UN,
the Ukrainian SSR was an elected member of the United Nations Security Council
in 1948â€“1949 and 1984â€“1985. Over the next decades, the Ukrainian republic
not only surpassed pre-war levels of industry and production but also was the
spearhead of Soviet power. Ukraine became the centre of Soviet arms industry
and high-tech research. The republic was also turned into a Soviet military
outpost in the cold war, a territory crowded by military bases packed with the
most up-to-date weapons systems. Such an important role resulted in a major
influence of the local elite. Many members of the Soviet leadership came from
Ukraine, most notably Nikita Khrushchev and Leonid Brezhnev a Soviet leader
from 1964 to 1982, as well as many prominent Soviet sportsmen, scientists and
artists. In 1954, the Russian-populated oblast of Crimea was transferred from
the Russian to the Ukrainian Soviet Republic. However, the relatively
underdeveloped industrial branches such as coal- and iron ore mining,
metallurgy, chemical and energy industry dominated the republic's economy. Once
a Cossack steppe, the southern oblasts of Dnipropetrovsk and Zaporizhzhia were
turned into a highly industrialised area with rapidly increasing impact on its
environment and public health. A pursuit to energy production sufficient for
growing industry led to the gigantic nature-remastering: turning the Dnieper
River into a regulated system of large reservoirs. The products of the rapidly
developed high-tech industry in Ukraine were largely directed for military
consumption, similarly to much of the Soviet economy, and the supply and
quality of consumer goods remained low compared even to the neighboring
countries of the Eastern bloc. A state-regulated system of production and
consumption lead to gradual decrease of quality of life and growing
"shadowisation" of retail infrastructure as well as of corruption. The town of
Pripyat, Ukraine was the site of the Chernobyl disaster, which occurred on
April 26, 1986 when a nuclear plant exploded. The fallout contaminated large
areas of northern Ukraine and even parts of Belarus. This spurred on a local
independence movement called the Rukh that helped expedite the break-up of the
Soviet Union during the late 1980s. Independence. Kravchuk and Kuchma rule
(1991â€“2004). On January 21, 1990, over 300,000 Ukrainians organised a human
chain for Ukrainian independence between Kiev and Lviv, in memory of the 1919
unification of the Ukrainian People's Republic and the West Ukrainian National
Republic. Citizens came out to the streets and highways, forming live chains by
holding hands in support of unity. Ukraine officially declared itself an
independent state on August 24, 1991, when the communist Supreme Soviet
(parliament) of Ukraine proclaimed that Ukraine will no longer follow the laws
of USSR and only the laws of the Ukrainian SSR, de facto declaring Ukraine's
independence from the Soviet Union. On December 1, Ukrainian voters
overwhelmingly approved a referendum formalising independence from the Soviet
Union. Over 90% of Ukrainian citizens voted for independence, with majorities
in every region, including 56% in Crimea, which had a 75% ethnic Russian
population. The Soviet Union formally ceased to exist on December 26, when the
presidents of Ukraine, Belarus and Russia (the founding members of the USSR)
met in Belovezh Pushcha to formally dissolve the Union in accordance with the
Soviet Constitution. And with this Ukraine's independence was formalized de
jure and recognised by the international community. The first nation to
recognize Ukraine's independence was Canada, which has the largest ethnic
Ukrainian minority in the West. The history of Ukraine between 1991 and 2004
was marked by the presidencies of Leonid Kravchuk and Leonid Kuchma. This was a
time of transition for Ukraine. While it had attained nominal independence from
Russia, its presidents maintained close ties with their neighbours. On June 1,
1996, Ukraine became a non-nuclear nation when it sent the last of its 1,900
strategic nuclear warheads it had inherited from the Soviet Union to Russia for
dismantling.; Ukraine had committed to this by signing the Budapest Memorandum
on Security Assurances in January 1994. The country adopted its constitution on
June 28. The Cassette Scandal of 2000 was one of the turning points in post-
independence history of the country. Orange Revolution (2004). In 2004, Leonid
Kuchma announced that he would not run for re-election. Two major candidates
emerged in the 2004 presidential election. Viktor Yanukovych, the incumbent
Prime Minister, supported by both Kuchma and by the Russian Federation, wanted
closer ties with Russia. The main opposition candidate, Viktor Yushchenko,
called for Ukraine to turn its attention westward and eventually join the EU.
In the runoff election, Yanukovych officially won by a narrow margin, but
Yushchenko and his supporters cried foul, alleging that vote rigging and
intimidation cost him many votes, especially in eastern Ukraine. A political
crisis erupted after the opposition started massive street protests in Kiev and
other cities, and the Supreme Court of Ukraine ordered the election results
null and void. A second runoff found Viktor Yushchenko the winner. Five days
later, Viktor Yanukovych resigned from office and his cabinet was dismissed on
January 5, 2005. Since the Orange Revolution. In March 2006, the Verkhovna Rada
elections took place and three months later the official government was formed
by the "Anti-Crisis Coalition" among the "Party of Regions", "Communist", and
"Socialist" parties. The latter party switched from the "Orange Coalition" with
"Our Ukraine", and the "Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc". The new coalition nominated
Viktor Yanukovych for the post of Prime Minister. Yanukovych once again became
Prime Minister, while the leader of the Socialist Party, Oleksander Moroz,
managed to secure the position of chairman of parliament, which is believed by
many to have been the reason for his leaving the Orange Coalition, where he had
not been considered for this position. On April 2, 2007, President Yushchenko
dissolved the Verkhovna Rada because members of his party were defecting to the
opposition. His opponents called the move unconstitutional. When they took the
matter to the Constitutional Court, Yushchenko dismissed 3 of the court's 18
judges, accusing them of corruption. During the Yushchenko term, relations
between Russia and Ukraine often appeared strained as Yushchenko looked towards
improved relations with the European Union and less toward Russia. In 2005, a
highly-publicized dispute over natural gas prices took place, involving Russian
state-owned gas supplier Gazprom, and indirectly involving many European
countries which depend on natural gas supplied by Russia through the Ukrainian
pipeline. A compromise was reached in January 2006, and in early 2010 a further
agreement was signed locking the price of Russian gas at $100 per 1,000 cubic
meters in an exclusive arrangement. By the time of the presidential election of
2009, Yushchenko and Tymoshenko â€” allies during the Orange Revolution â€” had
become bitter enemies. Tymoshenko ran for president against both Yushchenko and
Viktor Yanukovych, creating a three-way race. Yushchenko, whose popularity had
plummeted, refused to close ranks and support Tymoshenko, thus dividing the
anti-Yanukovych vote. Many pro-Orange voters stayed home. Yanukovych received
48% of the vote and Yushchenko less than 6%, an amount which, if thrown to
Tymoshenko, who received 45%, would have prevented Yanukovych from gaining the
presidency; since no candidate obtained an absolute majority in the first round
of voting the two highest polling candidates contested in a run-off second
ballot which Yanukovych won. During Yanukovych's term he has been accused of
tightening of press restrictions and a renewed effort in the parliament to
limit freedom of assembly. One frequently-cited example of Yankukovych's
alleged attempts to centralize power is the August 2011 arrest of Yulia
Tymoshenko. Other high-profile political opponents also came under criminal
investigation since. On 11 October 2011, a Ukrainian court sentenced Tymoshenko
to seven years in prison after she was found guilty of abuse of office when
brokering the 2009 gas deal with Russia. The conviction is seen as "justice
being applied selectively under political motivation" by the European Union and
other international organizations. Historiography of Ukraine. The scholarly
study of Ukraine's history emerged from romantic impulses in the late 19th
century. The outstanding leaders were Volodymyr Antonovych (1834â€“1908), based
in Kiev, and his student Michael Hrushevsky (1866â€“1934). For the first time
full-scale scholarly studies based on archival sources, modern research
techniques, and modern historical theories became possible. However, the
demands of government officialsâ€”especially Soviet, but also Czarists and
Polishâ€”made it difficult to disseminate ideas that ran counter to the central
government. Therefore exile schools of historians emerged in central Europe and
Canada after 1920. Strikingly different interpretations of the medieval state
of Kievan Rus' appear in the four schools of historiography within Ukraine:
Russophile, Sovietophile, Eastern Slavic, and Ukrainophile. The Sovietophile
and Russophile schools have become marginalized in independent Ukraine, with
the Ukrainophile school being dominant in the early 21st century. The
Ukrainophile school promotes an identity that is mutually exclusive of Russia.
It has come to dominate the nation's educational system, security forces, and
national symbols and monuments, although it has been dismissed as nationalist
by Western historians. The East Slavic school, an eclectic compromise between
Ukrainophiles and Russophilism, has a weaker ideological and symbolic base,
although it is preferred by Ukraine's centrist former elites. Many historians
in recent years have sought alternatives to national histories, and Ukrainian
history invited approaches that looked beyond a national paradigm. Multiethnic
history recognizes the numerous peoples in Ukraine; transnational history
portrays Ukraine as a border zone for various empires; and area studies
categorizes Ukraine as part of Eurasia, or more often as part of East-Central
Europe. Plokhy (2007) argues that looking beyond the country's national history
has made possible a richer understanding of Ukraine, its people, and the
surrounding regions. After 1991, historical memory was a powerful tool in the
political mobilization and legitimation of the post-Soviet Ukrainian state, as
well as the division of selectively used memory along the lines of the
political division of Ukrainian society. Ukraine did not experience the
restorationist paradigm typical of some other post-Soviet nations, including
the Baltic states, although the multifaceted history of independence, the
Orthodox Church in Ukraine, Soviet-era repressions, mass famine, and World War
II collaboration were used to provide a different constitutive frame for the
new Ukrainian nation. The politics of identity (which includes the production
of history textbooks and the authorization of commemorative practices) has
remained fragmented and tailored to reflect the ideological anxieties and
concerns of individual regions of Ukraine. Historical maps of Ukraine. The
Ukrainian state has occupied a number of territories since its initial
foundation. Most of these territories have been located within Eastern Europe,
however, as depicted in the maps in the gallery below, has also at times
extended well into Eurasia and southeastern Europe. At times there has also
been a distinct lack of a Ukrainian state, as its territories were on a number
of occasions, annexed by its more powerful neighbours.
