History of Zanzibar People have lived in Zanzibar for 20,000 years; history
proper starts when the islands became a base for traders voyaging between
Arabia, India, and Africa. Unguja offered a protected and defensible harbour,
so although the archipelago had few products of value, Arabs settled at what
became Zanzibar City (Stone Town) as a convenient point from which to trade
with East African coastal towns. They established garrisons on the islands and
built the first mosque in the Southern hemisphere. During the Age of
Exploration, the Portuguese Empire was the first European power to gain control
of Zanzibar, and kept it for nearly 200 years. In 1698 Zanzibar fell under the
control of the Sultanate of Oman, which developed an economy of trade and cash
crops, with a ruling Arab elite. Plantations were developed to grow spices,
hence the moniker of the Spice Islands (a name also used of Dutch colony the
Moluccas, now part of Indonesia). Another major trade good was ivory, the tusks
of elephants killed in mainland Africa. The third pillar of the economy was
slaves, giving Zanzibar an important place in the Arab slave trade, the Indian
Ocean equivalent of the better-known Triangular Trade. The Sultan of Zanzibar
controlled a substantial portion of the East African coast, known as Zanj, and
extensive inland trading routes. Sometimes gradually, sometimes by fits and
starts, control came into the hands of the British Empire; part of the
political impetus for this was the movement for the abolition of the slave
trade. In 1890 Zanzibar became a British protectorate. The death of one sultan
and the succession of another of whom the British did not approve led to the
Anglo-Zanzibar War, also known as the shortest war in history. The islands
gained independence from Britain in December 1963 as a constitutional monarchy.
A month later, the bloody Zanzibar Revolution, in which several thousand Arabs
and Indians were killed and thousands more expelled and expropriated, led to
the Republic of Zanzibar and Pemba. That April, the republic merged with the
mainland Tanganyika, or more accurately, was subsumed into Tanzania, of which
Zanzibar remains a semi-autonomous region. Zanzibar was most recently in the
international news with a January 2001 massacre, following contested elections.
Prehistory. Zanzibar has been inhabited, perhaps not continuously, since the
Paleolithic. A 2005 excavation at Kuumbi Cave in southeastern Zanzibar found
heavy duty stone tools that showed occupation of the site at least 22,000 years
ago. Archaeological discoveries of a limestone cave used radiocarbon techniques
to prove more recent occupation, from around 2800 BC to the year 0 (Chami
2006). Traces of the communities include objects such as glass beads from
around the Indian Ocean. It is a suggestion of early trans-oceanic trade
networks, although some writers have expressed pessimism about this
possibility. No cave sites on Zanzibar have revealed pottery fragments used by
early and later Bantu farming and iron-working communities who lived on the
islands (Zanzibar, Mafia) during the first millennium AD. On Zanzibar, the
evidence for the later farming and iron-working communities dating from the
mid-first millennium AD is much stronger and indicates the beginning of
urbanism there when settlements were built with mud-timber structures (Juma
2004). This is somewhat earlier than the existing evidence for towns in other
parts of the East African coast, given as the 9th century AD. The first
permanent residents of Zanzibar seem to have been the ancestors of the Hadimu
and Tumbatu, who began arriving from the East African mainland around 1000 AD.
They had belonged to various mainland ethnic groups, and on Zanzibar they lived
in small villages and failed to coalesce to form larger political units.
Because they lacked central organization, they were easily subjugated by
outsiders. Early Iranian & Arab rule. Ancient pottery demonstrates existing
trade routes with Zanzibar as far back as the ancient Sumer and Assyria. An
ancient pendant discovered near Eshnunna dated ca. 2500-2400 BC. has been
traced to copal imported from the Zanzibar region. Traders from Arabia (mostly
Yemen), the Persian Gulf region of Iran (especially Shiraz), and west India
probably visited Zanzibar as early as the 1st century AD. They used the monsoon
winds to sail across the Indian Ocean and landed at the sheltered harbor
located on the site of present-day Zanzibar Town. Although the islands had few
resources of interest to the traders, they offered a good location from which
to make contact and trade with the towns of the East African coast. A phase of
urban development associated with the introduction of stone material to the
construction industry of the East African coast began from the 10th century AD.
Traders began to settle in small numbers on Zanzibar in the late 11th or 12th
century, intermarrying with the indigenous Africans. Eventually a hereditary
ruler (known as the "Mwenyi Mkuu" or "Jumbe"), emerged among the Hadimu, and a
similar ruler, called the "Sheha", was set up among the Tumbatu. Neither had
much power, but they helped solidify the ethnic identity of their respective
peoples. The Yemenis built the earliest mosque in the southern hemisphere in
Kizimkazi, the southernmost village in Unguja. A kufic inscription on its
"mihrab" bears the date AH 500, i.e. 1107 AD. Villages were also present in
which lineage groups were common. Portuguese rule. Vasco da Gama's visit in
1499 marked the beginning of European influence. In 1503 or 1504, Zanzibar
became part of the Portuguese Empire when Captain Ruy LourenÃ§o Ravasco Marques
landed and demanded and received tribute from the sultan in exchange for peace.
Zanzibar remained a possession of Portugal for almost two centuries. Later Arab
rule. In 1698, Zanzibar became part of the overseas holdings of Oman, falling
under the control of the Sultan of Oman. The Portuguese were expelled and a
lucrative trade in slaves and ivory thrived, along with an expanding plantation
economy centring on cloves. The Arabs established garrisons at Zanzibar, Pemba,
and Kilwa. The height of Arab rule came during the reign of Seyyid Said (more
fully, Sayyid Said bin Sultan al-Busaid), who in 1840 moved his capital from
Muscat in Oman to Stone Town. He established a ruling Arab elite and encouraged
the development of clove plantations, using the island's slave labour.
Zanzibar's commerce fell increasingly into the hands of traders from the Indian
subcontinent, whom Said encouraged to settle on the island. After his death in
1856, his sons struggled over the succession. On April 6, 1861, Zanzibar and
Oman were divided into two separate principalities. Sayyid Majid bin Said Al-
Busaid (1834/5â€“1870), his sixth son, became the Sultan of Zanzibar, while the
third son, Sayyid Thuwaini bin Said al-Said, became the Sultan of Oman. The
Sultan of Zanzibar controlled a substantial portion of the east African coast,
known as Zanj, and trading routes extending much further across the continent,
as far as Kindu on the Congo River. In November 1886, a German-British border
commission established the Zanj as a ten-nautical mile (19Â km) wide strip
along most of the coast of East Africa, stretching from Cape Delgado (now in
Mozambique) to Kipini (now in Kenya), including Mombasa and Dar es Salaam, all
offshore islands, and several towns in what is now Somalia. However, from 1887
to 1892, all of these mainland possessions were lost to the colonial powers of
the United Kingdom, Germany, and Italy, although some were not formally sold or
ceded until the 20th century (Mogadishu to Italy in 1905 and Mombasa to Britain
in 1963). Zanzibar was famous worldwide for its spices and its slaves. It was
East Africa's main slave-trading port, and in the 19th century as many as
50,000 slaves were passing through the slave markets of Zanzibar each year.
(David Livingstone estimated that 80,000 Africans died each year before ever
reaching the island.) Tippu Tip was the most notorious slaver, under several
sultans, and also a trader, plantation owner and governor. Zanzibar's spices
attracted ships from as far away as the United States, which established a
consulate in 1837. The United Kingdom's early interest in Zanzibar was
motivated by both commerce and the determination to end the slave trade. In
1822, the British signed the first of a series of treaties with Sultan Said to
curb this trade, but not until 1876 was the sale of slaves finally prohibited.
Zanzibar had the distinction of having the first steam locomotive in East
Africa, when Sultan Bargash bin Said ordered a tiny 0-4-0 tank engine to haul
his regal carriage from town to his summer palace at Chukwani. British
influence and rule. The British Empire gradually took over; the relationship
was formalised by the 1890 Heligoland-Zanzibar Treaty, in which Germany
pledged, among other things, not to interfere with British interests in
Zanzibar. This treaty made Zanzibar and Pemba a British protectorate (not
colony), and the Caprivi Strip (in what is now Namibia) a German protectorate.
British rule through a sultan (vizier) remained largely unchanged. The death of
Hamad bin Thuwaini on 25 August 1896 saw the Khalid bin Bargash, eldest son of
the second sultan, Barghash ibn Sa'id, take over the palace and declare himself
the new ruler. This was contrary to the wishes of the British government, which
favoured Hamoud bin Mohammed. This led to a showdown, later called the Anglo-
Zanzibar War, on the morning of 27 August, when ships of the Royal Navy
destroyed the Beit al Hukum Palace, having given Khalid a one-hour ultimatum to
leave. He refused, and at 9 am the ships opened fire. Khalid's troops returned
fire and he fled to the German consulate. A cease fire was declared 45 minutes
after the action had begun, giving the bombardment the title of The Shortest
War in History. Hamoud was declared the new ruler and peace was restored once
more. Acquiescing to British demands, he brought an end in 1897 to Zanzibar's
role as a centre for the centuries-old eastern slave trade by banning slavery
and freeing the slaves, compensating their owners. Hamoud's son and heir
apparent, Ali, was educated in Britain. From 1913 until independence in 1963,
the British appointed their own residents (essentially governors). Independence
and revolution. On 10 December 1963, Zanzibar received its independence from
the United Kingdom as a constitutional monarchy under the Sultan. This state of
affairs was short-lived, as the Sultan and the democratically elected
government were overthrown on 12 January 1964 in the Zanzibar Revolution led by
John Okello, a Ugandan citizen. Sheikh Abeid Amani Karume was named President
of the newly created People's Republic of Zanzibar and Pemba. Several thousand
Arabs (5,000-12,000 Zanzibaris of Arabic descent) and Indians were killed,
thousands more detained or expelled, their property either confiscated or
destroyed. The film "Africa Addio" documents the revolution, including a
massacre of Arabs. (Ethnic difference, and the expulsion of those who had
anywhere else to go, were repeated themes in East Africa, the most prominent
example being the Expulsion of Indians in Uganda in 1972 by Idi Amin.) The
revolutionary government nationalized the local operations of the two foreign
banks in Zanzibar, Standard Bank and National and Grindlays Bank. These
nationalized operations may have provided the foundation for the newly-created
Peoples Bank of Zanzibar. Jetha Lila, the one locally-owned bank in Zanzibar,
or for that matter in all of East Africa, closed. It was owned by Indians and
though the revolutionary government of Zanzibar urged it to continue
functioning, the loss of its customer base as Indians left the island made it
impossible to continue. Union with Tanganyika. On 26 April 1964, the mainland
colony of Tanganyika united with Zanzibar to form the United Republic of
Tanganyika and Zanzibar; this lengthy name was compressed into a portmanteau,
the United Republic of Tanzania, on 29 October 1964. After unification, local
affairs were controlled by President Abeid Amani Karume, while foreign affairs
were handled by the United Republic in Dar es Salaam. Zanzibar remains a semi-
autonomous region of Tanzania. From this point onwards, see History of
Tanzania.
