History of Hungary Hungary is a country in Central Europe. Its history under
this name dates to the early Middle Ages, when Pannonian Basin was conquered by
the Hungarians, a semi-nomadic people in that time. For history of the area
before this period, see Pannonian basin before Hungary. Early history. The
oldest archaeological site in Hungary is V√©rtessz≈ël≈ës where in 1965
palaeolithic Oldowan pebble tools, and an early human fossil, nicknamed "Samu",
a 350,000-year-old Homo Erectus was discovered. The Roman Empire conquered
territory west of the Danube between 35 and 9 BCE From 9 BC to the end of the
4th century AD Pannonia, the western part of the basin was part of the Roman
Empire. In the final stages of the expansion of the Roman empire, for a short
while the Carpathian Basin fell under Mediterranean influence Greco-Roman
civilization - town centers, paved roads, and written sources were all part of
the advances to which the "Migration of Peoples" put an end. After the Western
Roman Empire collapsed under the stress of the migration of Germanic tribes and
Carpian pressure, the Migration Period continued bringing many invaders to
Europe. Among the first to arrive were the Huns, who built up a powerful empire
under Attila in 435 CE. The white Huns and Hungarians was the same nation. This
nation's one part was going to west Europe, and the other part stayed in Magna
Hungaria. When Attila (White Hun) dead, the Hun Empire frayed. One part of Huns
was going to Erd√©ly (They call themselves: Sz√©kely),and other part blended
with Avars, and other part was going back to Magna Hungaria. (Attila's son:
Csaba. Csaba's son: Ed. Ed's son: √úgyek. √úgyek's son: El≈ëd. El≈ëd's son:
√Ålmos, √Ålmos's son: √Årp√°d. √Ålmos s' folk and the Hun of Erd√©ly was
meeting in Vereckei H√°g√≥)Hunnish rule faded, the Germanic Ostrogoths,
Lombards then Slavs came to Pannonia, and the Gepids had a presence in the
eastern part of the Carpathian Basin for about 100 years. In the 560s the Avars
founded the Avar Khaganate, a state which maintained supremacy in the region
for more than two centuries and had the military power to launch attacks
against its neighboring empires. The Avar Khaganate was weakened by constant
wars and outside pressure, and the Franks under Charlemagne managed to defeat
the Avars, ending their 250-year rule. In the middle of the 9th century, the
Slavic Balaton Principality, also known as Lower Pannonia, was established by
the Franks as a frontier march when they destroyed the Avar state in the
western part of the Pannonian plain; however this vassal state was destroyed in
900 by Hungarian tribes. Middle Ages (895‚Äì1526). √Årp√°d was the Magyar
leader whom sources name as the single leader who unified the Magyar tribes via
the Covenant of Blood (), forging what was thereafter known as the Hungarian
nation. √Årp√°d led the new nation to the Carpathian Basin in the 9th century.
From 895 to 902 the whole area of the Carpathian Basin was conquered by the
Hungarians. After that, an early Hungarian state (the Principality of Hungary,
founded in 895) was formed in this territory. The military power of the nation
allowed the Hungarians to conduct successful fierce campaigns and raids as far
as today's Spain. A later defeat at the Battle of Lechfeld in 955 signaled an
end to raids on western territories (Byzantine raids continued until 970), and
links between the tribes weakened. The ruling prince ("fejedelem") G√©za of the
√Årp√°d dynasty, who ruled only part of the united territory, the nominal
overlord of all seven Magyar tribes, aimed to integrate Hungary into Christian
Western Europe, rebuilding the state according to the Western political and
social model. He established a dynasty by naming his son Vajk (the later King
Stephen I of Hungary) as his successor. This was contrary to the then-dominant
tradition of the succession of the eldest surviving member of the ruling
family. (See:agnatic seniority) By ancestral right prince Kopp√°ny, -as the
oldest member of the dynasty- should have claimed the throne, but G√©za chose
his first-born son to be his successor. The fight in the chief prince's family
started after G√©za's death, in 997. Duke Kopp√°ny took up arms, and many
people in Transdanubia joined him. The rebels represented the old faith and
order, ancient human rights, tribal independence and pagan belief, but Stephen
won a decisive victory over his uncle Kopp√°ny, and had him executed. The
Patrimonial Kingdom. Hungary was recognized as a Catholic Apostolic Kingdom
under Saint Stephen I. Stephen was the son of G√©za and thus a descendant of
√Årp√°d. Stephen was crowned by the Holy Crown of Hungary in December 1000 AD
in the capital, Esztergom. The Papacy confers on him the right to have the
cross carried before him, with full administrative authority over bishoprics
and churches. By 1006, Stephen had solidified his power, eliminating all rivals
who either wanted to follow the old pagan traditions or wanted an alliance with
the Eastern Christian Byzantine Empire. Then he started sweeping reforms to
convert Hungary into a western feudal state, complete with forced
Christianization. Stephen established a network of 10 episcopal and 2
archiepiscopal sees, and ordered the buildup of monasteries churches and
cathedrals. In the earliest times Hungarian language was written in a runic-
like script. The country switched to the Latin alphabet under Stephen. From
1000 to 1844, Latin was the official language of the country. He followed the
Frankish administrative model: The whole of this land was divided into counties
("megy√©k"), each under a royal official called an "isp√°n" count ()‚Äîlater
f≈ëisp√°n (). This official represented the king‚Äôs authority, administered
its population, and collected the taxes that formed the national revenue. Each
"isp√°n" maintained an armed force of freemen at his fortified headquarters
(castrum or v√°r). What emerged was a strong kingdom that withstood attacks
from German kings and Emperors, and nomadic tribes following the Hungarians
from the East, integrating some of the latter into the population (along with
Germans invited to Transylvania and the northern part of the kingdom,
especially after the Battle of Mohi), and conquering Croatia in 1091. According
to an alternative history based on the document Pacta Conventa, which is most
likely a forgery Hungary and Croatia created a personal union. There is no
undoubtedly genuine document of the personal union, and medieval sources
mention the annexation into the Hungarian kingdom. After the Great Schism (The
East-West Schism /formally in 1054/, between Western Roman Catholic and Eastern
Orthodox Christianity.) Hungary determined itself as the easternmost bastion of
Western civilisation (This statement was affirmed later by Pope Pius II who
wrote that to Emperor Friedrich III, "Hungary is the shield of Christianity and
the defender of Western civilization"). One of his most famous laws was half a
millennium ahead of its time: "De strigis vero quae non sunt, nulla amplius
quaestio fiat" (As for the matter of witches, no such things exist, therefore
no further investigations or trials are to be held). He was the most powerful
and wealthiest member of the dynasty, B√©la disposed of annual equivalent of
23,000¬ kg of pure silver. It exceeded those of the French king (estimated at
some 17,000 kilograms) and was double the receipts of the English Crown. He
rolled back the Byzantine potency in Balkan region. In 1195, Bela III had
expanded the Hungarian Kingdom southward and westward to Bosnia and Dalmatia,
helping to break up the Byzantine Empire, and extending suzerainty over Serbia.
In 1211 Andrew II of Hungary (ruled from 1205 to 1235) granted the Burzenland
(in Transylvania) to the Teutonic Knights. In 1225, Andrew II expelled the
Teutonic Knights from Transylvania, hence Teutonic Order had to transfer to the
Baltic sea. In 1224, Andrew issued the Diploma Andreanum which unified and
ensured the special privileges of the Transylvanian Saxons. It is considered
the first Autonomy law in the world. He led the Fifth Crusade to the Holy Land
in 1217. He set up the largest royal army in the history of Crusades (20,000
knights and 12,000 castle-garrisons). The Golden Bull of 1222 was the first
constitution in Continental Europe. It limited the king's power. The Golden
Bull ‚Äî the Hungarian equivalent of England‚Äôs Magna Carta ‚Äî to which every
Hungarian king thereafter had to swear, had a twofold purpose: to reaffirm the
rights of the smaller nobles of the old and new classes of royal servants
("servientes regis") against both the crown and the magnates and to defend
those of the whole nation against the crown by restricting the powers of the
latter in certain fields and legalizing refusal to obey its unlawful/
unconstitutional commands (the "ius resistendi"). The lesser nobles also began
to present Andrew with grievances, a practice that evolved into the institution
of the parliament, or Diet. Hungary became the first country where the
parliament had supremacy over the kingship. The most important legal ideology
was the Doctrine of the Holy Crown. Important points of the Doctrine: The
sovereignty belongs to the noble nation‚Üí(the Holy Crown). The members of the
Holy Crown are the citizens of the Crown's lands. None can reach full power.
The nation is sharing a portion of the political power with the ruler. Minority
cannot rule over majority (against tyranny and oligarchy). Mongol attacks. In
1241‚Äì1242, the kingdom received a major blow with the Mongol Invasion: after
the defeat of the Hungarian army at the Battle of Mohi, B√©la IV of Hungary
fled, and a large part of the population died in the ensuing destruction
leading later to the invitation of settlers, largely from Germany. Historians
estimate that the population loss was between 20 and 50 percent. In the plains
between 50 and 80% of the settlements were destroyed. Only castles, strongly
fortified cities and abbeys could withstand the assault, as the Mongols had no
time for long sieges - their goal was to move west as soon as possible. The
siege engines and the Chinese and Persian engineers that operated them for the
Mongols had been left in Russia. During the Russian campaign, the Mongols drove
some 40,000 Cumans, a nomadic tribe of pagan Kipchaks, west of the Carpathian
Mountains. There, the Cumans appealed to King B√©la IV of Hungary for
protection. The Iranian Jassic people came to Hungary together with the Cumans
after they were defeated by the Mongols. Cumans constituted perhaps up to 7-8%
of the population of Hungary in the second half of the 13th century. Over the
centuries they were fully assimilated into the Hungarian population, and their
language disappeared, but they preserved their identity and their regional
autonomy until 1876. As a consequence, after the Mongols retreated, King B√©la
ordered the construction of hundreds of stone castles and fortifications, to
defend against a possible second Mongol invasion. The Mongols returned to
Hungary in 1286, but the new built stone-castle systems and new tactics (using
a higher proportion of heavily armed knights) stopped them. The invading Mongol
force was defeated near Pest by the royal army of Ladislaus IV of Hungary. As
with later invasions, it was repelled handily, the Mongols losing much of their
invading force. These castles proved to be very important later in the long
struggle with the Ottoman Empire. However the cost of building them indebted
the Hungarian King to the major feudal landlords again, so the royal power
reclaimed by B√©la IV after his father Andrew II significantly weakened it was
once again dispersed amongst lesser nobility. The countries of the Balkan
region and the territory of Russian states fell under Ottoman/Mongolian rule
very rapidly, due to the lack of the network of stone/brick castles and
fortresses in these countries. Age of elected Kings. After the destructive
period of interregnum (1301‚Äì1308), the first Angevin king, Charles I of
Hungary (reigned 1308‚Äì1342) - a descendant of the √Årp√°d dynasty in the
female line - successfully restored royal power, and defeated oligarch rivals,
the so-called "little kings". His new fiscal, customs and monetary policies
proved successful during his reign. One of the primary sources of his power was
the wealth derived from the gold mines of eastern and northern Hungary.
Eventually production reached the remarkable figure of 3,000¬ lb. (1350¬ kg) of
gold annually - one-third of the total production of the world as then known,
and five times as much as that of any other European state. Charles also sealed
an alliance with the Polish king Casimir. After Italy, Hungary was the first
European country where the renaissance appeared. The second Hungarian king in
the Angevin line, Louis the Great (reigned 1342‚Äì1382) extended his rule as
far as the Adriatic Sea, and occupied the Kingdom of Naples several times. In
1351, the golden bull was completed with the law of entail. Which instated that
the nobles hereditary lands could not be taken away and must remain in the
family. He also became king of Poland (reigned 1370‚Äì1382). During his reign
lived the epic hero of Hungarian literature and warfare, the king's Champion:
Nicolas Toldi. Louis had become popular in Poland because of his campaign
against the Tatars and pagan Lithuanians. Two successful wars (1357‚Äì1358,
1378‚Äì1381) against Venice annexed Dalmatia and Ragusa and more territories on
the Adriatic Sea. Venice also had to raise the Angevin flag in St. Mark's
Square on holy days. Some Balkan states (Vallachia, Moldova, Serbia, Bosnia)
became his vassals. Louis I established a university in P√©cs in 1367 (by papal
accordance). The Ottoman Turks confronted the Balkan vassal states ever more
often. In 1366 and 1377, Louis led successful campaigns against the Ottomans
(Battle of Nicapoli in 1366). From the death of Casimir III of Poland in 1370,
he was also king of Poland. He retained his strong influence in the political
life of Italian Peninsula for the rest of his life. King Louis died without a
male heir, and after years of anarchy the country was stabilized only when
Sigismund (reigned 1387‚Äì1437), a prince of the Luxembourg line, succeeded to
the throne by marrying the daughter of Louis the Great, Queen Mary. It was not
for entirely selfless reasons that one of the leagues of barons helped him to
power: Sigismund had to pay for the support of the lords by transferring a
sizeable part of the royal properties. For some years, the baron's council
governed the country in the name of the Holy Crown; the king was imprisoned for
a short time. The restoration of the authority of the central administration
took decades. In 1404 Sigismund introduced the "Placetum Regnum". According to
this decree, Papal bulls and messages could not be pronounced in Hungary
without the consent of the king. Sigismund summoned the Council of Constance
(1414‚Äì1418) to abolish the Avignon Papacy and the Papal Schism of the
Catholic Church, which was resolved by the election of a new pope. In 1433 he
even became Holy Roman Emperor. During his long reign the Royal castle of Buda
became probably the largest Gothic palace of the late Middle Ages. After the
death of Sigismund, his son in law, Albert II of Germany, was titled king of
Hungary. Albert II, however, died in 1439. The first Hungarian Bible
translation was completed in 1439. For a half year in 1437, there was an anti-
feudal and anti-clerical peasant revolt in Transylvania which was strongly
influenced by Hussite ideas. (See: Budai Nagy Antal Revolt) From a small noble
family in Transylvania, John Hunyadi grew to become one of the country's most
powerful lords, thanks to his outstanding capabilities as a mercenary
commander. In 1446, the parliament elected the great general John Hunyadi
governor (1446‚Äì1453), then regent (1453‚Äì1456). He was a successful crusader
against the Ottoman Turks, one of his greatest victories being the Siege of
Belgrade in 1456. Hunyadi defended the city against the onslaught of the
Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II. During the siege, Pope Callixtus III ordered the
bells of every European church to be rung every day at noon, as a call for
believers to pray for the defenders of the city. However, in many countries
(like England and Spanish kingdoms), the news of the victory arrived before the
order, and the ringing of the church bells at noon was transformed into a
commemoration of the victory. The Popes did not withdraw the order, and
Catholic (and the older Protestant) churches still ring the noon bell in the
Christian world to this day. Age of early absolutism. The last strong king was
the Renaissance king Matthias Corvinus (king from 1458 to 1490). Matthias was
the son of John Hunyadi. Andr√°s Hess set up a printing press in Buda in 1472.
This was the first time in the medieval Hungarian kingdom that a member of the
nobility, without dynastic ancestry and relationship, mounted the royal throne.
A true Renaissance prince, a successful military leader and administrator, an
outstanding linguist, a learned astrologer, and an enlightened patron of the
arts and learning. Although Matyas regularly convened the Diet and expanded the
lesser nobles' powers in the counties, he exercised absolute rule over Hungary
by means of huge secular bureaucracy. Matthias set out to build a great empire,
expanding southward and northwest, while he also implemented internal reforms.
The serfs, common people considered Matthias a just ruler because he protected
them from excessive demands and other abuses by the magnates. Like his father,
Matthias desired to strengthen the Kingdom of Hungary to the point where it
became the foremost regional power and overlord, strong enough to push back the
Ottoman Empire; towards that end he deemed necessary the conquering of large
parts of the Holy Roman Empire. In 1479, under the leadership of general P√°l
Kinizsi, the Hungarian army destroyed the Ottoman and Wallachian troops at the
Battle of Breadfield. Army of Hungary, almost all times destroyed the enemies
when Matthias was the king. His mercenary standing army called the Black Army
of Hungary () was an unusually big army in its age, it accomplished a series of
victories in the Austrian-Hungarian War (1477-1488), capturing parts of Austria
and Vienna in 1485, as well as parts of Bohemia in the Bohemian War (1468-
1478). The king died without a legal successor. His library, the Bibliotheca
Corviniana, was Europe's greatest collection of historical chronicles,
philosophic and scientific works in the 15th century, and second only in size
to the Vatican Library which mainly contained religious material. His
renaissance library is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Decline (1490‚Äì1526). By
the early 16th century, the Ottoman Empire became the second most populous
state in the world, which opened the door to creation of the largest armies of
the era. The magnates, who did not want another heavy-handed king, procured the
accession of Vladislaus II (King: 1490‚Äì1516), king of Bohemia (L√°szl√≥ II in
Hungarian), precisely because of his notorious weakness: he was known as King
Dob≈æe, or Dobzse (meaning ‚ÄúGood‚Äù or, loosely, ‚ÄúOK‚Äù), from his habit of
accepting with that word every paper laid before him. Under his reign the
central power began to experience severe financial difficulties, largely due to
the enlargement of feudal lands at his expense. The magnates also dismantled
administration and institute systems of the country. The country's defenses
declined as border guards and castle garrisons went unpaid, fortresses fell
into disrepair, and initiatives to increase taxes to reinforce defenses were
stifled. Hungary's international role was wasted, its political stability
shaken, and social progress was deadlocked. In 1514, the weakened old King
Vladislaus II faced a major peasant rebellion led by Gy√∂rgy D√≥zsa, which was
ruthlessly crushed by the nobles, led by J√°nos Szapolyai. The resulting
degradation of order paved the way for Ottoman preeminence. In 1521, the
strongest Hungarian fortress in the South, N√°ndorfeh√©rv√°r (modern Belgrade)
fell to the Turks, and in 1526, the Hungarian army was crushed at the Battle of
Moh√°cs. The young king Louis II, and the leader of the Hungarian army, P√°l
Tomori died in the battle. The early appearance of protestantism further
worsened internal relations in the anarchical country. Through the centuries
Hungary kept its old "constitution", which granted special "freedoms" or rights
to the nobility, the free royal towns such as Buda, Kassa (Ko≈°ice), Pozsony
(Bratislava), and Kolozsv√°r (Cluj-Napoca) and groups like the Jassic people or
Transylvanian Saxons. Early modern age (1526‚Äì1700). After some 150 years of
war in the south of Hungary, Ottoman forces conquered parts of the country,
continuing their expansion until 1556. The Ottomans achieved their first
decisive victory over the Hungarian army at the Battle of Moh√°cs in 1526.
Subsequent decades were characterized by political chaos. A divided Hungarian
nobility elected two kings simultaneously, J√°nos Szapolyai (1526‚Äì1540, of
Hungarian-German origin) and the Austrian Ferdinand of Habsburg (1527‚Äì1540).
Armed conflicts between the new rival monarchs further weakened the country
from the internal side. With the conquest of Buda in 1541 by the Turks, Hungary
was riven into three parts. The north-west (present-day Slovakia, western
Transdanubia and Burgenland, western Croatia and parts of north-eastern
present-day Hungary) remained under Habsburg rule; although initially
independent, later it became a part of Habsburg Monarchy under the informal
name Royal Hungary. The Habsburg Emperors would from then on be crowned also as
Kings of Hungary. Turks were unable to conquer Northern and Western parts of
Hungary. The eastern part of the kingdom (Partium and Transylvania) became at
first an independent principality, but gradually was brought under Turkish rule
as a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire. The remaining central area (most of
present-day Hungary), including the capital of Buda, became a province of the
Ottoman Empire. Much of the land was devastated by recurrent warfare. Most
small Hungarian settlements disappeared. Rural people living in the now Ottoman
provinces could survive only in larger settlements known as Khaz towns, which
were owned and protected directly by the Sultan. The Turks were indifferent to
the sect of Christianity practiced by their Hungarian subjects. For this
reason, a majority of Hungarians living under Ottoman rule became Protestant
(largely Calvinist), as Habsburg counter-reformation efforts could not
penetrate Ottoman lands. Largely throughout this time, Pozsony (Pressburg,
today: Bratislava) acted as the capital (1536‚Äì1784), coronation town
(1563‚Äì1830) and seat of the Diet of Hungary (1536‚Äì1848). Nagyszombat
(modern Trnava) acted in turn as the religious center, starting from 1541. The
vast majority of the seventeen and nineteen thousands Ottoman soldiers in
service in the Ottoman fortresses in the territory of Hungary were Orthodox and
Muslim Balkan Slavs instead of ethnic Turkish people. Southern Slavs were also
acting as akinjis and other light troops intended for pillaging in the
territory of present-day Hungary. In 1558 the Transylvanian Diet of Turda
declared free practice of both the Catholic and Lutheran religions, but
prohibited Calvinism. Ten years later, in 1568, the Diet extended this freedom,
declaring that: "It is not allowed to anybody to intimidate anybody with
captivity or expelling for his religion". Four religions were declared as
accepted ("recepta") religions, while Orthodox Christianity was "tolerated"
(though the building of stone Orthodox churches was forbidden). Hungary entered
the Thirty Years' War, Royal (Habsburg) Hungary joined the Catholic side, until
Transylvania joined the Protestant side. In 1686, two years after the
unsuccessful siege of Buda, a renewed European campaign was started to enter
the Hungarian capital. This time, the Holy League's army was twice as large,
containing over 74,000 men, including German, Croat, Dutch, Hungarian, English,
Spanish, Czech, Italian, French, Burgundian, Danish and Swedish soldiers, along
with other Europeans as volunteers, artilleryman, and officers, the Christian
forces reconquered Buda. The second Battle of Moh√°cs was a crushing defeat for
the Turks, in the next few years, all of the former Hungarian lands, except
areas near Timi≈üoara (Temesv√°r), were taken from the Turks. At the end of the
17th century, Transylvania became part of Hungary again. In the 1699 Treaty of
Karlowitz these territorial changes were officially recognised, and in 1718 the
entire Kingdom of Hungary was removed from Ottoman rule. Concurrently, between
1604 and 1711, there was a series of anti-Austrian, and anti-Habsburg uprisings
which took place in the Habsburg state of Royal Hungary (more precisely, in
present-day Slovakia and in present day western and central Hungary), as well
as anti-Catholic uprisings, which were to be found across the Hungarian lands.
Religious protesters demanded equal rights among Christian groups. The
uprisings were usually organized from Transylvania. Ethnic aftermath of Ottoman
wars. As a consequence of the constant warfare between Hungarians and Ottoman
Turks, population growth was stunted and the network of medieval settlements
with their urbanized bourgeois inhabitants perished. The 150 years of Turkish
wars fundamentally changed the ethnic composition of Hungary. As a result of
demographic losses including deportations and massacres, the number of ethnic
Hungarians in existence at the end of the Turkish period was substantially
diminished. Late Modern period (1700‚Äì1918). There were a series of anti-
Habsburg (i.e. anti-Austrian) and anti-Catholic (requiring equal rights and
freedom for all Christian religions) uprisings between 1604 and 1711, which ‚Äì
with the exception of the last one ‚Äì took place in Royal Hungary. The
uprisings were usually organized from Transylvania. The last one was an
uprising led by 'II. R√°k√≥czi Ferenc', who after the dethronement of the
Habsburgs in 1707 at the Diet of √ìn√≥d took power as the "Ruling Prince" of
Hungary. The Hungarian Kuruc army lost the main battles at Battle of Trencin
however there were also success actions, for example when √Åd√°m Balogh almost
captured the Austrian Emperor with Kuruc troops. When Austrians defeated the
uprising in 1711, R√°k√≥czi was in Poland. He later fled to France, finally
Turkey, and lived to the end of his life (1735) in nearby Rodosto. Ladislas
Ignace de Bercheny who was son of Mikl√≥s Bercs√©nyi immigrated to France and
created the first French hussar regiment. Afterward, to make further armed
resistance impossible, the Austrians blew up some castles (most of the castles
on the border between the now-reclaimed territories occupied earlier by the
Ottomans and Royal Hungary), and allowed peasants to use the stones from most
of the others as building material (the "v√©gv√°r"s among them). The 18th
century also saw one of the most famous Hungarian hussars named Michael Kovats.
He created the modern US cavalry in the American Revolutionary War and is
commemorated today with a statue in Charleston, North Carolina. The Period of
Reforms (1825‚Äì1848). In the 1820s, the Emperor was forced to convene the
Hungarian Diet, and thus a Reform Period began. Nevertheless, its progress was
slow, because the nobles insisted on retaining their privileges (no taxation,
exclusive voting rights, etc.). Therefore the achievements were mostly of
national character (e.g. introduction of Hungarian as one of the official
languages of the country, instead of the former Latin). Count Istv√°n
Sz√©chenyi, the most prominent statesmen of the country recognized the urgent
need of modernization and their message got through. The Hungarian Parliament
was reconvened in 1825 to handle financial needs. A liberal party emerged in
the Diet. The party focused on providing for the peasantry in mostly symbolic
ways because of their ability to understand the needs of the laborers. Lajos
Kossuth emerged as leader of the lower gentry in the Parliament. Habsburg
monarchs tried to preclude the industrialization of the country. A remarkable
upswing started as the nation concentrated its forces on modernization even
though the Habsburg monarchs obstructed all important liberal laws about the
human civil and political rights and economic reforms. Many reformers (like
Lajos Kossuth, Mih√°ly T√°ncsics ) were imprisoned by the authorities.
Revolution, and War of Independence. On 15 March 1848 mass demonstrations in
Pest and Buda enabled Hungarian reformists to push through a list of 12
demands. The Hungarian Diet took the opportunity presented by the revolution to
enact a comprehensive legislative program of dozens of civil and human rights
reforms, referred to as the April laws. Faced with revolution both at home and
in Vienna, Austrian Emperor Ferdinand I first had to accept Hungarian demands.
After the Austrian revolution was suppressed, emperor Franz Joseph replaced his
epileptic uncle Ferdinand I as Emperor. Franz Joseph refused all reforms and
started to arm against Hungary. A year later, in April 1849 the independent
government of Hungary was established. The new independent government seceded
from the Austrian Empire. The new government formed itself as a republic with
under governor and president Lajos Kossuth and the first Prime minister, Lajos
Batthy√°ny. The House of Habsburg of the Austrian Empire was dethroned in
Hungarian part of the Austrian Empire and the first Republic of Hungary was
founded. The Habsburg Ruler and his advisers skilfully manipulated the
Croatian, Serbian and Romanian peasantry, led by priests and officers firmly
loyal to the Habsburgs, and induced them to rebel against the Hungarian
government. The Hungarians were supported by the vast majority of the Slovak,
German and Rusyn nationalities and by all the Jews of the kingdom, as well as
by a large number of Polish, Austrian and Italian volunteers. Many members of
the nationalities gained coveted the highest positions within the Hungarian
Army, like General J√°nos Damjanich, an ethnic Serb who became a Hungarian
national hero through his command of the 3rd Hungarian Army Corps. Initially,
the Hungarian forces ("Honv√©ds√©g") defeated Austrian armies. In July 1849
Hungarian Parliament proclaimed and enacted foremost the ethnic and minority
rights in the world, but it was too late: To counter the successes of the
Hungarian revolutionary army, Franz Joseph asked for help from the "Gendarme of
Europe," Czar Nicholas I, whose Russian armies invaded Hungary. The huge army
of the Russian Empire and the Austrian forces proved too powerful for the
Hungarian army, and General Art√∫r G√∂rgey surrendered in August 1849. Julius
Freiherr von Haynau, the leader of the Austrian army, then became governor of
Hungary for a few months and, on 6 October, ordered the execution of 13 leaders
of the Hungarian army as well as Prime Minister Batthy√°ny. Lajos Kossuth
escaped into exile. Following the war of 1848‚Äì1849, the whole country was in
"passive resistance". Archduke Albrecht von Habsburg was appointed governor of
the Kingdom of Hungary, and this time was remembered for Germanization pursued
with the help of Czech officers. Austria‚ÄìHungary (1867‚Äì1918). Due to
external and internal problems, reforms seemed inevitable to secure the
integrity of the Habsburg Empire. Major military defeats, like the Battle of
K√∂niggr√§tz (1866), forced the Emperor to concede internal reforms. To appease
Hungarian separatism, the Emperor made a deal with Hungary, negotiated by
Ferenc De√°k, called the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867, by which the dual
Monarchy of Austria‚ÄìHungary came into existence. The two realms were governed
separately by two parliaments from two capitals, with a common monarch and
common external and military policies. Economically, the empire was a customs
union. The first Prime Minister of Hungary after the Compromise was Count Gyula
Andr√°ssy. The old Hungarian Constitution was restored, and Franz Joseph was
crowned as King of Hungary. In 1868, Hungarian and Croatian assembly made the
Croatian‚ÄìHungarian Agreement by which Croatia was recognised as autonomous
region of Holly crown. Austria-Hungary was geographically the second largest
country in Europe after the Russian Empire (239,977 sq. m in 1905 ), and the
third most populous (after Russia and the German Empire). Nationalists demanded
education in the Magyar language, a position that united Catholics and
Protestants opposed to instruction in Latin as desired by Catholic bishops. In
the 1832-36 Diet the conflict between Catholic laymen and clergy sharpened
considerably and a mixed commission was established. It offered the Protestants
certain limited concessions. The basic issue of this religious and educational
struggle was how to promote the Magyar language and Magyar nationalism and
achieve more independence from German Austria. The landed nobility controlled
the villages and monopolized political roles. In Parliament, the magnates held
life memberships in the Upper House, and the gentry dominated the Lower House
and, after 1830, parliamentary life. The tension between "crown" (the German-
speaking Hapsburgs in Vienna) and "country" remained a constant political
fixture as the Compromise of 1867 enabled the Magyar nobility to run the
country but left the Emperor with control over foreign and military policies.
Conflicts between magnates and gentry appeared regarding protection against
cheap food imports (1870s), the Church-state problem (1890s), and the
"constitutional crisis" (1900s). The gentry gradually lost their power locally
and rebuilt their political base more on office-holding rather than
landownership. They depended more and more on the state apparatus and were
reluctant to challenge it. Economy. The era witnessed economic development in
the rural country. The formerly backwards Hungarian economy became relatively
modern and industrialized by the turn of the 20th century, although agriculture
remained dominant. In 1873, the old capital Buda and √ìbuda (Ancient Buda) were
officially merged with the third city, Pest, thus creating the new metropolis
of Budapest. The dynamic Pest grew into the country's administrative,
political, economic, trade and cultural hub. Technological advancement
accelerated industrialization and urbanization. The GNP per capita grew roughly
1.45% per year from 1870 to 1913. That level of growth compared very favorably
to that of other European nations such as Britain (1.00%), France (1.06%), and
Germany (1.51%). The strong points of the industry were the electricity and
electro-technology, telecommunication, and the transport industry: (locomotive
and tram construction ship construction) The key symbols of industrialization
were (at the time) the famous Ganz concern, and Tungsram Works. Many of the
state institutions and the modern administrative system of Hungary were
established during this period. Due to various reasons like the policy of
Magyarization and the migration of millions, the census in 1910 (excluding
Croatia), recorded the following distribution of population: Hungarian 54.5%,
Romanian 16.1%, Slovak 10.7%, and German 10.4%. The largest religious
denomination was the Roman Catholic (49.3%), followed by the Calvinist (14.3%),
Greek Orthodox (12.8%) /Romanians Serbians Ruthenians), Greek Catholic (11.0%),
Lutheran (7.1%), and Jewish (5.0%) religions. In 1910, 6.37% of the population
were eligible to vote in elections due to census. World War I. After the
Assassination in Sarajevo the Hungarian Prime Minister, Istv√°n Tisza and his
cabinet tried to avoid the breaking out of a war in Europe, but his diplomatic
attempts remained unsuccessful. Austria‚ÄìHungary drafted 9 million (fighting
forces: 7,8 million) soldiers in World War I (4 million from Kingdom of
Hungary). In First World War, Austria‚ÄìHungary was fighting on the side of
Germany, Bulgaria and Turkey. The Central Powers conquered Serbia and Romania
proclaimed war. The Central Powers later conquered Southern Romania and the
Romanian capital Bucharest. On November 1916 Emperor Franz Joseph died, the new
monarch Charles IV sympathized by pacifists. With great difficulty, the Central
Powers stopped and repelled the attacks of the Russian Empire. The Eastern
front of the Allied (Entente) Powers completely collapsed. Austria-Hungary
withdrew from defeated countries. On the Italian front, the Austro-Hungarian
army could not make more successful progress against Italy after January 1918.
Despite great Eastern successes, Germany suffered complete defeat in the more
determinant Western front. By 1918, the economic situation had deteriorated
(strikes in factories were organized by leftist and pacifist movements), and
uprisings in the army had become commonplace. In the capital cities (Vienna and
Budapest), the Austrian and the Hungarian leftist liberal movements (the
maverick parties) and their leader politicians supported and strengthened the
separatism of ethnic minorities. Austria-Hungary signed general armistice in
Padua on 3 November 1918. In October 1918, the personal union with Austria was
dissolved. Between the two world wars (1918‚Äì1941). Hungarian People's
Republic. Hungarian People's Republic In 1918, as a political result of German
defeat on the Western front in World War I, the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy
collapsed. French Entente troops landed in Greece to rearm the defeated Romania
and Serbia, and the newly formed Czechoslovak state. Despite general armistice
agreement, the Balkanian French army organized new campaigns against Hungary
with the help of Czechoslovak, Romanian and Serbian governments. Former Prime
Minister Istv√°n Tisza was murdered in Budapest by a gang of soldiers during
the Aster Revolution of October 1918. On 31 October 1918 the success of the
Aster Revolution in Budapest brought the leftist liberal Count Mih√°ly K√°rolyi
to power as Prime Minister. K√°rolyi was a devotee of Entente from the
beginning of the war. On 13 November 1918 Charles I surrendered his powers as
King of Hungary; however, he did not abdicate, a technicality that made a
return to the throne possible. The First Republic was proclaimed on 16 November
1918 with K√°rolyi being named as president. K√°rolyi tried to build Hungary as
the "Eastern Switzerland" and persuade non-Hungarian minorities (Slovaks,
Romanians and Ruthenians) to stay loyal to the country, offering them autonomy.
However these efforts came too late. By a notion of Woodrow Wilson's pacifism,
K√°rolyi ordered the full disarmament of the Hungarian Army. Hungary remained
without national defence in the darkest hour of its history. Surrounding
countries started to arm. On 5 November 1918 the Serbian Army, with French
involvement, attacked southern parts of the country. On 8 November the
Czechoslovak Army attacked northern parts of Hungary, and on 2 December the
Romanian Army started to attack the eastern (Transylvanian) parts of Hungary.
The K√°rolyi government made all armed associations illegal, and introduced
proposals to defend the integrity of the country. These measures failed to stem
popular discontent, especially when the Entente powers began distributing
slices of Hungary's traditional territory to Romania, Yugoslavia, and
Czechoslovakia, giving priority to ethno-linguistic criteria over historical
ones. French and Serbian forces occupied the southern parts of Hungary. By
February 1919 the government had lost all popular support, having failed on
domestic and military fronts. On 21 March after the Entente military
representative demanded more and more territorial concessions from Hungary
( Vix¬¥s note ), K√°rolyi signed all concessions and resigned. Hungarian Soviet
Republic ("Republic of the Councils"). The Communist Party of Hungary, led by
B√©la Kun, allied itself with the Hungarian Social Democratic Party came to
power and proclaimed the Hungarian Soviet Republic. Social Democrat S√°ndor
Garbai was the official Head of government, but the Soviet Republic was de
facto dominated by B√©la Kun, who was in charge of foreign affairs. The
Communists ‚Äì "The Reds" ‚Äì came to power largely thanks to being the only
group with an organized fighting force, and they promised that Hungary would
defend its territory without conscription. (possibly with the help of the
Soviet Red Army). Hence: the Red Army of Hungary was a little voluntary army
(53,000 men). Most soldiers of the Red Army were armed factory workers from
Budapest. Initially, Kun's regime achieved some military successes: the
Hungarian Red Army, under the lead of the genius strategist, Colonel Aur√©l
Stromfeld, ousted Czechoslovak troops from the north and planned to march
against the Romanian army in the east. In terms of domestic policy, the
Communist government nationalized industrial and commercial enterprises,
socialized housing, transport, banking, medicine, cultural institutions, and
all landholdings of more than 400,000 square metres. The support of the
Communists proved to be short-lived in Budapest. The Communists had never been
popular in country towns and countryside. In the aftermath of a coup attempt,
the government took a series of actions called the Red Terror, murdering
several hundred people (mostly scientists and intellectuals). The Soviet Red
Army was never able to aid the new Hungarian republic. Despite the great
military successes against Czechoslovakian army, the Communist leaders gave
back all recaptured lands. That attitude demoralized the voluntary army. The
Hungarian Red Army was dissolved before it could successfully complete its
campaigns. In the face of domestic backlash and an advancing Romanian force,
B√©la Kun and most of his comrades fled to Austria, while Budapest was occupied
on 6 August. Kun and his followers took along numerous art treasures and the
gold stocks of the National Bank. All these events, and in particular the final
military defeat, led to a deep feeling of dislike among the general population
against the Soviet Union (which did not offer military assistance) and the Jews
(since most members of Kun's government were Jewish, making it easy to blame
the Jews for the government's mistakes). Counterrevolution. The new fighting
force in Hungary were the Conservative Royalists counter-revolutionaries ‚Äì
the "Whites". These, who had been organizing in Vienna and established a
counter-government in Szeged, assumed power, led by Istv√°n Bethlen, a
Transylvanian aristocrat, and Mikl√≥s Horthy, the former commander in chief of
the Austro-Hungarian Navy. The conservatives determined the K√°rolyi government
and Communists as capital treason. Starting in Western Hungary and spreading
throughout the country, a White Terror began by other half-regular and half-
militarist detachments (as the police power crashed, there were no serious
national regular forces and authorities), and many arrant Communists and other
leftists were tortured and executed without trial. Radical Whites launched
pogroms against the Jews, displayed as the cause of all territorial losses of
Hungary. The most notorious commander of the Whites was P√°l Pr√≥nay. The
leaving Romanian army pillaged the country: livestock, machinery and
agricultural products were carried to Romania in hundreds of freight cars. On
16 November with the consent of Romanian forces, Horthy's army marched into
Budapest. His government gradually restored security, stopped terror, and set
up authorities, but thousands of sympathizers of the K√°rolyi and Kun regimes
were imprisoned. Radical political movements were suppressed. In March the
parliament restored the Hungarian monarchy but postponed electing a king until
civil disorder had subsided. Instead, Miklos Horthy was elected Regent and was
empowered, among other things, to appoint Hungary's Prime Minister, veto
legislation, convene or dissolve the parliament, and command the armed forces.
Trianon Hungary and the Regency. Hungary's signing of the Treaty of Trianon on
4 June 1920 ratified the country's borders being redrawn. The territorial
provisions of the treaty required Hungary to surrender more than two-thirds of
its pre-war lands. However, nearly one-third of the 10 million ethnic
Hungarians found themselves outside the diminished homeland. New international
borders separated Hungary's industrial base from its sources of raw materials
and its former markets for agricultural and industrial products. Hungary lost
84% of its timber resources, 43% of its arable land, and 83% of its iron ore.
Furthermore, post-Trianon Hungary possessed 90% of the engineering and printing
industry of the Kingdom, while only 11% of timber and 16% iron was retained. In
addition, 61% of arable land, 74% of public road, 65% of canals, 62% of
railroads, 64% of hard surface roads, 83% of pig iron output, 55% of industrial
plants, 100% of gold, silver, copper, mercury and salt mines, and most of all,
67% of credit and banking institutions of the former Kingdom of Hungary lay
within the territory of Hungary's neighbors. Horthy appointed Count P√°l Teleki
as Prime Minister in July 1920. His government issued a numerus clausus law,
limiting admission of "political insecure elements" (these were often Jews) to
universities and, in order to quiet rural discontent, took initial steps
towards fulfilling a promise of major land reform by dividing about 3,850¬ km2
from the largest estates into smallholdings. Teleki's government resigned,
however, after, Charles IV, unsuccessfully attempted to retake Hungary's throne
in March 1921. King Charles's return produced split parties between
conservatives who favored a Habsburg restoration and nationalist right-wing
radicals who supported election of a Hungarian king. Count Istv√°n Bethlen, a
non-affiliated right-wing member of the parliament, took advantage of this rift
forming a new Party of Unity under his leadership. Horthy then appointed
Bethlen Prime Minister. Charles IV died soon after he failed a second time to
reclaim the throne in October 1921. (For more detail on Charles's attempts to
retake the throne, see "Charles IV of Hungary's conflict with Mikl√≥s Horthy".)
As Prime Minister, Bethlen dominated Hungarian politics between 1921 and 1931.
He fashioned a political machine by amending the electoral law, providing jobs
in the expanding bureaucracy to his supporters, and manipulating elections in
rural areas. Bethlen restored order to the country by giving the radical
counter-revolutionaries payoffs and government jobs in exchange for ceasing
their campaign of terror against Jews and leftists. In 1921, he made a deal
with the Social Democrats and trade unions (called the Bethlen-Peyer Pact),
agreeing, among other things, to legalize their activities and free political
prisoners in return for their pledge to refrain from spreading anti-Hungarian
propaganda, calling political strikes, and organizing the peasantry. Bethlen
brought Hungary into the League of Nations in 1922 and out of international
isolation by signing a treaty of friendship with Italy in 1927. The revision of
the Treaty of Trianon rose to the top of Hungary's political agenda and the
strategy employed by Bethlen consisted of strengthening the economy and
building relations with stronger nations. Revision of the treaty had such a
broad backing in Hungary that Bethlen used it, at least in part, to deflect
criticism of his economic, social and political policies. The Great Depression
induced a drop in the standard of living and the political mood of the country
shifted further towards the right. In 1932 Horthy appointed a new Prime
Minister, Gyula G√∂mb√∂s, that changed the course of Hungarian policy towards
closer cooperation with Germany and started an effort to magyarize the few
remaining ethnic minorities in Hungary. G√∂mb√∂s signed a trade agreement with
Germany that drew Hungary's economy out of depression but made Hungary
dependent on the German economy for both raw materials and markets. Adolf
Hitler appealed to Hungarian desires for territorial revisionism, while extreme
right wing organizations, like the Arrow Cross Party, increasingly embraced
extreme Nazi policies, including those relating to the suppression and
victimization of Jews. The government passed the First Jewish Law in 1938. The
law established a quota system to limit Jewish involvement in the Hungarian
economy. In 1938 became Prime Minister B√©la Imr√©dy. Imr√©dy's attempts to
improve Hungary's diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom initially made
him very unpopular with Germany and Italy. In light of Germany's Anschluss of
Austria in March, he realized that he could not afford to alienate Germany and
Italy for long. In the autumn of 1938 his foreign policy became very much pro-
German and pro-Italian. Intent on amassing a base of power in Hungarian right
wing politics, Imr√©dy began to suppress political rivals, so the increasingly
influential Arrow Cross Party was harassed, and eventually banned by Imr√©dy's
administration. As Imr√©dy drifted further to the right, he proposed that the
government be reorganized along totalitarian lines and drafted a harsher Second
Jewish Law. Parliament, under the new government of P√°l Teleki, approved the
Second Jewish Law in 1939, which greatly restricted Jewish involvement in the
economy, culture and society and, significantly, defined Jews by race instead
of religion. This definition significantly and negatively altered the status of
those who had formerly converted from Judaism to Christianity. World War II.
Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy sought to enforce peacefully the claims of
Hungarians on territories Hungary lost in 1920 with the signing of the Treaty
of Trianon, and the two Vienna Awards returned parts of Czechoslovakia and
Transylvania to Hungary. On 20 November 1940 under pressure from Germany, P√°l
Teleki affiliated Hungary with the Tripartite Pact. In December 1940, he also
signed an ephemeral "Treaty of Eternal Friendship" with Yugoslavia. A few
months later, after a Yugoslavian coup threatened the success of the planned
German invasion of the Soviet Union (Operation Barbarossa), Hitler asked the
Hungarians to support his invasion of Yugoslavia. He promised to return some
former Hungarian territories lost after World War I in exchange for
cooperation. Unable to prevent Hungary's participation in the war alongside
Germany, Teleki committed suicide. The right-wing radical L√°szl√≥ B√°rdossy
succeeded him as Prime Minister. Eventually Hungary annexed small parts of
present day Slovenia, Croatia and Serbia. After war broke out on the Eastern
Front many Hungarian officials argued for participation in the war so as not to
encourage Hitler into favoring Romania in the event of border revisions in
Transylvania. Hungary entered the war and on 1 July 1941 at the direction of
the Germans, the Hungarian Karpat Group advanced far into southern Russia. At
the Battle of Uman the Gyorshadtest participated in the encirclement of the 6th
Soviet Army and the 12th Soviet Army. Twenty Soviet divisions were captured or
destroyed. Worried about Hungary's increasing reliance on Germany, Admiral
Horthy forced B√°rdossy to resign and replaced him with Mikl√≥s K√°llay, a
veteran conservative of Bethlen's government. K√°llay continued B√°rdossy's
policy of supporting Germany against the Red Army, while he also
surreptitiously entered into negotiations with the Western Powers. During the
Battle of Stalingrad, the Hungarian Second Army suffered terrible losses.
Shortly after the fall of Stalingrad in January 1943, the Hungarian Second Army
effectively ceased to exist as a functioning military unit. Secret negotiations
with the British and Americans continued. Aware of K√°llay's deceit and fearing
that Hungary might conclude a separate peace, Hitler ordered Nazi troops to
launch Operation Margarethe and occupy Hungary in March 1944. D√∂me Szt√≥jay,
an avid supporter of the Nazis, become the new Prime Minister with the aid of a
Nazi military governor, Edmund Veesenmayer. The infamous SS Colonel Adolf
Eichmann went to Hungary to oversee the large-scale deportations of Jews to
German death camps in occupied Poland. Between 15 May and 9 July 1944 the
Hungarians deported 437,402 Jews to the Auschwitz concentration camp. In August
1944 Horthy replaced Szt√≥jay with the anti-Fascist General G√©za Lakatos.
Under the Lakatos regime, the acting Interior Minister B√©la Horv√°th ordered
Hungarian gendarmes to prevent any Hungarian citizens from being deported. In
September 1944, Soviet forces crossed the Hungarian border. On 15 October 1944,
Horthy announced that Hungary had signed an armistice with the Soviet Union.
The Hungarian army ignored the armistice. The Germans launched Operation
Panzerfaust and, by kidnapping his son (Mikl√≥s Horthy, Jr.), forced Horthy to
abrogate the armistice, depose the Lakatos government, and name the leader of
the Arrow Cross Party, Ferenc Sz√°lasi, as Prime Minister. Sz√°lasi became
Prime Minister of a new fascist Government of National Unity and Horthy
abdicated. In cooperation with the Nazis, Sz√°lasi restarted the deportations
of Jews, particularly in Budapest. Thousands more Jews were killed by Hungarian
Arrow Cross members. The retreating German army demolished the rail, road, and
communications systems. On 28 December 1944 a provisional government was formed
in Hungary under acting Prime Minister B√©la Mikl√≥s. Mikl√≥s and Sz√°lasi's
rival governments each claimed legitimacy: the Germans and pro-German
Hungarians loyal to Sz√°lasi fought on, as the territory effectively controlled
by the Arrow Cross regime shrunk gradually. The Red Army completed the
encirclement of Budapest on 29 December 1944 and the Battle of Budapest began
and continued into February 1945. Most of what remained of the Hungarian First
Army was destroyed about 200 miles north of Budapest between 1 January and 16
February 1945. Budapest unconditionally surrendered to the Soviet Red Army on
13 February 1945. On 20 January 1945, representatives of the Hungarian
provisional government signed an armistice in Moscow. Sz√°lasi's government had
fled the country by the end of March. Officially, Soviet operations in Hungary
ended on 4 April 1945 when the last German troops were expelled. On 7 May 1945
General Alfred Jodl, the German Chief of Staff, signed the unconditional
surrender of all German forces. Hungary's World War II casualties: Tam√°s Stark
of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences has provided the following assessment of
losses from 1941 to 1945 in Hungary. Military losses were 300,000‚Äì310,000,
including 110‚Äì120,000 killed in battle and 200,000 missing in action and POW
in the Soviet Union. Hungarian military losses include 110,000 men who were
conscripted from the annexed territories of Greater Hungary in Slovakia,
Romania and Yugoslavia and the deaths of 20-25,000 Jews conscripted for Army
labor units. Civilian losses of about 80,000 include 45,500 killed in the
1944‚Äì1945 military campaign and in air attacks, and the genocide of Romani
people of 28,000 persons. Jewish Holocaust victims totaled 600,000 (300,000 in
the territories annexed in 1938,1939,1940 and 1941, 200,000 in the pre-1938
countryside and 100,000 in Budapest). See World War II casualties. Post-War
Communist period. Transition to Communism (1944‚Äì1949). The Soviet Army
occupied Hungary from September 1944 until April 1945. The siege of Budapest
lasted almost 2 months, from December 1944 to February 1945 (the longest
successful siege of any city in the entire war, including Berlin) and the city
suffered widespread destruction, including all the Danube bridges which were
blown up by the Germans in an effort to slow the Soviet advance. By signing the
Peace Treaty of Paris, Hungary again lost all the territories that it had
gained between 1938 and 1941. Neither the Western Allies nor the Soviet Union
supported any change in Hungary's pre-1938 borders, which was the primary
motive behind the Hungarian involvement in the war. The Soviet Union itself
annexed Sub-Carpathia (before 1938 the eastern edge of Czechoslovakia), which
is today part of Ukraine. The Treaty of Peace with Hungary signed on 10
February 1947 declared that: "The decisions of the Vienna Award of November 2,
1938, are declared null and void" and Hungarian boundaries were fixed along the
former frontiers as they existed on 1 January 1938 except a minor loss of
territory on the Czechoslovakian border. Many of the Communist leaders of 1919
returned from Moscow. The first major violation of civil rights was suffered by
the ethnic German minority, half of which (240,000 people) were deported to
Germany in 1946‚Äì1948, although the great majority of them did not support
Germany and were not members of any pro-Nazi movement. There was a forced
"exchange of population" between Hungary and Czechoslovakia, which involved
about 70,000 Hungarians living in Slovakia and somewhat smaller numbers of
ethnic Slovaks living in the territory of Hungary. Unlike the Germans, these
people were allowed to carry some of their property with them. The Soviets
originally planned for a piecemeal introduction of the Communist regime in
Hungary, therefore when they set up a provisional government in Debrecen on 21
December 1944, they were careful to include representatives of several moderate
parties. Following the demands of the Western Allies for a democratic election,
the Soviets authorized the only essentially free election in eastern Europe in
November 1945 in Hungary. This was also the first election held in Hungary on
the basis of universal franchise. People voted for party lists, not for
individual candidates. At the elections the Independent Smallholders' Party, a
center-right peasant party, won 57% of the vote. Despite the hopes of the
Communists and the Soviets that the distribution of the aristocratic estates
among the poor peasants would increase their popularity, the Hungarian
Communist Party received only 17% of the votes. The Soviet commander in
Hungary, Marshal Voroshilov, refused to allow the Smallholders' Party to form a
government on their own. Under Voroshilov's pressure, the Smallholders
organized a coalition government including the Communists, the Social Democrats
and the National Peasant Party (a left-wing peasant party), in which the
Communists held some of the key posts. On 1 February 1946 Hungary was declared
a Republic, and the leader of the Smallholders, Zolt√°n Tildy, became President
handing over the office of Prime Minister to Ferenc Nagy. M√°ty√°s R√°kosi,
leader of the Communist Party, became deputy Prime Minister. Another leading
Communist, L√°szl√≥ Rajk became minister of the interior responsible for
controlling law enforcement, and in this position established the security
police (√ÅVH). The Communists exercised constant pressure on the Smallholders
both inside and outside the government, nationalizing industrial companies,
banning religious civil organizations and occupying key positions in local
public administration. In February 1947 the police began arresting leaders of
the Smallholders Party, charging them with "conspiracy against the Republic".
Several prominent figures decided to emigrate or were forced to escape abroad,
including Prime Minister Ferenc Nagy in May 1947. Later M√°ty√°s R√°kosi
boasted that he had dealt with his partners in the government, one by one,
"cutting them off like slices of salami." At the next parliamentary election in
August 1947 the Communists committed widespread election fraud with absentee
ballots (the so-called "blue slips"), but even so, they only managed to
increase their share from 17% to 24% in Parliament. The Social Democrats (by
this time a servile ally of the Communists) received 15% in contrast to their
17% in 1945. The Smallholders' Party lost much of its popularity and ended up
with 15%, but their former voters turned towards three new center-right parties
which seemed more determined to resist the Communist onslaught: their combined
share of the total votes was 35%. Faced with their second failure at the polls,
the Communists changed tactics, and, under new orders from Moscow, decided to
eschew democratic facades and speed up the Communist takeover. In June 1948 the
Social Democratic Party was forced to "merge" with the Communist Party,
creating the Hungarian Working People's Party, which was dominated by the
Communists. Anti-Communist leaders of the Social Democrats, such as K√°roly
Peyer or Anna K√©thly, were forced into exile or excluded from the party. Soon
after, President Zolt√°n Tildy was also removed from his position, and replaced
by a fully cooperative Social Democrat, √Årp√°d Szakasits. Ultimately, all
"democratic" parties were organized into a so-called People's Front in February
1949, thereby losing even the vestiges of their autonomy. The leader of the
People's Front was R√°kosi himself. Opposition parties were simply declared
illegal and their leaders arrested or forced into exile. On 18 August 1949 the
parliament passed the new constitution of Hungary (1949/XX.) modeled after the
1936 constitution of the Soviet Union. The name of the country changed to the
People's Republic of Hungary, "the country of the workers and peasants" where
"every authority is held by the working people". Socialism was declared as the
main goal of the nation. A new coat-of-arms was adopted with Communist symbols,
such the red star, hammer and sickle. Stalinist era (1949‚Äì1956). M√°ty√°s
R√°kosi, who as a chief secretary of the Hungarian Working People's Party was
de facto the leader of Hungary, possessed practically unlimited power and
demanded complete obedience from fellow members of the Party, including his two
most trusted colleagues, Ern≈ë Ger≈ë and Mih√°ly Farkas. All three of them
returned to Hungary from Moscow, where they spent long years and had close ties
to high-ranking Soviet leaders there. Their main rivals in the party were the
'Hungarian' Communists who led the illegal party during the war in Hungary, and
were considerably more popular within party ranks. Their most influential
leader, L√°szl√≥ Rajk, who was minister of foreign affairs at the time, was
arrested in May 1949. He was accused of rather surreal crimes, such as spying
for Western imperialist powers and for Yugoslavia (which was also a Communist
country but in very bad relations with the Soviet Union at the time). At his
trial in September 1949 he made a forced confession to be an agent of Mikl√≥s
Horthy, Leon Trotsky, Josip Broz Tito and Western imperialism. He also admitted
that he had taken part in a murder plot against M√°ty√°s R√°kosi and Ern≈ë
Ger≈ë. Rajk was found guilty and executed. In the next three years, other
leaders of the party deemed untrustworthy, like former Social Democrats or
other Hungarian illegal Communists such as J√°nos K√°d√°r, were also arrested
and imprisoned on trumped-up charges. The showcase trial of Rajk is considered
the beginning of the worst period of the R√°kosi dictatorship. M√°ty√°s R√°kosi
now attempted to impose totalitarian rule on Hungary. The centrally
orchestrated personality cult focused on him and Joseph Stalin soon reached
unprecedented proportions. R√°kosi's images and busts were everywhere, all
public speakers were required to glorify his wisdom and leadership. In the
meantime, the secret police, led through G√°bor P√©ter by R√°kosi himself,
mercilessly persecuted all 'class enemies' and 'enemies of the people'. An
estimated 2,000 people were executed and over 100,000 were imprisoned. Some
44,000 ended up in forced-labor camps, where many died due to horrible work
conditions, poor food and practically no medical care. Another 15,000 people,
mostly former aristocrats, industrialists, military generals and other upper-
class people were deported from the capital and other cities to countryside
villages where they were forced to do hard agricultural labor. These policies
were opposed by some members of the Hungarian Working People's Party and around
200,000 were expelled by R√°kosi from the organization. By 1950, the state
controlled most of the economy, as all large and mid-sized industrial
companies, plants, mines, banks of all kind as well as all companies of retail
and foreign trade were nationalized without any compensation. Slavishly
following Soviet economic policies, R√°kosi declared that Hungary would become
a "country of iron and steel", even though Hungary lacked iron ore completely.
The forced development of heavy industry served military purposes; it was meant
to be preparation for the impending World War III against Western imperialism.
A disproportionate amount of the country's resources were spent on building
whole industrial cities and plants from scratch, while much of the country was
still in ruins since the war. Traditional strengths of Hungary, such as the
agricultural and textile industries were neglected. Large agricultural
latifundia were divided and distributed among poor peasants already in 1945. In
agriculture, the government tried to force independent peasants to enter co-
operatives in which they would become merely paid laborers, but many of them
stubbornly resisted. The government retaliated with ever higher requirements of
compulsory food quotas imposed on peasants' produce. Rich peasants, called
'kulaks' in Russians, were declared 'class enemies' and suffered all sorts of
discrimination, including imprisonment and loss of property. With them, some of
the most able farmers were removed from production. The declining agricultural
output led to a constant scarcity of food, especially meat. R√°kosi rapidly
expanded the education system in Hungary. This was an attempt to replace the
educated class of the past by what R√°kosi called a new "working
intelligentsia". In addition to effects such as better education for the poor,
more opportunities for working class children and increased literacy in
general, this measure also included the dissemination of Communist ideology in
schools and universities. Also, as part of an effort to separate the Church
from the State, practically all religious schools were taken into state
ownership, and religious instruction was denounced as retrograde propaganda and
was gradually eliminated from schools. The Hungarian churches were
systematically intimidated. Cardinal J√≥zsef Mindszenty, who had bravely
opposed the German Nazis and the Hungarian Fascists during the Second World
War, was arrested in December 1948 and accused of treason. After five weeks
under arrest (which included torture), he confessed to the charges against him
and he was sentenced to life imprisonment. The Protestant churches were also
purged and their leaders were replaced by those willing to remain loyal to
R√°kosi's government. The new Hungarian military hastily staged public, pre-
arranged trials to purge "Nazi remnants and imperialist saboteurs". Several
officers were sentenced to death and executed in 1951, including Lajos Toth, a
28 victory-scoring fighter ace of World War II Royal Hungarian Air Force, who
had voluntarily returned from US captivity to help revive Hungarian aviation.
The victims were cleared posthumously following the fall of communism.
Preparations for a show trial started in Budapest in 1953 to prove that Raoul
Wallenberg had not been dragged off in 1945 to the Soviet Union but was the
victim of cosmopolitan Zionists. For the purposes of this show trial, three
Jewish leaders as well as two would-be "eyewitnesses" were arrested and
interrogated by torture. The show trial was initiated in Moscow, following
Stalin's anti-Zionist campaign. After the death of Stalin and Lavrentiy Beria,
the preparations for the trial were stopped and the arrested persons were
released. R√°kosi had great difficulties managing the economy and the people of
Hungary saw living standards fall. Although his government became increasingly
unpopular, he had a firm grip on power until Stalin died on 5 March 1953 when a
confused power struggle began in Moscow. Some of the Soviet leaders perceived
the unpopularity of the Hungarian regime and ordered R√°kosi to give up his
position as Prime Minister in favor of another former Communist-in-exile in
Moscow, Imre Nagy, who was R√°kosi's chief opponent in the party. R√°kosi,
however, retained his position as general secretary of the Hungarian Working
People's Party and over the next three years the two men became involved in a
bitter struggle for power. As Hungary's new Prime Minister, Imre Nagy slightly
relaxed state control over the economy and the mass media and encouraged public
discussion on political and economic reform. In order to improve the general
supply, he increase the production and distribution of consumer goods and
reduced the tax and quota burdens of the peasants. Nagy also closed forced-
labor camps, released most of the political prisoners - the Communists were
allowed back into Party ranks -, and reined in the secret police, whose hated
head, G√°bor P√©ter, was convicted and imprisoned in 1954. All these rather
moderate reforms earned him widespread popularity in the country, especially
among the peasantry and the left-wing intellectuals. Following a turn in
Moscow, where Malenkov, Nagy's primary patron lost the power struggle against
Khrushchev, M√°ty√°s R√°kosi started a counterattack on Nagy. On March 9, 1955,
the Central Committee of the Hungarian Working People's Party condemned Nagy
for "rightist deviation". Hungarian newspapers joined the attacks and Nagy was
accused of being responsible for the country's economic problems and on 18
April he was dismissed from his post by a unanimous vote of the National
Assembly. Soon after, Nagy was even excluded from the Party and temporarily
retired from politics. R√°kosi once again became the unchallenged leader of
Hungary. R√°kosi's second reign, however, did not last long. His power was
undermined by a speech made by Nikita Khrushchev in February 1956, in which he
denounced the policies of Joseph Stalin and his followers in eastern Europe,
especially the attacks on Yugoslavia and the cult of personality. On 18 July
1956 visiting Soviet leaders removed R√°kosi from all his positions and he
boarded a plane bound for the Soviet Union, never to return to Hungary. But the
Soviets made a major mistake by the appointment of his close friend and ally,
Ern≈ë Ger≈ë, as his successor, who was equally unpopular and shared
responsibility for most of R√°kosi's crimes. The fall of R√°kosi was followed
by a flurry of reform agitation both inside and outside the Party. L√°szl√≥
Rajk and his fellow victims of the showcase trial of 1949 were cleared of all
charges, and on 6 October 1956, the Party authorized a reburial, which was
attended by tens of thousands of people and became a silent demonstration
against the crimes of the regime. On 13 October it was announced that Imre Nagy
had been reinstated as a member of the party. 1956 Revolution. On 23 October
1956 a peaceful student demonstration in Budapest produced a list of 16 demands
for reform and greater political freedom. As the students attempted to
broadcast these demands, police made some arrests and tried to disperse the
crowd with tear gas. When the students attempted to free those arrested, the
police opened fire on the crowd, setting off a chain of events which led to the
Hungarian Revolution. That night, commissioned officers and soldiers joined the
students on the streets of Budapest. Stalin's statue was brought down and the
protesters chanted "Russians go home", "Away with Ger≈ë" and "Long Live Nagy".
The Central Committee of the Hungarian Working People's Party responded to
these developments by requesting Soviet military intervention and deciding that
Imre Nagy should become head of a new government. Soviet tanks entered Budapest
at 2 a.m. on 24 October. On 25 October Soviet tanks opened fire on protesters
in Parliament Square. One journalist at the scene saw 12 dead bodies and
estimated that 170 had been wounded. Shocked by these events the Central
Committee of the Hungarian Working People's Party forced Ern≈ë Ger≈ë to resign
from office and replaced him with J√°nos K√°d√°r. Imre Nagy now went on Radio
Kossuth and announced he had taken over the leadership of the Government as
Chairman of the Council of Ministers." He also promised "the far-reaching
democratization of Hungarian public life, the realization of a Hungarian road
to socialism in accord with our own national characteristics, and the
realization of our lofty national aim: the radical improvement of the workers'
living conditions." On 28 October Nagy and a group of his supporters, including
J√°nos K√°d√°r, G√©za Losonczy, Antal Apr√≥, K√°roly Kiss, Ferenc M√ºnnich and
Zolt√°n Szab√≥, managed to take control of the Hungarian Working People's
Party. At the same time revolutionary workers' councils and local national
committees were formed all over Hungary. The change of leadership in the party
was reflected in the articles of the government newspaper, "Szabad N√©p" (i.e.
Free People). On 29 October the newspaper welcomed the new government and
openly criticized Soviet attempts to influence the political situation in
Hungary. This view was supported by Radio Miskolc that called for the immediate
withdrawal of Soviet troops from the country. On 30 October Imre Nagy announced
that he was freeing Cardinal J√≥zsef Mindszenty and other political prisoners.
He also informed the people that his government intends to abolish the one-
party state. This was followed by statements of Zolt√°n Tildy, Anna K√©thly and
Ferenc Farkas concerning the restitution of the Smallholders Party, the Social
Democratic Party and the Pet≈ëfi (former Peasants) Party. Nagy's most
controversial decision took place on 1 November when he announced that Hungary
intended to withdraw from the Warsaw Pact as well as proclaiming Hungarian
neutrality he asked the United Nations to become involved in the country's
dispute with the Soviet Union. On 3 November Nagy announced details of his
coalition government. It included Communists (J√°nos K√°d√°r, Georg Luk√°cs,
G√©za Losonczy), three members of the Smallholders Party (Zolt√°n Tildy, B√©la
Kov√°cs and Istv√°n Szab√≥), three Social Democrats (Anna K√©thly, Gyula
Keleman, Joseph Fischer), and two Pet≈ëfi Peasants (Istv√°n Bib√≥ and Ferenc
Farkas). P√°l Mal√©ter was appointed minister of defence. Nikita Khrushchev,
the leader of the Soviet Union, became increasingly concerned about these
developments and on 4 November 1956 he sent the Red Army into Hungary. Soviet
tanks immediately captured Hungary's airfields, highway junctions and bridges.
Fighting took place all over the country but the Hungarian forces were quickly
defeated. During the Hungarian Uprising an estimated 20,000 people were killed,
nearly all during the Soviet intervention. Imre Nagy was arrested and replaced
by the Soviet loyalist, J√°nos K√°d√°r. Nagy was imprisoned until being
executed in 1958. Other government ministers or supporters who were either
executed or died in captivity included P√°l Mal√©ter, G√©za Losonczy, Attila
Szigethy and Mikl√≥s Gimes. Post Revolution (or K√°d√°r) era 1956‚Äì1989. Once
he was in power, J√°nos K√°d√°r led an attack against revolutionaries. 21,600
mavericks (democrats, liberals, reformist Communists alike) were imprisoned,
13,000 interned, and 400 killed. But in the early 1960s, K√°d√°r announced a
new policy under the motto of "He who is not against us is with us." (this was
a modification of R√°kosi's statement 'He who is not with us is against us').
He declared a general amnesty, gradually curbed some of the excesses of the
secret police, and introduced a relatively liberal cultural and economic course
aimed at overcoming the post-1956 hostility towards him and his regime. In
1966, the Central Committee approved the "New Economic Mechanism," through
which it sought to rebuild the economy, increase productivity, make Hungary
more competitive in world markets, and create prosperity to ensure political
stability. Over the next two decades of relative domestic quiet, K√°d√°r's
government responded alternately to pressures for minor political and economic
reforms as well as to counter-pressures from reform opponents. By the early
1980s, it had achieved some lasting economic reforms and limited political
liberalization and pursued a foreign policy which encouraged more trade with
the West. Nevertheless, the New Economic Mechanism led to mounting foreign
debt, incurred to shore up unprofitable industries. Hungary's transition to a
Western-style democracy was one of the smoothest among the former Soviet bloc.
By late 1988, activists within the party and bureaucracy and Budapest-based
intellectuals were increasing pressure for change. Some of these became reform
socialists, while others began movements which were to develop into parties.
Young liberals formed the Federation of Young Democrats (Fidesz); a core from
the so-called Democratic Opposition formed the Alliance of Free Democrats
(SZDSZ), and the national opposition established the Hungarian Democratic Forum
(MDF). Civic activism intensified to a level not seen since the 1956
revolution. In 1988, K√°d√°r was replaced as General Secretary of the Communist
Party, and reform Communist leader Imre Pozsgay was admitted to the Politburo.
In 1989, the Parliament adopted a "democracy package," which included trade-
union pluralism; freedom of association, assembly, and the press; a new
electoral law; and in October 1989 a radical revision of the constitution,
among others. Since then, Hungary has tried to reform its economy and increase
its connections with western Europe, hoping to become a member of the European
Union as soon as possible. A Central Committee plenum in February 1989 endorsed
in principle the multiparty political system and the characterisation of the
October 1956 revolution as a "popular uprising," in the words of Pozsgay, whose
reform movement had been gathering strength as Communist Party membership
declined dramatically. K√°d√°r's major political rivals then cooperated to move
the country gradually to democracy. The Soviet Union reduced its involvement by
signing an agreement in April 1989 to withdraw Soviet forces by June 1991.
National unity culminated in June 1989 as the country reburied Imre Nagy, his
associates, and, symbolically, all other victims of the 1956 revolution. A
national round table, comprising representatives of the new parties and some
recreated old parties‚Äîsuch as the Smallholders and Social Democrats‚Äîthe
Communist Party, and different social groups, met in the late summer of 1989 to
discuss major changes to the Hungarian constitution in preparation for free
elections and the transition to a fully free and democratic political system.
In October 1989, the Communist Party convened its last congress and re-
established itself as the Hungarian Socialist Party (MSZP). In a historic
session on 16‚Äì20 October 1989, the Parliament adopted legislation providing
for multiparty parliamentary elections and a direct presidential election. The
legislation transformed Hungary from a People's Republic into the Republic of
Hungary, guaranteed human and civil rights, and created an institutional
structure that ensures separation of powers among the judicial, executive, and
legislative branches of government. On the day of the 1956 Revolution, 23
October, the Hungarian Republic was officially declared (by the provisional
President of the Republic M√°ty√°s Sz≈±r√∂s), replacing the Hungarian People's
Republic. The revised constitution also championed the "values of bourgeois
democracy and democratic socialism" and gave equal status to public and private
property. Third Republic (1989- ). The first free parliamentary election, held
in May 1990, was effectively a plebiscite on communism. The revitalized and
reformed Communists performed poorly despite having more than the usual
advantages of an "incumbent" party. Populist, center-right, and liberal parties
fared best, with the Hungarian Democratic Forum (MDF) winning 43% of the vote
and the Alliance of Free Democrats (SZDSZ) capturing 24%. Under Prime Minister
J√≥zsef Antall, the MDF formed a center-right coalition government with the
Independent Smallholders' Party (FKGP) and the Christian Democratic People's
Party (KDNP) to command a 60% majority in the parliament. Parliamentary
opposition parties included SZDSZ, the Hungarian Socialist Party (MSZP), and
the Alliance of Young Democrats (Fidesz). Between March 12, 1990 and June 19,
1991 the Soviet troops ("Southern Army Group") left Hungary. The total number
of Soviet military and civilian personnel stationed in Hungary was around
100,000, having at their disposal approximately 27,000 military equipment. The
withdrawal was performed with 35,000 railway cars. The last units commanded by
general Viktor Silov crossed the Hungarian-Ukrainian border at Z√°hony-Chop.
P√©ter Boross succeeded as Prime Minister after Antall died in December 1993.
The Antall/Boross coalition governments struggled to create a reasonably well-
functioning parliamentary democracy in a market-economy, and to manage the
related political, social and economic crises resulting from the collapse of
the former Communist system. The massive decline in living standards led to a
massive loss of political support. In the May 1994 election, the Socialists won
a plurality of votes and 54% of the seats (with the new Prime Minister, Gyula
Horn) after a campaign focused largely on economic issues and the substantial
decline in living standards since 1990. This signaled a wish to turn back to
the relative security and stability of the socialist era, but voters rejected
both right and left-wing extremist solutions - no such party gained seats in
parliament. After its disappointing result in the election, leadership of the
Fidesz party opted for an ideological shift from a liberal to a conservative
party. This caused a severe split in the membership and many members left for
the other liberal party, the SZDSZ, which formed a coalition with the
socialists, leading to a more than two-thirds majority. The coalition was
influenced by the socialism of Prime Minister Gyula Horn, by the economic focus
of its technocrats (who had been Western-educated in the 1970s and 1980s) and
ex-cadre entrepreneur supporters, and by its liberal coalition partner the
SZDSZ. Facing the threat of state bankruptcy, Horn initiated economic reforms
and aggressive privatization of state enterprises to multinational companies in
return for expectations of investment (in the form of reconstruction, expansion
and modernization). The government adopted a fiscal austerity program, the
Bokros plan in 1995, which had dramatic consequences on social stability and
quality of life. The government introduced post-secondary tuition fees,
partially privatized state services, but supported science both directly and
indirectly, through the private sector. The government pursued a foreign policy
of integration with Euro-Atlantic institutions and reconciliation with
neighboring countries. The Bokros plan and efforts at privatizations were
unpopular with voters, as were rising crime rates, allegations of government
corruption, and an attempt to restart the unpopular program of building a dam
in the Danube. This dissatisfaction among voters helped to propel center-right
parties into power following national elections in May 1998. Fidesz gained the
plurality of parliamentary seats and forged a coalition with the Smallholders
and the Democratic Forum. The new government, headed by 35-year-old Prime
Minister Viktor Orb√°n, promised to stimulate faster growth, curb inflation,
and lower taxes. It inherited an economy with positive economic indicators,
including a growing export-surplus. The government abolished tuition fees and
aimed to create good market conditions for small businesses and to encourage
local production with domestic resources. In terms of foreign policy, the
Orb√°n administration continued to pursue Euro-Atlantic integration as its
first priority, but was a more vocal advocate of minority rights for ethnic
Hungarians abroad than the previous government had been. As a result of a 1997
referendum, Hungary joined NATO in 1999. In 2002, the European Union agreed to
admit Hungary, along with 9 other countries, as members on 1 January 2004.
Fidesz was criticized by its adversaries for the party's presentation of
history, particularly the 1989 system-change. While Fidesz had suggested that
the Socialist party is the moral and legal successor to the hated state party
of the Communist past, the Socialists would assert that they had been those who
had pushed for change from within, derided Fidesz members for crediting
themselves as the sole creators and heirs of the system-change. In the 2002
election the MSZP/SZDSZ coalition won over Fidesz/MDF coalition in a fierce
political fight, with record-high 73% voter turnout. P√©ter Medgyessy became
the new prime minister. Under the socialist-liberal government, the economic
balance of the Hungarian economy started a downfall, while quality of life,
infrastructure and technology boosted. On 12 April 2003, Hungarians voted to
join the European Union (EU), with 83% of the votes in favor. Since the EU had
already accepted Hungary as a possible member, the four leading political
parties (MSZP, Fidesz, SZDSZ and MDF) agreed to establish the required
prerequisites and policies and to work together to prepare the country for the
accession with the least possible harm to the economy and people while
maximizing the positive effects on the country. On 1 May 2004 Hungary became a
member of the EU. In the elections of April 2006, Hungary decided to re-elect
its government for the first time since 1989, though with a new Prime Minister,
Ferenc Gyurcs√°ny. The left-wing strengthened its position, with the coalition
of the Social Democrats (MSZP) and the Liberals (SZDSZ) reaching 54 percent of
the vote and gaining 210 seats as opposed to the previous 198. The parties of
the former term (Fidesz, MDF, SZDSZ, MSZP) won parliamentary seats again. The
new parliament assembled in late May 2006, and the new government was formed in
June 2006. The new government presented plans to reach balance and sustainable
economic growth by removing subsidies to the growth of standard of living,
which it had not included in its campaign. A leaked speech was followed by mass
protests against the Gyurcs√°ny government between 17 September and 23 October
2006. It was the first sustained protest in Hungary since 1989. From 2007, when
increased inflation caused by tax increases decreased the standard of living, a
complete restructuring of the state-administration, energy sector, relation
towards private economy, health sector and welfare supports took place. Members
of affected professional unions describe the measures as lacking discussion and
uncompromising. The country joined Schengen Area at the end of 2007. In 2008,
the coalition broke up over the disagreement whether the insurance side of the
health sector should be state owned and therefore decided in policies the by
state or by private companies. This conflict was followed by a successful
public referendum, initiated by Fidesz, calling for the elimination of
university tuition fees, direct payments at visitations of doctors by insured
patients, and daily fees at hospital by insured patients. This effectively
stopped the restructuring of health care, while it remained completely publicly
owned. The 2008 financial crisis caused further budgetary constraints. After
Gyurcs√°ny's resignation, the Socialists put forward a "government of experts"
under Gordon Bajnai in March 2009, which would only make essential
macroeconomic decisions. In the first round of the 2010 spring general
elections, the center-right Fidesz received 2.704 million votes, i.e. the votes
of 33.69% of the 8.026 million eligible voters or 52.73% of the 5.128 million
actual voters for party lists, which resulted in more than two-thirds of the
seats in Parliament. Fidesz took 263 seats, the Socialists 59, radical, far
right nationalist Jobbik 47, and the newly founded Lehet M√°s a Politika
(Politics Can Be Different) 16, with one seat taken by an independent. In the
autumn municipal elections, Fidesz achieved a majority in almost all local and
mayoral elections, winning the traditional strongholds of the liberal parties.
The newly formed government set three priorities around which it intended to
govern: the New Constitution, holding those who committed criminal deeds during
the former government to account, and creating jobs. The rationale for
accepting a New Constitution was that the constitution of the Third Republic
was a heavily modified version of the 1949 communist constitution, which was
transformed to be the base of a western-style democracy during the Round Table
Consultations during the System-Change of 1989-90. The preamble of the 1989
version of the 1949 Constitution even stated that it is a temporary
constitution in effect until the new constitution is accepted. FIDESZ regarded
itself empowered by the people to form the new constitution on its own. FIDESZ
believed this on the bases that it won a two-thirds majority in the parliament
by popular support, while the opinion of the opposition parties was that only a
multi-party compromise over a new constitution would be legitimate, regardless
of the ratio of the parliamentary seats. The FIDESZ-accepted constitution
entered into force on Jan. 1, 2012. It did not introduce radical differences to
the state-structure: for example, the election of the President of the Republic
remained done by the majority of MEPs. However, the new constitution was
criticized by the opposition parties and also by civil organizations for what
they perceived as the governing party weakened the checks and balances
previously established by the 1989 version of the 1949 constitution. For
example, the 1989 version allowed any MEP to request constitutional review at
the Constitutional Court in advance of any law, while the 2012 constitution
only allowed this to a joint initiative by one-quarter of the members of
parliament. The new constitution eliminated the right of an ordinary citizen to
appeal to the Constitutional Court and also made it harder to demand public
referendum. An other example of what other parties regarded as the weakening of
the checks and balances: the FIDESZ 2/3 majority has doubled the required
signatures that individual MEP nominees need to enter the election, negatively
impacting the chances of small parties sending delegates to the parliament.
Former President of the Republic L√°szl√≥ S√≥lyom, who was an active
participant of writing the 1989 version of the 1949 constitution was among
those who raised concerns over the weakening of the checks and balances. The
government also launched what it dubbed the 'war against public debt', intended
to reduce the debt of the state as much as possible. Despite the government's
efforts, as of yet the national debt has not decreased. The reason for it is
that much of the national debt was taken up in foreign currencies, and the
national currency weakened during the government's term.
