Mesolithic The Mesolithic (Greek: "mesos" "middle", "lithos" "stone") is an
archaeological concept used to refer to specific groups of archaeological
cultures defined as falling between the Paleolithic and the Neolithic. The term
developed as a catch-all to refer to material that did not fit into the other
categories of prehistory and after the development of radiocarbon dating the
arbitrary nature of its definition has become apparent. The term is used to
refer to different time spans in different parts of Eurasia. It was first used
to refer to post-Holocene but pre-agricultural material in northwest Europe
about 10,000 to 5000¬ BCE but is also applied to material from the Levant
(about 20,000 to 9500¬ BCE); in Japan the J≈çmon period (about 14,000 to
400¬ BCE) is sometimes called Mesolithic and it is also applied to some
cultures from the Indian sub-continent (100,000 to 30,000¬ BCE). The term
"Epipaleolithic" is often used for areas outside northern Europe but was also
the preferred synonym used by French archaeologists until the 1960s. History of
the concept. The three -lithics are subdivisions of the Stone Age in the three-
age system developed since classical times and given a modern archaeological
meaning by Christian J√ºrgensen Thomsen, a Danish archaeologist, in the early
19th century. Subdivisions of "earlier" and "later" were added to the Stone Age
by Thomsen and especially his junior colleague and employee Jens Jacob Asmussen
Worsaae. John Lubbock kept these divisions in his work "Pre-historic Times" in
1865 and introduced the terms Paleolithic ("Old Stone Age") and Neolithic ("New
Stone Age") for them. He saw no need for an intermediate category. When Hodder
Westropp introduced the Mesolithic in 1866 as a technology intermediate between
Paleolithic and Neolithic, a storm of controversy immediately arose around it.
A British school led by John Evans denied any need for an intermediate. The
ages blended together like the colors of a rainbow, he said. A European school
led by Louis Laurent Gabriel de Mortillet asserted that there was a gap between
the earlier and later. Edouard Piette claimed to have filled the gap with his
discovery of the Azilian Culture. Knut Sterjna offered an alternative in the
Epipaleolithic, a continuation of the use of Paleolithic technology. By the
time of Vere Gordon Childe's work, "The Dawn of Europe" (1947), which affirms
the Mesolithic, sufficient data had been collected to determine that the
Mesolithic was in fact necessary and was indeed a transition and intermediary
between the Paleolithic and the Neolithic. The start and end dates of the
Mesolithic vary by geographical region. Childe's recycled view prevails that
the term generally covers the period between the end of the Pleistocene and the
start of the Neolithic. The times of these events vary greatly; moreover, the
various Mesolithics within the span might be as short as roughly a thousand
years or as long as roughly 15,000 years depending on the circumstances. If the
Mesolithic is more similar to the Paleolithic it is called the Epipaleolithic.
The Paleolithic was an age of purely hunting and gathering while in the
Neolithic domestication of plants and animals had occurred. Some Mesolithic
people continued with intensive hunting. Others were practising the initial
stages of domestication. Some Mesolithic settlements were villages of huts.
Others were walled cities. The type of tool remains the diagnostic factor. The
Mesolithic featured composite devices manufactured with Mode V chipped stone
tools. The Paleolithic had utilized Modes I-IV and the Neolithic mainly
abandoned the modes in favor of polished, not chipped, stone tools. Due to the
innovation of a three-stage system for African archaeology by John Hilary
Goodman and Clarence van Riet Lowe of South Africa in the early 20th century,
translations of "Old," "Middle," and "New Stone Age" can no longer be used for
Paleolithic, Mesolithic and Neolithic. In African archaeology, which applies
only from the Sahara southward, Lower Paleolithic is replaced by "Early Stone
Age," Middle Paleolithic is replaced by "Middle Stone Age" and Upper
Paleolithic by "Later Stone Age." The Mesolithic and Neolithic are not
recognized. Current terminology. The term "Mesolithic" is in competition with
another term, "Epipaleolithic", which means the "final Upper Palaeolithic
industries occurring at the end of the final glaciation which appear to merge
technologically into the Mesolithic". In the archaeology of northern Europe,
for example for archaeological sites in Great Britain, Germany, Scandinavia,
Ukraine, and Russia, the term "Mesolithic" is almost always used. In the
archaeology of other areas, the term "Epipaleolithic" may be preferred by most
authors, or there may be divergences between authors over which term to use or
what meaning to assign to each. A Spanish scholar, Alfonso Moure, says in this
regard:"In the terminology of prehistoric archeology, the most widespread trend
is to use the term 'Epipaleolithic' for the industrial complexes of post-
glacial hunter-gatherer groups. Conversely, those that are in course of
transition toward artificial food production are assigned to the 'Mesolithic.'"
The Levant. Mesolithic 1 (Kebara culture; 20‚Äì18,000¬ BCE to 12,150¬ BCE)
followed the Aurignacian or Levantine Upper Paleolithic throughout the Levant.
By the end of the Aurignacian, gradual changes took place in stone industries.
Small stone tools called microliths and retouched bladelets can be found for
the first time. The microliths of this culture period differ greatly from the
Aurignacian artifacts. This period is more properly called Epipaleolithic. By
20,000 to 18,000¬ BCE the climate and environment had changed, starting a
period of transition. The Levant became more arid and the forest vegetation
retreated, to be replaced by steppe. The cool and dry period ended at the
beginning of Mesolithic 1. The hunter-gatherers of the Aurignacian would have
had to modify their way of living and their pattern of settlement to adapt to
the changing conditions. The crystallization of these new patterns resulted in
Mesolithic 1. New types of settlements and new stone industries developed. The
inhabitants of a small Mesolithic 1 site in the Levant left little more than
their chipped stone tools behind. The industry was of small tools made of
bladelets struck off single-platform cores. Besides bladelets, burins and end-
scrapers were found. A few bone tools and some ground stone have also been
found. These so-called Mesolithic sites of Asia are far less numerous than
those of the Neolithic and the archeological remains are very poor. The second
period, Mesolithic 2, is also called the Natufian culture. The change from
Mesolithic 1 to Natufian culture can be dated more closely. The latest date
from a Mesolithic 1 site in the Levant is 12,150¬ BCE. The earliest date from a
Natufian site is 11,140¬ BCE. This period is characterized by the early rise of
agriculture that would later emerge into the Neolithic period. Natufian culture
is commonly split into two subperiods: Early Natufian (12,500‚Äì10,800¬ BCE)
(Christopher Delage gives a. 13000 - 11500 BP uncalibrated, equivalent to ca.
13,700 to 11,500¬ BCE) and Late Natufian (10,800‚Äì9500¬ BCE). The Late
Natufian most likely occurred in tandem with the Younger Dryas. Radiocarbon
dating places the Natufian culture between 12,500 and 9500¬ BCE, just before
the end of the Pleistocene. This period is characterised by the beginning of
agriculture. The earliest known battle occurred during the Mesolithic period at
a site in Egypt known as Cemetery 117. Europe. The Mesolithic began with the
Holocene warm period around 11,660¬ BP and ended with the introduction of
farming, the date of which varied in each geographical region. Regions that
experienced greater environmental effects as the last glacial period ended have
a much more apparent Mesolithic era, lasting millennia. In northern Europe, for
example, societies were able to live well on rich food supplies from the
marshlands created by the warmer climate. Such conditions produced distinctive
human behaviors that are preserved in the material record, such as the
Maglemosian and Azilian cultures. Such conditions also delayed the coming of
the Neolithic until as late as 5000-4000¬ BC in northern Europe. As the
"Neolithic package" (including farming, herding, polished stone axes, timber
longhouses and pottery) spread into Europe, the Mesolithic way of life was
marginalized and eventually disappeared. Mesolithic adaptations such as
sedentism, population size and use of plant foods are cited as evidence of the
transition to agriculture. However in north-Eastern Europe, the hunting and
fishing lifestyle continued into the Medieval period in regions less suited to
agriculture. Ceramic Mesolithic. In North-Eastern Europe, Siberia, and certain
southern European and North African sites, a "ceramic Mesolithic" can be
distinguished between 7000-3850¬ BCE. Russian archaeologists prefer to describe
such pottery-making cultures as Neolithic, even though farming is absent. This
pottery-making Mesolithic culture can be found peripheral to the sedentary
Neolithic cultures. It created a distinctive type of pottery, with point or
knob base and flared rims, manufactured by methods not used by the Neolithic
farmers. Though each area of Mesolithic ceramic developed an individual style,
common features suggest a single point of origin. The earliest manifestation of
this type of pottery may be in the region around Lake Baikal in Siberia. It
appears in the Elshan or Yelshanka or Samara culture on the Volga in Russia c.
7000¬ BCE, and from there spread via the Dnieper-Donets culture to the Narva
culture of the Eastern Baltic. Spreading westward along the coastline it is
found in the Erteb√∏lle culture of Denmark and Ellerbek of Northern Germany,
and the related Swifterbant culture of the Low Countries. Mesolithic cultures.
"Periodization: The Levant: 20,000 to 9500¬ BCE; Europe: 9660 to 5000¬ BCE;
Elsewhere: 10,000 to 400¬ BCE"
