Achaemenid Empire The Achaemenid Persian Empire (; Old Persian: "ParsƒÅ", name
of ruling dynasty: "HaxƒÅmani≈°iya", ) (c. 550‚Äì330 BCE), sometimes known as
the First Persian Empire, was an Iranian empire in Western Asia, founded in the
6th century BCE by Cyrus the Great who overthrew the Median confederation. It
expanded to eventually rule over significant portions of the ancient world
which at around 500 BCE stretched from the Indus Valley in the east, to Thrace
and Macedon on the northeastern border of Greece, making it the biggest empire
the world had yet seen. The Achaemenid Empire would eventually control Egypt as
well. It was ruled by a series of monarchs who unified its disparate tribes and
nationalities by constructing a complex network of roads. Calling themselves
the "Pars" after their original Aryan tribal name "Parsa", Persians settled in
a land which they named "Parsua" ("Persis" in Greek), bounded on the west by
the Tigris River and on the south by the Persian Gulf. This became their
heartland for the duration of the Achaemenid Empire. It was from this region
that eventually Cyrus the Great (Cyrus II of Persia) would advance to defeat
the Median, the Lydian,and the Babylonian Empires, opening the way for
subsequent conquests into Egypt and Asia Minor. At the height of its power
after the conquest of Egypt, the empire encompassed approximately 8 million km2
spanning three continents: Asia, Africa and Europe. At its greatest extent, the
empire included the modern territories of Iran, Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Israel/
Palestine, Lebanon, all significant population centers of ancient Egypt as far
west as Libya, Turkey, Thrace and Macedonia, much of the Black Sea coastal
regions, Armenia, Georgia, Azerbaijan, much of Central Asia, Afghanistan,
northern Saudi Arabia and parts of western Pakistan. It is noted in Western
history as the antagonist foe of the Greek city states during the Greco-Persian
Wars, for emancipation of slaves including the Jewish people from their
Babylonian captivity, and for instituting infrastructures such as a postal
system, road systems, and the usage of an official language throughout its
territories. The empire had a centralised, bureaucratic administration under
the Emperor and a large professional army and civil services, inspiring similar
developments in later empires. The Empire's vast size and its extraordinary
ethnocultural diversity are traditionally thought to have been its undoing. The
delegation of power to local governments eventually weakened the king's central
authority, causing resources to be expended in attempts to subdue local
rebellions. This accounts for the dis-unification of the region by the time
Alexander the Great invaded Persia in 334 BCE. This viewpoint however is
challenged by some modern scholars who argue that the Achaemenid Empire was not
facing any such crisis around the time of Alexander, and that only internal
succession struggles within the Achaemenid family ever came close to weakening
the Empire. Alexander, an avid admirer of Cyrus the Great, would eventually
cause the collapse of the empire and its disintegration around 330 BCE into
what later became the Ptolemaic Kingdom and Seleucid Empire, in addition to
other minor territories which gained independence at that time. The Iranian
Culture of the central plateau, however, continued to thrive and eventually
reclaimed power by the 2nd century BCE. The historical mark of the Achaemenid
Empire went far beyond its territorial and military influences and included
cultural, social, technological and religious influences as well. Many
Athenians adopted Achaemenid customs in their daily lives in a reciprocal
cultural exchange, some being employed by, or allied to the Persian kings. The
impact of Cyrus the Great's Edict of Restoration is mentioned in Judeo-
Christian texts and the empire was instrumental in the spread of Zoroastrianism
as far east as China. Even Alexander the Great, the man who would set out to
conquer this vast empire, would respect its customs, by enforcing respect for
the royal Persian kings including Cyrus the Great, and even by appearing in
proskynesis, a Persian royal custom, despite stern Macedonian disapproval. The
Persian empire would also set the tone for the politics, heritage and history
of modern Persia (now called Iran). The influence also encompasses Persia's
previous territories collectively referred to as the Greater Iran. A notable
engineering achievement is the Qanat water management system, the oldest and
longest of which is older than 3000 years and longer than 44 miles (71¬ km). In
480 BCE, it is estimated that 50 million people lived in the Achaemenid Empire
or about 44% of the world's population at the time, making it the largest
empire by population percentage. History. Origin. The Persian Empire is named
after an Indo-European tribe called "Parsua". The name Persia is a Latin
pronunciation of the Indo-Iranian people Parsua who named their territorial
borders Persis, after their tribal name, an area located north of the Persian
Gulf and East of Tigris river referred to as Persis (or in Persian, Pars).
Despite its success and rapid expansion, Achaemenid empire was not the first
Iranian empire, as by sixth century BCE another group of ancient Iranic people
had already established the Median Empire. The Medes had originally been the
dominant Iranic group in the region, rising to power at the end of the 7th
century BC and incorporating the Persians into their empire. The Iranic peoples
had arrived in the region circa 1000 BC and had initially fallen under the
domination of the Assyrian Empire (911-609 BC). However, the Medes and
Persians, (together with the Scythians and Babylonia) played a major role in
the destruction of an Assyria riven by internal strife. The term Achaemenid is
in fact the Latinized version of the Old Persian name "HaxƒÅmani≈°" (a
bahuvrihi compound translating to "having a friend's mind"), meaning in Greek
"of the family of the Achaemenis." Despite the derivation of the name,
Achaemenes was himself a minor seventh century ruler of the Anshan (Ansham or
An≈°ƒÅn) located in southwestern Iran. It was not until the time of Cyrus the
Great (Cyrus II of Persia) a descendant of Achaemenes, that the Achaemenid
empire developed the prestige of an empire, and set out to incorporate the
existing empires of the ancient east, to become the vast Persian empire of
which the ancient texts speak. At some point in 550 BCE, Cyrus the Great rose
in rebellion against the Median empire (most likely due to the Medes'
mismanagement of Persis), eventually conquering the Medes and creating the
first Persian empire. Cyrus the Great would utilize his tactical genius, as
well as his understanding of the socio-political equations governing his
territories, to eventually incorporate into the Persian empire the neighbouring
Lydian and Neo-Babylonian empires, and also leading the way for his successor,
Cambyses II to venture into Egypt and defeat the Hittite Empire and the
Egyptian Kingdom. Cyrus the Great would reflect his political acumen in the
management of his newly formed empire, as the Persian empire became the first
to attempt to govern many different ethnic groups, on the principle of equal
responsibilities, and rights for all people, so long as subjects paid their
taxes and kept the peace. Additionally, the king would agree not to interfere
with the local customs, religions, and trades of its subject states, a unique
quality that eventually won Cyrus the support of the Babylonians. This system
of management would ultimately become an issue for the Persians, as with a
larger empire came the need for order and control, leading to expenditure of
resources and mobilization of troops, to quell local rebellions, weakening the
central power of the king. By the time of Darius III, this disorganization had
almost led to a disunified realm. The Persians from whom Cyrus hailed were
originally nomadic pastoral people in the western Iranian plateau and by 850
BCE were calling themselves the "Parsa" and their constantly shifting territory
"Parsua" for the most part localized around Persis (Pars). As Persians gained
power, they developed the infrastructure to support their growing influence
including creation of a capital named Pasargadae, and an opulent city named
Persepolis. Begun during the rule of Darius the Great (Darius I), and completed
some 100 years later, Persepolis was a symbol of the empire serving both as a
ceremonial centre and a center for government. It had a special set of
gradually progressive stairways named "All Countries" around which carved
relief decoration depicted scenes of heroism, hunting, natural themes, and
presentation of the gifts to the Achaemenid kings by their subjects during the
spring festival, Nowruz. The core structure was composed of a multitude of
square rooms or halls, the biggest of which was called "Apadana". Tall, erect,
decorated columns would often welcome visitors as well as impress them as to
the size of the structure. Later on, Darius the Great (Darius I), would also
utilize Susa and Ecbatana as his governmental centres, developing them into a
similar metropolis status. Account of the ancestral lineage of the Persian
kings of the Achaemenid dynasty can be derived from either documented Greek or
Roman accounts, or from existing documented Persian accounts, such as those
found in the Behistun Inscription. However, since most existing accounts of
this vast empire are in works of Greek philosophers and historians, and since
much of the original Persian documents are lost, not to mention varying
scholarly views on their origin and possible motivations behind them, it is
difficult to create a definitive and completely objective list. Nonetheless, it
is clear that Cyrus the Great (Cyrus II of Persia), and Darius the Great
(Darius I of Persia), were critical in expansion of the empire. Cyrus the Great
is often believed to be the son of Cambyses I, grandson of Cyrus I, the father
of Cambyses II, and a relative of Darius the Great, through a shared ancestor,
Teispes. Cyrus the Great is also believed to have been a family member
(possibly grandson) of the Median king Astyages through his mother, Mandana of
Media. A minority of scholars argue that perhaps Achaemenes was a retrograde
creation of Darius the Great, in order to reconcile his connection with Cyrus
the Great, after gaining power. Ancient Greek writers provide some legendary
information about Achaemenes by calling his tribe the "Pasargadae", and stating
that he was "raised by an eagle". Plato, when writing about the Persians,
identified Achaemenes with Perses, ancestor of the Persians in Greek mythology.
According to Plato, Achaemenes was the same person as Perses, a son of the
Ethiopian queen Andromeda and the Greek hero Perseus, and a grandson of Zeus.
Later writers believed that Achaemenes and Perses were different people, and
that Perses was an ancestor of the king. This account further confirms that
Achaemenes could well have been a significiant Anshan leader and an ancestor of
Cyrus the Great. Regardless, both Cyrus the Great and Darius the Great were
related, prominent kings of Persia, under whose rule the empire expanded to
include much of the ancient world. Formation and expansion. The empire took its
unified form with a central administration around Pasargadae erected by Cyrus
the Great. The empire ended up conquering and enlarging the Median empire to
include in addition Egypt and Asia Minor. During the reigns of Darius I and his
son Xerxes I it engaged in military conflict with some of the major city-states
of Ancient Greece, and although it came close to defeating the Greek army this
war ultimately led to the empire's overthrow. In 559 BCE, Cambyses I the Elder
was succeeded as the king of An≈°ƒÅn by his son Cyrus II the Great, who also
succeeded the still-living Arsames as the King of Persia, thus reuniting the
two realms. Cyrus is considered to be the first true king of the Persian
empire, as his predecessors were subservient to the Medes. Cyrus the Great
conquered Media, Lydia, and Babylon. Cyrus was politically shrewd, modeling
himself as the "savior" of conquered nations, often allowing displaced people
to return, and giving his subjects freedom to practice local customs. To
reinforce this image, he instituted policies of religious freedom, and restored
temples and other infrastructure in the newly acquired cities.(Most notably the
Jewish inhabitants of Babylon, as recorded in the Cyrus Cylinder and the
Tanakh). As a result of his tolerant policies he came to be known by those of
the Jewish faith, as "the anointed of the Lord." His immediate successors were
less successful. Cyrus' son Cambyses II conquered Egypt in 525 BCE, but died in
July 522 BCE as the result of an injurious self-accident, during a revolt led
by a sacerdotal clan that had lost its power following Cyrus' conquest of
Media. According to Herodotus, Cambyses II had originally ventured into Egypt
to take revenge for the pharaoh Amasis's trickery when he sent a fake Egyptian
bride whose family Amasis had murdered, instead of his own daughter, to wed
Cambyses II. Additionally negative reports of mistreatment caused by Amasis,
given by Phanes of Halicarnassus, a wise council man serving Amasis, further
enforced Cambyses's resolve to venture into Egypt. Amasis died before Cambyses
II could face him, but his successor Psamtik III was defeated by Cambyses II in
the Battle of Pelusium. While Cambyses II was in Egypt, the Zoroastrian
priests, whom Herodotus called Magi, usurped the throne for one of their own,
Gaumata, who then pretended to be Cambyses II's younger brother Bardiya (Greek:
"Smerdis" or "Tanaoxares/Tanyoxarkes"), who had been assassinated some three
years earlier. Owing to the strict rule of Cambyses II, especially his stance
on taxation, and his long absence in Egypt, "the whole people, Perses, Medes
and all the other nations," acknowledged the usurper, especially as he granted
a remission of taxes for three years (Herodotus iii. 68). Cambyses II himself
would not be able to quell the imposters, as he died due to accidental injury
on the way back from Egypt. The claim that Gaumata had impersonated Bardiya
(Smerdis), is derived from Darius the Great and the records at the Behistun
Inscription. Historians are divided over the possibility that the story of the
impostor was invented by Darius as justification for his coup. Darius made a
similar claim when he later captured Babylon, announcing that the Babylonian
king was not, in fact, Nebuchadnezzar III, but an impostor named Nidintu-bel.
According to the Behistun Inscription, Gaumata ruled for seven months before
being overthrown in 522 BCE by Darius the Great (Darius I) (Old Persian
"DƒÅryavu≈°" "Who Holds Firm the Good", also known as "Darayarahush" or Darius
the Great). The Magi, though persecuted, continued to exist, and a year
following the death of the first pseudo-Smerdis (Gaumata), saw a second pseudo-
Smerdis (named VahyazdƒÅta) attempt a coup. The coup, though initially
successful, failed. Herodotus writes that the native leadership debated the
best form of government for the Empire. It was agreed that an oligarchy would
divide them against one another, and democracy would bring about mob rule
resulting in a charismatic leader resuming the monarchy. Therefore, they
decided a new monarch was in order, particularly since "they" were in a
position to choose him. Darius I was chosen monarch from among the leaders. He
was cousin to Cambyses II and Bardiya (Smerdis), claiming Ariaramnes as his
ancestor. The Achaemenids thereafter consolidated areas firmly under their
control. It was Cyrus the Great and Darius the Great who, by sound and
farsighted administrative planning, brilliant military maneuvering, and a
humanistic world view, established the greatness of the Achaemenids and, in
less than thirty years, raised them from an obscure tribe to a world power. It
was during the reign of Darius the Great (Darius I) that Persepolis was built
(518‚Äì516 BCE) and which would serve as capital for several generations of
Achaemenid kings. Ecbatana ("HagmatƒÅna" "City of Gatherings", modern: Hamadan)
in Media was greatly expanded during this period and served as the summer
capital. Darius the Great (Darius I) eventually attacked the Greek mainland,
which had supported rebellious Greek colonies under his aegis; but as a result
of his defeat at the Battle of Marathon, he was forced to pull the limits of
his empire back to Asia Minor. Some scholars argue that in the context of
history of the Near and Middle east in the first millennium, Alexander can be
considered as the "last of the Achaemenids." This is partly because Alexander
maintained more or less the same political structure, and borders as the
previous Achaemenid kings. Greco-Persian Wars. By the 5th century BCE the Kings
of Persia were either ruling over or had subordinated territories roughly
encompassing today's Iran, Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Israel/ Palestine,
Kuwait, Egypt, northern Libya, Turkey, Cyprus, parts of Greece, Macedonia
(ancient kingdom), Bulgaria, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan,
Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Afghanistan, parts of northern Arabia, and
some parts of north-western India/ Pakistan. The Ionian Revolt in 499 BCE, and
associated revolts in Aeolis, Doris, Cyprus and Caria, were military rebellions
by several regions of Asia Minor against Persian rule, lasting from 499 to 493
BCE At the heart of the rebellion was the dissatisfaction of the Greek cities
of Asia Minor with the tyrants appointed by Persia to rule them, along with the
individual actions of two Milesian tyrants, Histiaeus and Aristagoras. In 499
BCE, the then tyrant of Miletus, Aristagoras, launched a joint expedition with
the Persian satrap Artaphernes to conquer Naxos, in an attempt to bolster his
position in Miletus (both financially and in terms of prestige). The mission
was a debacle, and sensing his imminent removal as tyrant, Aristagoras chose to
incite the whole of Ionia into rebellion against the Persian king Darius the
Great. The Persians continued to reduce the cities along the west coast that
still held out against them, before finally imposing a peace settlement in 493
BCE on Ionia that was generally considered to be both just and fair. The Ionian
Revolt constituted the first major conflict between Greece and the Achaemenid
Empire, and as such represents the first phase of the Greco-Persian Wars. Asia
Minor had been brought back into the Persian fold, but Darius had vowed to
punish Athens and Eretria for their support for the revolt. Moreover, seeing
that the political situation in Greece posed a continued threat to the
stability of his Empire, he decided to embark on the conquest of all of Greece.
However, the Persian forces were defeated at the Battle of Marathon and Darius
would die before having the chance to launch an invasion of Greece. Xerxes I
(485‚Äì465 BCE, Old Persian "X≈°ayƒÅr≈°a" "Hero Among Kings"), son of Darius I,
vowed to complete the job. He organized a massive invasion aiming to conquer
Greece. His army entered Greece from the north, meeting little or no resistance
through Macedonia and Thessaly, but was delayed by a small Greek force for
three days at Thermopylae. A simultaneous naval battle at Artemisium was
tactically indecisive as large storms destroyed ships from both sides. The
battle was stopped prematurely when the Greeks received news of the defeat at
Thermopylae and retreated. The battle was a strategic victory for the Persians,
giving them uncontested control of Artemisium and the Aegean Sea. Following his
victory at the Battle of Thermopylae, Xerxes sacked the evacuated city of
Athens and prepared to meet the Greeks at the strategic Isthmus of Corinth and
the Saronic Gulf. In 480 BCE the Greeks won a decisive victory over the Persian
fleet at the Battle of Salamis and forced Xerxes to retire to Sardis. The land
army which he left in Greece under Mardonius retook Athens but was eventually
destroyed in 479 BCE at the Battle of Plataea. The final defeat of the Persians
at Mycale encouraged the Greek cities of Asia to revolt, and marked the end of
Persian expansion into Europe. The cultural phase. Xerxes I was followed by
Artaxerxes I (465‚Äì424 BCE), who moved the capital from Persepolis to Babylon.
It was during this reign that Elamite ceased to be the language of government,
and Aramaic gained in importance. It was probably during this reign that the
solar calendar was introduced as the national calendar. Under Artaxerxes I,
Zoroastrianism became the "de facto" religion of state, and for this Artaxerxes
I is today also known as the Constantine of that faith. Artaxerxes I died in
Susa, and his body was brought to Persepolis for internment in the tomb of his
forebears. Artaxerxes I was immediately succeeded by his eldest son Xerxes II,
who was however assassinated by one of his half-brothers a few weeks later.
Darius II rallied support for himself and marched eastwards, executing the
assassin and was crowned in his stead. From 412 Darius II (423‚Äì404 BCE), at
the insistence of the able Tissaphernes, gave support first to Athens, then to
Sparta, but in 407 BCE, Darius' son Cyrus the Younger was appointed to replace
Tissaphernes and aid was given entirely to Sparta which finally defeated Athens
in 404 BCE In the same year, Darius fell ill and died in Babylon. At his
deathbed, his Babylonian wife Parysatis pleaded with Darius to have her second
eldest son Cyrus (the Younger) crowned, but Darius refused. Darius was then
succeeded by his eldest son Artaxerxes II Memnon. Plutarch relates (probably on
the authority of Ctesias) that the displaced Tissaphernes came to the new king
on his coronation day to warn him that his younger brother Cyrus (the Younger)
was preparing to assassinate him during the ceremony. Artaxerxes had Cyrus
arrested and would have had him executed if their mother Parysatis had not
intervened. Cyrus was then sent back as Satrap of Lydia, where he prepared an
armed rebellion. Cyrus and Artaxerxes met in the Battle of Cunaxa in 401 BCE,
where Cyrus was killed. Artaxerxes II (404‚Äì358 BCE), was the longest reigning
of the Achaemenid kings and it was during this 45-year period of relative peace
and stability that many of the monuments of the era were constructed.
Artaxerxes moved the capital back to Persepolis, which he greatly extended.
Also the summer capital at Ecbatana was lavishly extended with gilded columns
and roof tiles of silver and copper (Polybius, 27 October 2012). The
extraordinary innovation of the Zoroastrian shrine cults can also be dated to
his reign, and it was probably during this period that Zoroastrianism was
disseminated throughout Asia Minor and the Levant, from Armenia. The temples,
though serving a religious purpose, were however not a purely selfless act:
they also served as an important source of income. From the Babylonian kings,
the Achaemenids had taken over the concept of a mandatory temple tax, a one-
tenth tithe which all inhabitants paid to the temple nearest to their land or
other source of income (Dandamaev & Lukonin, 1989:361‚Äì362). A share of this
income called the "quppu ≈°a ≈°arri", "kings chest"‚Äîan ingenious institution
originally introduced by Nabonidus‚Äîwas then turned over to the ruler. In
retrospect, Artaxerxes is generally regarded as an amiable man who lacked the
moral fibre to be a really successful ruler. However, six centuries later
Ardeshir I, founder of the second Persian Empire, would consider himself
Artaxerxes' successor, a grand testimony to the importance of Artaxerxes to the
Persian psyche. Fall of the empire. [[File:Battleofissus333BC-
mosaic.jpg|thumb|The Battle of Issus, between Alexander the Great on horseback
to the left, and Darius III in the chariot to the right, represented in a
Pompeii mosaic dated 1st century BCE ‚Äì National Museum of Archaeology in
Naples.]] According to Plutarch, Artaxerxes' successor Artaxerxes III (358 ‚Äì
338 BCE) came to the throne by bloody means, ensuring his place upon the throne
by the assassination of eight of his half-brothers. In 343 BCE Artaxerxes III
defeated Nectanebo II, driving him from Egypt, and made Egypt once again a
Persian satrapy. In 338 BCE Artaxerxes III died under unclear circumstances
(natural causes according to cuneiform sources but Diodorus, a Greek historian,
reports that Artaxerxes was murdered by Bagoas, his minister). while Philip of
Macedon united the Greek states by force and began to plan an invasion into the
empire. Artaxerxes III was succeeded by Artaxerxes IV Arses, who before he
could act was also poisoned by Bagoas. Bagoas is further said to have killed
not only all Arses' children, but many of the other princes of the land. Bagoas
then placed Darius III (336‚Äì330 BCE), a nephew of Artaxerxes IV, on the
throne. Darius III, previously Satrap of Armenia, personally forced Bagoas to
swallow poison. In 334 BCE, when Darius was just succeeding in subduing Egypt
again, Alexander and his battle-hardened troops invaded Asia Minor. At two
different times, the Achaemenids ruled Egypt although the Egyptians twice
regained temporary independence from Persia. After the practice of Manetho,
Egyptian historians refer to the periods in Egypt when the Achaemenid dynasty
ruled as the twenty-seventh dynasty of Egypt, 525‚Äì404 BCE, until the death of
Darius II, and the thirty-first dynasty of Egypt, 343‚Äì332 BCE, which began
after Nectanebo II was defeated by the Persian king Artaxerxes III. Alexander
the Great (Alexander III of Macedon) defeated the Persian armies at Granicus
(334 BCE), followed by Issus (333 BCE), and lastly at Gaugamela (331 BCE).
Afterwards, he marched on Susa and Persepolis which surrendered in early 330
BCE. From Persepolis, Alexander headed north to Pasargadae where he visited the
tomb of Cyrus, the burial of the man whom he had heard of from Cyropedia. In
the ensuing chaos created by Alexander the Great's invasion of Persia, Cyrus
the Great's tomb was broken into and most of its luxuries were looted. When
Alexander the Great reached the tomb, he was horrified by the manner in which
the tomb was treated, and questioned the Magi, putting them to court. On some
accounts, Alexander's decision to put the Magi on trial was more about his
attempt to undermine their influence and his show of power in his newly
conquered empire, than a concern for Cyrus's tomb. Regardless, Alexander the
Great ordered Aristobulus to improve the tomb's condition and restore its
interior, showing respect for Cyrus. From there he headed to Ecbatana, where
Darius III had sought refuge. Darius III was taken prisoner by Bessus, his
Bactrian satrap and kinsman. As Alexander approached, Bessus had his men murder
Darius III and then declared himself Darius' successor, as Artaxerxes V, before
retreating into Central Asia leaving Darius' body in the road to delay
Alexander, who brought it to Persepolis for an honorable funeral. Bessus would
then create a coalition of his forces, in order to create an army to defend
against Alexander. Before Bessus could fully unite with his confederates at the
eastern part of the empire, Alexander, fearing the danger of Bessus gaining
control, found him, put him on trial in a Persian court under his control, and
ordered his execution in a "cruel and barbarous manner". Despite having
succeeded to conquer the whole of the Persian empire, Alexander the Great, was
nonetheless unable to offer a stable alternative. After his death, Alexander's
once massive Persian empire was broken into and succeeded by few smaller
empires the most significant of which was the Seleucid Empire, ruled by the
generals of Alexander and their descendants. They in turn would be succeeded by
the Parthian Empire. Istakhr, one of the vassal kingdoms of the Parthian
Empire, would be overthrown by Papak, a priest of the temple there. Papak's
son, Arda≈°ir I, who named himself in remembrance of Artaxerxes II, would
revolt against the Parthians, eventually defeating them and establishing the
Sassanid Empire or as it is known the second Persian Empire. Descendants in
later Iranian dynasties. Both the later dynasties of the Parthians and
Sassanids and Gabaris would on occasion claim Achaemenid descent. Recently
there has been some corroboration for the Parthian claim to Achaemenid ancestry
via the possibility of an inherited disease (neurofibromatosis) demonstrated by
the physical descriptions of rulers and from evidence of familial disease on
ancient coinage. Government. Cyrus the Great founded the empire as a multi-
state empire, governed by four capital states; Pasargadae, Babylon, Susa and
Ekbatana. The Achaemenids allowed a certain amount of regional autonomy in the
form of the satrapy system. A satrapy was an administrative unit, usually
organized on a geographical basis. A 'satrap' (governor) was the vassal king,
who administered the region, a 'general' supervised military recruitment and
ensured order, and a 'state secretary' kept the official records. The general
and the state secretary reported directly to the satrap as well as the central
government. At differing times, there were between 20 and 30 satrapies. Cyrus
the Great created an organized army including the Immortals unit, consisting of
10,000 highly trained soldiers Cyrus also formed an innovative postal system
throughout the empire, based on several relay stations called Chapar Khaneh.
Darius the Great moved the capital from Pasargadae to Persepolis; he
revolutionized the economy by placing it on a silver and gold coinage and
introducing a regulated and sustainable tax system that was precisely tailored
to each satrapy, based on their supposed productivity and their economic
potential. For instance, Babylon was assessed for the highest amount and for a
startling mixture of commodities ‚Äì 1000 silver talents, four months supply of
food for the army. India was clearly already fabled for its gold; the province
consisting of the sindh and western punjab regions of ancient northwestern
India traded gold dust equal in value to the very large amount of 4680 silver
talents for various commodities. Egypt was known for the wealth of its crops;
it was to be the granary of the Persian Empire (as later of Rome's) and was
required to provide 120,000 measures of grain in addition to 700 talents of
silver. This was exclusively a tax levied on subject peoples. Other
accomplishments of Darius' reign included codification of the data, a universal
legal system, and construction of a new capital at Persepolis. Under the
Achaemenids, the trade was extensive and there was an efficient infrastructure
that facilitated the exchange of commodities in the far reaches of the empire.
Tariffs on trade were one of the empire's main sources of revenue, along with
agriculture and tribute. The satrapies were linked by a 2,500-kilometer
highway, the most impressive stretch being the Royal Road from Susa to Sardis,
built by command of Darius I. The relays of mounted couriers could reach the
remotest of areas in fifteen days. Despite the relative local independence
afforded by the satrapy system, royal inspectors, the "eyes and ears of the
king", toured the empire and reported on local conditions. The king also
maintained a personal bodyguard of the elite 10,000 Immortals when not at war.
The practice of slavery in Achaemenid Persia was generally banned, although
there is evidence that conquered and/or rebellious armies were sold into
captivity. Zoroastrianism, the de facto religion of the empire, explicitly
forbids slavery, and the kings of Achaemenid Persia, especially the founder
Cyrus the Great, followed this ban to varying degrees, as evidenced by the
freeing of the Jews at Babylon, and the construction of Persepolis by paid
workers. The vexilloid of the Achaemenid Empire was a gold falcon on a field of
crimson. Military. Despite its humble origins in Persis, the empire reached an
enormous size under the leadership of Cyrus the Great. Cyrus created a multi-
state empire where he allowed regional rulers, called the 'satrap' to rule as
his proxy over a certain designated area of his empire called the satrapy. The
basic rule of governance was based upon loyalty and obedience of each satrapy
to the central power, or the king, and compliance with tax laws. Due to the
ethnocultural diversity of the subject nations under the rule of Persia, its
enormous geographic size, and the constant struggle for power by regional
competitors, the creation of a professional army was necessary for both
maintenance of the peace, and also to enforce the authority of the king in
cases of rebellion and foreign threat. Cyrus managed to create a strong land
army, using it to advance in his campaigns in Babylonia, Lydia, and Asia Minor,
which after his death was used by his son Cambyses II, in Egypt against Psamtik
III. Cyrus would die battling a local Iranian insurgency in the empire, before
he could have a chance to develop a naval force. That task however would fall
to Darius the Great, who would officially give Persians their own royal navy to
allow them to engage their enemies on multiple seas of this vast empire, from
the Black sea, and the Aegean Sea, to the Persian Gulf, Ionian Sea, and the
Mediterranean sea. Navy. Since its foundation by Cyrus, the Persian empire had
been primarily a land empire with a strong army, but void of any actual naval
forces. By the fifth century BCE, this was to change, as the empire came across
Greek, and Egyptian forces, each with their own maritime traditions and
capabilities. Darius the Great (Darius I) is to be credited as the first
Achaemenid king to invest in a Persian fleet. Even by then no true "imperial
navy" had existed either in Greece or Egypt. Persia would become the first
empire, under Darius, to inaugurate and deploy the first regular imperial navy.
Despite this achievement, the personnel for the imperial navy would not come
from Iran, but were often Phoenicians (mostly from Sidon), Egyptians, Cypriots,
and Greeks chosen by Darius the Great to operate the empire's combat vessels.
At first the ships were built in Sidon by the Phoenicians; the first Achaemenid
ships measured about 40 meters in length and 6 meters in width, able to
transport up to 300 Persian troops at any one trip. Despite origin of the
technique of the arsenal and ship construction in Sidon, soon other states of
the empire were constructing their own ships each incorporating slight local
preferences. The ships eventually found their way to the Persian Gulf. Persian
naval forces laid the foundation for a strong Persian maritime presence in the
Persian Gulf, that existed until the arrival of the British East India Company,
and the Royal Navy in the mid-nineteenth century CE. Persians were not only
stationed on islands of the Persian Gulf, but also had ships often of 100 to
200 capacity patrolling the empire's various rivers including the Shatt-al-
Arab, Tigris and Nile in the west, as well as the Sind waterway in India. The
Achaemenid high naval command had established major naval bases located along
the Shatt-al-Arab, Bahrain, Oman, and Yemen. The Persian fleet would soon not
only be used for peace-keeping purposes along the Shatt al-Arab but would also
open the door to trade with India via the Persian Gulf. Darius's navy was in
many ways a world power at the time, but it would be Artaxerxes II who in the
summer of 397 B.C.E would build a formidable navy, as part of a rearmament
which would lead to his decisive victory at Knidos in 394 BCE, reestablishing
Achaemenid power in Ionia. Artaxerxes II would also utilize his massive navy to
later on quell a rebellion in Egypt. The construction material of choice was
wood, but some armored Achaemenid ships had metallic blades on the front, often
meant to slice enemy ships using the ship's momentum. Naval ships were also
equipped with hooks on the side to grab enemy ships, or to negotiate their
position. The ships were propelled by sails or manpower. That is, in fact very
smart of the Persians. The ships the Persians created where unique. As far as
maritime engagement, the ships were equipped with two mangonels that would
launch projectiles such as stones, or flammable substances. Xenophon describes
his eye-witness account of a massive military bridge created by joining 37
Persian ships across the Tigris river. The Persians utilized each boat's
buoyancy, in order to support a connected bridge above which supply could be
transferred. Herodotus also gives many accounts of Persians utilizing ships to
build bridges. Years later, a similar boat bridge would be constructed by
Xerxes the Great (Xerxes I), in his invasion of Greece. Although the Persians
failed to capture the Greek city states completely, the tradition of maritime
involvement was carried down by the Persian kings, most notably Artaxerxes II.
Years later, when Alexander invaded Persia and during his advancement into
India, he took a page from the Persian art of war, by having Hephaestion and
Perdiccas construct a similar boat-bridge at the Indus river, in India in
spring of 327 BCE Culture. Herodotus, in his mid-5th century BCE account of
Persian residents of the Pontus, reports that Persian youths, from their fifth
year to their twentieth year, were instructed in three things ‚Äì "to ride a
horse, to draw a bow, and to speak the Truth". King Darius then tells us,
Languages. During the reign of Cyrus and Darius, and as long as the seat of
government was still at Susa in Elam, the language of the chancellory was
Elamite. This is primarily attested in the Persepolis fortification and
treasury tablets that reveal details of the day-to-day functioning of the
empire. In the grand rock-face inscriptions of the kings, the Elamite texts are
always accompanied by Akkadian and Old Persian inscriptions, and it appears
that in these cases, the Elamite texts are translations of the Old Persian
ones. It is then likely that although Elamite was used by the capital
government in Susa, it was not a standardized language of government everywhere
in the empire. The use of Elamite is not attested after 458 BCE Following the
conquest of Mesopotamia, the Aramaic language (as used in that territory) was
adopted as a "vehicle for written communication between the different regions
of the vast empire with its different peoples and languages. The use of a
single official language, which modern scholarship has dubbed Official Aramaic
or Imperial Aramaic, can be assumed to have greatly contributed to the
astonishing success of the Achaemenids in holding their far-flung empire
together for as long as they did." In 1955, Richard Frye questioned the
classification of Imperial Aramaic as an "official language", noting that no
surviving edict expressly and unambiguously accorded that status to any
particular language. Frye reclassifies Imperial Aramaic as the ""lingua
franca"" of the Achaemenid territories, suggesting then that the Achaemenid-era
use of Aramaic was more pervasive than generally thought. Many centuries after
the fall of the empire, Aramaic script and ‚Äì as ideograms ‚Äì Aramaic
vocabulary would survive as the essential characteristics of the Pahlavi
writing system. Although Old Persian also appears on some seals and art
objects, that language is attested primarily in the Achaemenid inscriptions of
Western Iran, suggesting then that Old Persian was the common language of that
region. However, by the reign of Artaxerxes II, the grammar and orthography of
the inscriptions was so "far from perfect" that it has been suggested that the
scribes who composed those texts had already largely forgotten the language,
and had to rely on older inscriptions, which they to a great extent reproduced
verbatim. Customs. Herodotus mentions that the Persians were invited to great
birthday feasts (Herodotus, "Histories" 8), which would be followed by many
desserts, a treat which they reproached the Greeks for omitting from their
meals. He also observed that the Persians drank wine in large quantities and
used it even for counsel, deliberating on important affairs when drunk, and
deciding the next day, when sober, whether to act on the decision or set it
aside. Religion. It was during the Achaemenid period that Zoroastrianism
reached South-Western Iran, where it came to be accepted by the rulers and
through them became a defining element of Persian culture. The religion was not
only accompanied by a formalization of the concepts and divinities of the
traditional Iranian pantheon but also introduced several novel ideas, including
that of free will. Under the patronage of the Achaemenid kings, and by the 5th
century BCE as the "de facto" religion of the state, Zoroastrianism would reach
all corners of the empire. The Bible claims that Cyrus the Great allowed the
Jews to return to their homeland after decades of captivity by the Assyrian and
Babylonian empires. During the reign of Artaxerxes I and Darius II, Herodotus
wrote "Perses have no images of the gods, no temples nor altars, and consider
the use of them a sign of folly. This comes, I think, from their not believing
the gods to have the same nature with men, as the Greeks imagine." He claims
the Persians offer sacrifice to: "the sun and moon, to the earth, to fire, to
water, and to the winds. These are the only gods whose worship has come down to
them from ancient times. At a later period they began the worship of Urania,
which they borrowed from the Arabians and Assyrians. Mylitta is the name by
which the Assyrians know this goddess, to whom the Persians referred as
Anahita." (The original name here is Mithra, which has since been explained to
be a confusion of Anahita with Mithra, understandable since they were commonly
worshipped together in one temple). From the Babylonian scholar-priest Berosus,
who‚Äîalthough writing over seventy years after the reign of Artaxerxes II
Mnemon‚Äîrecords that the emperor had been the first to make cult statues of
divinities and have them placed in temples in many of the major cities of the
empire (Berosus, III.65). Berosus also substantiates Herodotus when he says the
Persians knew of no images of gods until Artaxerxes II erected those images. On
the means of sacrifice, Herodotus adds "they raise no altar, light no fire,
pour no libations." This sentence has been interpreted to identify a critical
(but later) accretion to Zoroastrianism. An altar with a wood-burning fire and
the Yasna service at which libations are poured are all clearly identifiable
with modern Zoroastrianism, but apparently, were practices that had not yet
developed in the mid-5th century. Boyce also assigns that development to the
reign of Artaxerxes II (4th century BCE), as an orthodox response to the
innovation of the shrine cults. Herodotus also observed that "no prayer or
offering can be made without a magus present" but this should not be confused
with what is today understood by the term "magus", that is a "magupat" (modern
Persian: "mobed"), a Zoroastrian priest. Nor does Herodotus' description of the
term as one of the tribes or castes of the Medes necessarily imply that these
"magi" were Medians. They simply were a hereditary priesthood to be found all
over Western Iran and although (originally) not associated with any one
specific religion, they were traditionally responsible for all ritual and
religious services. Although the unequivocal identification of the "magus" with
Zoroastrianism came later (Sassanid era, 3rd‚Äì7th century CE), it is from
Herodotus' "magus" of the mid-5th century that Zoroastrianism was subject to
doctrinal modifications that are today considered to be revocations of the
original teachings of the prophet. Also, many of the ritual practices described
in the Avesta's "Vendidad" (such as exposure of the dead) were already
practiced by the "magu" of Herodotus ' time. Art and architecture. "Achaemenid
architecture" refers to the architectural achievements of the Achaemenid
Persians manifesting in construction of spectacular cities utilized for
governance and inhabitation, temples made for worship and social gatherings
(such as Zoroastrian temples), and mausoleums erected in honor of fallen kings
(such as the burial tomb of Cyrus the Great). The quintessential feature of
Persian architecture was its eclectic nature with elements of Median, Assyrian,
and Asiatic Greek all incorporated, yet maintaining a unique Persian identity
seen in the finished products. "Achaemenid art" refers to the artistic
achievements of the Aachaemenid Persians manifesting in construction of
complicated frieze reliefs, crafting of precious metals (such as the Oxus
Treasure), decoration of palaces, glazed brick masonry, fine craftsmanship
(masonry, carpentry, etc.), and gardening, and out door decoration. It is
critical to understand that although Persians borrowed techniques from all
corners of their empire, it was not simply a combination of styles, but
synthesis of a new unique Persian style. Cyrus the Great in fact had an
extensive ancient Iranian heritage behind him; the rich Achaemenid gold work,
which inscriptions suggest may have been a specialty of the Medes, was for
instance in the tradition of the delicate metalwork found in Iron Age II times
at Hasanlu and still earlier at Marlik. This was imperial art on a scale the
world had not seen before. Materials and artists were drawn from all corners of
the empire, and thus tastes, styles, and motifs became mixed together in an
eclectic art and architecture that in itself mirrored the Persian empire.
Legacy. The Achaemenid Empire left a lasting impression on the heritage and the
cultural identity of Asia and Middle East, as well as influencing the
development and structure of future empires. In fact the Greeks and later on
the Romans copied the best features of the Persian method of governing the
empire, and vicariously adopted them. Georg W. F. Hegel in his work "The
Philosophy of History" introduces the Persian Empire as the "first empire that
passed away" and its people as the "first historical people" in history.
According to his account; The famous American orientalist, Professor Arthur
Upham Pope (1881‚Äì1969) said: "The western world has a vast unpaid debt to the
Persian Civilization!" Achaemenid kings and rulers. Attested. Early in the
reign of Artaxerxes II, in 399 BCE, the Persians lose control over Egypt. They
regained control 57 years later ‚Äì in 342 BCE ‚Äì when Artaxerxes III
conquered Egypt.
