Political history Political history is the narrative and analysis of political
events, ideas, movements, and leaders. It is distinct from, but related to,
other fields of history such as Diplomatic history, social history, economic
history, and military history, as well as constitutional history and public
history. Generally, political history focuses on decisions made by the
leadership of nation-states. Political history studies the organization and
operation of power in large societies. By focusing on the elites in power, on
their impact on society, on popular response, and on the relationships with the
elites in other countries. The field often involves the deconstruction of myths
and received wisdom. The political historian has the constant, and awesome,
responsibility of doing justice to the leadership of the past. According to
Hegel, political History "is an idea of the state with a moral and spiritual
force beyond the material interests of its subjects: it followed that the state
was the main agent of historical change" This contrasts with social history,
which focuses predominantly on the actions and lifestyles of ordinary people,
or people's history, which is historical work from the perspective of common
people. In two decades from 1975 to 1995, the proportion of professors of
history in American universities identifying with social history rose from 31%
to 41%, while the proportion of political historians fell from 40% to 30%. In
the history departments of British universities in 2007, of the 5723 faculty
members, 1644 (29%) identified themselves with social history while political
history came next with 1425 (25%). Political world history. The political
history of the world is the history of the various political entities created
by the Human race throughout their existence on Earth and the way these states
define their borders. The history of political thinking goes back to antiquity.
Political history, and thus the history of political thinking throughout human
existence stretches though up to Medieval period and the Renaissance. In the
Age of Enlightenment, political entities expanded from basic systems of self-
governance and monarchy to the complex democratic and communist systems that
exist of the Industrialied and the Modern Era, in parallel, political systems
have expanded from vaguely defined frontier-type boundaries, to the definite
boundaries existing today. Aspects of political history. The first "scientific"
political history was written by Leopold von Ranke in Germany in the 19th
century. His methodologies profoundly affected the way historians critically
examine sources; see historiography for a more complete analysis of the
methodology of various approaches to history. An important aspect of political
history is the study of ideology as a force for historical change. One author
asserts that "political history as a whole cannot exist without the study of
ideological differences and their implications." Studies of political history
typically centre around a single nation and its political change and
development. Some historians identify the growing trend towards narrow
specialization in political history during recent decades: "while a college
professor in the 1940s sought to identify himself as a "historian", by the
1950s "American historian" was the designation." From the 1970s onwards, new
movements sought to challenge traditional approaches to political history. The
development of social history and women's history shifted the emphasis away
from the study of leaders and national decisions, and towards the role of
ordinary citizens; "...by the 1970s "the new social history" began replacing
the older style. Emphasis shifted to a broader spectrum of American life,
including such topics as the history of urban life, public health, ethnicity,
the media, and poverty." As such, political history is sometimes seen as the
more 'traditional' kind of history, in contrast with the more 'modern'
approaches of other fields of history. Britain. Readman (2009) discusses the
historiography of British political history in the 20th century. It describes
how British political scholarship mostly ignored 20th century history due to
temporal proximity to the recent past, the unavailability of primary sources,
and the potential for bias. The article explores how transitions in scholarship
have allowed for greater interest in 20th century history among scholars, which
include less reliance on archival sources, methodological changes in
historiography, and the flourishing of new forms of history such as oral
history. Germany. In the course of the 1960s, however, some German historians
(notably Hans-Ulrich Wehler and his cohort) began to rebel against this idea,
instead suggesting a "Primacy of Domestic Politics" ("Primat der
Innenpolitik"), in which the insecurities of (in this case German) domestic
policy drove the creation of foreign policy. This led to a considerable body of
work interpreting the domestic policies of various states and the ways this
influenced their conduct of foreign policy. France. The French "Annales School"
had already put an emphasis on the role of geography and economics on history,
and of the importance of broad, slow cycles rather than the constant apparent
movement of the "history of events" of high politics. It downplayed politics
and diplomacy. The most important work of the "Annales" school, Fernand
Braudel's "The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip
II", contains a traditional Rankean diplomatic history of Philip II's
Mediterranean policy, but only as the third and shortest section of a work
largely focusing on the broad cycles of history in the "longue dur√©e" ("long
term"). The "Annales" were broadly influential, leading to a turning away from
political history towards an emphasis on broader trends of economic and
environmental change. Social history. In the 1960s and 1970s, an increasing
emphasis on giving a voice to the voiceless and writing the history of the
underclasses, whether by using the quantitative statistical methods of social
history or the more qualitative assessments of cultural history, also
undermined the centrality of diplomatic history to the historical discipline.
