Protohistory Protohistory refers to a period between prehistory and history,
during which a culture or civilization has not yet developed writing, but other
cultures have already noted its existence in their own writings. For example,
in Europe, the Celts and the Germanic tribes may be considered to have been
protohistoric when they began appearing in Greek and Roman texts. Protohistoric
may also refer to the transition period between the advent of literacy in a
society and the writings of the first historians. The preservation of oral
traditions may complicate matters as these can provide a secondary historical
source for even earlier events. Colonial sites involving a literate group and a
non-literate group are also studied as protohistoric situations. It can also
refer to a period in which fragmentary or external historical documents, not
necessarily including a developed writing system, have been found. For
instance, the Protoâ€“Three Kingdoms of Korea, the Yayoi and the Mississippian
groups recorded by early European explorers are protohistoric. Usage of the
term. In "The Oxford Illustrated History of Prehistoric Europe", an article by
Timothy Taylor says, In the abstract of a later paper on "slavery in the first
millennium Aegean, Carpatho-Balkan and Pontic regions", Taylor, who is
primarily an archaeologist, says, For other examples, see also the writings of
Brian Fagan on the protohistory of North America and the work of Muhammed Abdul
Nayeem on that of the Arabian Peninsula Chronology. As with prehistory,
determining when a culture may be considered prehistoric or protohistoric is
sometimes difficult for the archaeologist. Data vary considerably from culture
to culture, region to region, and even from one system of reckoning dates to
another. Civilizations and peoples. The best known protohistoric civilizations
and ethnic groups are those for whom the term was originally coined: the
barbarian tribes mentioned by European and Asian writers. Many of these peoples
of course also experienced periods of prehistory and history.
