Shepherds' Crusade The Shepherds' Crusade (aka Crusade of the Pastoureaux; )
refers to separate events from the 13th and 14th century. The first took place
in 1251 during the Seventh Crusade; the second occurred in 1320. Shepherds'
Crusade, 1251. In 1248, Louis IX of France went on the Seventh Crusade, but
after the defeat of the crusaders, he was captured near Damietta in Egypt. A
peasant movement arose in northern France to support Louis, led by "the Master
of Hungary", apparently a very old Hungarian monk, who claimed to have been
instructed by the Virgin Mary to lead the shepherds of France to the Holy Land
to rescue Louis. He led up to 60,000 mostly young peasants to Paris, where he
met with Louis IX's mother, the acting regent. The group split up after leaving
the city and created disturbances in places such as Rouen, Tours and Orl√©ans.
In Amiens, and then in Bourges, they also began to attack Jews. The authorities
rounded up and excommunicated the crusaders. However a group led by the Master
resisted the authorities outside Bourges, resulting in the Master being killed
in the ensuing skirmish. Shepherds' Crusade, 1320. A separate movement occurred
in May 1320 in Normandy, when a teenage shepherd claimed to have been visited
by the Holy Spirit, which instructed him to fight the Moors in Spain. First,
they marched to Paris where Philip V refused to meet them. They then marched
south attacking castles, royal officials, priests, lepers but most of all Jews.
In Avignon John XXII, gave orders to stop them and in Spain James II of Aragon
at first prohibited them from entering the kingdom, but when they did enter in
July, James warned all his nobles to make sure the Jews were kept safe. At the
fortress of Montclus over 300 Jews were killed and James' son Alfonso was sent
out to bring them under control with those responsible for the massacre
executed. After this the crusade dispersed. In 1321, King Philip fined those
communities in which Jews had been killed. This led to a second revolt, this
time among the urban population.
