Western Xia The Western Xia Dynasty () or the Tangut Empire, was known to the
Tanguts and the Tibetans as Minyak. The state existed from 1038 to 1227 AD in
what are now the northwestern Chinese provinces of Ningxia, Gansu, eastern
Qinghai, northern Shaanxi, northeastern Xinjiang, southwest Inner Mongolia, and
southernmost Outer Mongolia, measuring about eight hundred thousand square
kilometers. The state suffered from devastating destruction by the Mongols who
founded Yuan Dynasty (1271‚Äì1368), including most of its written records and
architecture. Its founders and history therefore remained controversial until
recent research conducted both in the West and within China. They occupied the
area of important trade route between North China and Central Asia, the Hexi
Corridor. The Western Xia made significant achievements in literature, art,
music, and architecture, which was characterized as "shining and sparkling".
Their extensive stance among the other empires of the Liao, Song, and Jin was
attributable to their effective military organizations that integrated cavalry,
chariots, archery, shields, artillery (cannons carried on the back of camels),
and amphibious troops for combats on land and water. Name. The full title of
the Western Xia as named by their own state is "" reconstructed as /*phiow¬π-
bjij¬≤-lhjij-lhjij¬≤/ which translates as "The Great Xia State of the White and
the Lofty" (ÁôΩÈ´òÂ§ßÂ§èÂúã), or called "mj…®-njaa" or "khj…®-dwuu-lhjij"
(Ëê¨ÁßòÂúã). The region was known to the Tanguts and the Tibetans as Minyak
(ÂΩåËó•). Its reference as "Western Xia" came from the Chinese record of "Xi-
Xia" (Ë•øÂ§è), literally "Western Xia", and thus that name is often used in
sinological literature. It was derived from its location on the western side of
the Yellow River, in contrast to the Liao (916‚Äì1125) and Jin (1115‚Äì1234) on
its east, and the Song Dynasty in the south. The English reference of "Tangut"
comes from the Mongolian name for the country, "Tangghut" (), believed to
reflect the same word as "Dangxiang" (ÂÖöÈ Ö) found in Chinese literature.
Foundations. The founder of the Tangut-Western Xia was the Tuoba Xianbei from
the Tuyuhun Kingdom. After Tuyuhun Kingdom was destroyed by the Tibetans in
670, its famous prince, Tuoba Chici, who controlled the "Dangxiang Qiang"
submitted under the Tang Dynasty and was "bestowed" with the royal name of Li
(Êùé). In the end of the Tang Dynasty, the Tuoba brought troops to suppress the
Huang Chao Rebellion on behalf of the Tang court and took control of the Xia
State, or Xia Zhou, in northern Shaanxi in 881. After the Tang fell in 907, the
Tuoba descendants formally declared resistance against the expanding Northern
Song in 982 and proclaimed independence to establish the Western Xia or Tangut,
in 1038. The foundation of Western Xia goes back to the year 982 under Li
Deming. However, it would not be until 1038 that the Tangut chieftain Li
Yuanhao, Li Deming's son, who also ordered the creation of a Tangut writing
system and the translation of Chinese classics into Tangut, named himself
emperor of Da Xia, and demanded of the Song emperor recognition as an equal.
The Song court accepted the recognition of Li Yuanhao as 'governor', but not
'emperor', a title considered exclusive to the Song emperor. After intense
diplomatic contacts, in 1043 the Tangut state accepted the recognition of the
Song emperor as emperor in exchange for annual gifts, which implied tacit
recognition on the part of the Song of the military power of the Tangut. Early
history. After Jingzong's death (1048), Yizong became the emperor at the age of
two. His mother became the regent and during Yizong's reign, Liao Dynasty
launched an invasion of Western Xia, causing Western Xia to submit to Liao
Dynasty as a vassal state. After Yizong's death, Huizong was put under house
arrest by his mother, and she attacked Song Dynasty. The attack was a failure,
and Huizong took back power from his mother. After Chongzong became emperor,
his grandmother (Huizong's mother) became regent again and launched invasion of
Liao Dynasty and Song Dynasty. Again, both campaigns ended in defeat and
Chongzong took direct control of Western Xia. He ended wars with both Liao and
Song and focused on domestic reform. In 1115, Jurchen Jin Dynasty was set up
and Liao emperor fled to Western Xia in 1123. Chongzong submitted to the Jin
demand of the Liao emperor and Western Xia became a vassal state of Jin. After
Jin Dynasty attacked and took parts of the northern territories from the Song
Dynasty, initiating the Southern Song period, Western Xia also attacked and
took several thousands square miles of land. Immediately following Renzong's
coronation, many natural disasters occurred and Renzong worked to stabilize the
economy. The kingdom developed a script to write its own Tibeto-Burman
language. The Tanguts and the Mongols. After Renzong's death, Emperor Huanzong
of Western Xia came into power and Western Xia's power began to fail. After
Genghis Khan unified the northern grasslands of Mongolia, the Xianbei who
resided near Mt. Yin self proclaimed to be "White Mongols" and joined them.
They received the same treatment as the Mongols and partook in their westward
conquests in Central Asia and Europe. During this period, the Mongol troops led
by Genghis carried out six rounds of attacks against Western Xia over a period
of twenty-two years (1202, 1207, 1209‚Äì10, 1211‚Äì13, 1214‚Äì19, 1225‚Äì26).
In 1206, Xiangzong (Li An-chuan) initiated a coup d'√©tat against Huanzong and
killed him, installing himself as emperor. In 1207 Li An-ch'uan submitted to
the Mongols, and gave his daughter to Genghis Khan in marriage. Xiangzong then
began a decade-long campaign against the Jin Empire, significantly weakening
both empires. Also during Xiangzong's reign, corruption rose to new heights,
and the peasants were in poverty. The Western Xia army was also untrained and
ill-equipped. Xiangzong abdicated after Shenzong started a coup d'√©tat and
seized power, and Xiangzong died in the same year, 1211. The Mongols asked
their allies and tributaries for military aid in the campaign against the
Islamic countries in 1216. Although the Tangut emperor Shenzong was willing,
his court and, in particular, his general A≈°a-gambu, recommended against it.
When Genghis Khan returned from his campaign the new emperor Xianzong pled with
him, but the general A≈°a-gambu challenged Genghis Khan. The emperor Xianzong
died during the fighting and was succeeded by Modi (Li Xian), the last of the
Tangut rulers. Modi sued for peace, which was accepted, but he was then
executed by Tolui, a son of Genghis Khan. (cf. Kwanten 1974). In 1221‚Äì1222
(time of Karma Pakshi) a Karma Kagyu Lama, Tsangpa Tungkhur-wa, was invited to
Minyak, which by this time had become largely Buddhist and Tibetanized. He was
still there when Genghis Khan died in 1227 and he received an edict of approval
from the queen. During the last round of the Mongol attacks, Genghis died in
Western Xia. The official account of the Mongol history attributed his death to
an illness, whereas legends accounted that he died from a wound inflicted in
the battles. After the Western Xia capital was overrun in 1227, the Mongols
devastated its buildings and written records, killed the last emperor and
massacred tens of thousands of civilians‚Äîeffectively bringing the state to an
end. Thereafter, the Western Xia troops were incorporated into the Mongol army
in their subsequent military conquests in central and southern China. Due to
the fierce resistance of the Xia against the Mongol attacks, especially in
causing the death of Genghis, the Tanguts were initially suppressed in the Yuan
Dynasty (1271‚Äì1368). Toward the middle and later phases of the Yuan, they
received equivalent treatment as the ruling Mongols and attained highest
offices in the Central Court. After the Yuan fell, a substantial number of the
Tanguts followed the Mongols into the northern grassland. Other communities
remained in China, in modern Anhui surviving well into the Ming dynasty.
Members of the royal clan emigrated to western Sichuan, northern Tibet, even
possibly northeast India, in some instances becoming local rulers.
