Zhou Dynasty The Zhou Dynasty (1046‚Äì256 BC) ( ) was a Chinese dynasty that
followed the Shang Dynasty and preceded the Qin Dynasty. Although the Zhou
Dynasty lasted longer than any other dynasty in Chinese history, the actual
political and military control of China by the Ji () family lasted only until
771 BC, a period known as the Western Zhou. During the Zhou Dynasty, the use of
iron was introduced to China, though this period of Chinese history produced
what many consider the zenith of Chinese bronze-ware making. The dynasty also
spans the period in which the written script evolved into its modern form with
the use of an archaic clerical script that emerged during the late Warring
States period. History. Foundation. According to Chinese mythology, the Zhou
lineage began when a consort of the legendary Emperor Ku miraculously conceived
Qi (lit. "the Abandoned One") after stepping into a divine footprint. Qi was a
culture hero credited with surviving three abandonments by his mother and with
greatly improving Xia agriculture, to the point where he was granted lordship
over Tai and the ancestral name Ji by his own Xia king and a later posthumous
name (Houji, "Lord of Millet") by the Shang king Tang. He even received
sacrifice as a harvest god. Qi's son Buzhu abandoned his position at court and
either he or his son Ju abandoned agriculture entirely, living a nomadic life
in the manner of their Rong and Di barbarian neighbors. Ju's son Duke Liu,
however, led his people to prosperity by restoring agriculture and settling
them at a place called Bin, which his descendants ruled for generations. Old
Duke Danfu later led the clan from Bin to Zhou, an area in the Wei River valley
of modern-day Qishan County. The duke passed over his two elder sons Taibo and
Zhongyong to favor Jili, a warrior who conquered several Rong tribes as a
vassal of the Shang kings Wu Yi and Wen Ding before being treacherously killed.
Taibo and Zhongyong had supposedly already fled to the Yangtze delta, where
they established the state of Wu among the tribes there. Jili's son King Wen
bribed his way out of imprisonment and moved the Zhou capital to Feng (within
present-day Xi'an). Around 1046 BC, King Wen's son King Wu and his ally Jiang
Ziya led an army of 45,000 men and 300 chariots across the Yellow River and
defeated King Zhou of Shang at the Battle of Muye, marking the beginning of the
Zhou Dynasty. Western Zhou. King Wu maintained the old capital for ceremonial
purposes but constructed a new one for his palace and administration nearby at
Hao. Although Wu's early death left a young and inexperienced heir, the Duke of
Zhou assisted his nephew King Cheng in consolidating royal power. He quelled
rebellious Zhou princes, feudal rulers, and Shang partisans; countered Zhou's
crisis of legitimacy by expounding the doctrine of the Mandate of Heaven while
accommodating important Shang rituals at Chengzhou; and set up the "fengjian"
system to maintain Zhou authority over its greatly-expanded territory. Over
time, this decentralized system became strained as the familial relationships
between the Zhou kings and the regional dynasts thinned over the generations.
Peripheral territories developed local power and prestige on par with that of
the Zhou. When King You demoted and exiled his Jiang queen in favor of the
beautiful but common Bao Si, the disgraced queen's father the Marquis of Shen
joined with Zeng and the Quanrong barbarians to sack Hao in 771 BC. With King
You dead, a conclave of nobles met at Shen and declared the Marquis's grandson
King Ping. The capital was moved eastward to Chengzhou, marking the end of the
"Western Zhou" (, p¬ "Xƒ´ Zh≈çu") and the beginning of the "Eastern Zhou"
dynasty (, p¬ "D≈çng Zh≈çu"). Eastern Zhou. The Eastern Zhou was characterized
by an accelerating collapse of royal authority, although the king's ritual
importance allowed over five more centuries of rule. The Confucian chronicle of
the early years of this process led to its title of the "Spring and Autumn"
Period. The partition of Jin in the mid-5th century BC initiated a second
phase, the "Warring States". In 403 BC, the Zhou court recognized Han, Zhao,
and Wei as fully independent states; in 344 BC, the first Duke Hui of Wei
claimed the royal title of king for himself. A series of states rose to
prominence before each falling in turn, but Zhou was a minor player in these
conflicts. The last Zhou king is traditionally taken to be Nan, who was killed
when Qin captured the capital Chengzhou in 256 BC. A "King Hui" was declared,
but his splinter state was fully removed by 249 BC. Qin's unification of China
concluded in 221 BC with Qin Shihuang's annexation of Qi. The Eastern Zhou,
however, is also remembered as the golden age of Chinese philosophy: the
Hundred Schools of Thought which flourished as rival lords patronized itinerant
"shi" scholars is led by the example of Qi's Jixia Academy. The Nine Schools of
Thought which came to dominate the others were Confucianism (as interpreted by
Mencius and others), Legalism, Taoism, Mohism, the utopian communalist
Agriculturalism, two strains of Diplomatists, the sophistic Logicians, Sun-
tzu's Militarists, and the Naturalists. Although only the first three of these
went on to receive imperial patronage in later dynasties, doctrines from each
influenced the others and Chinese society in sometimes unusual ways. The
Mohists, for instance, found little interest in their praise of meritocracy but
much acceptance for their mastery of siege warfare; much later, however, their
arguments against nepotism were used in favor of establishing the imperial
examination system. Culture and society. Feudalism and the rise of Confucian
bureaucracy. Western writers often describe the Zhou period as "feudal" because
the Zhou's "fƒìngji√ n" (Â∞ÅÂª∫) system invites comparison with medieval rule
in Europe. There were many similarities between the decentralized systems. When
the dynasty was established, the conquered land was divided into hereditary
fiefs (, "zh≈´h√≥u") that eventually became powerful in their own right. The
fiefs or states themselves tended to become feudally subdivided. There were
five peerage ranks below the royal ranks, in descending order with common
English translations: "g≈çng" ÂÖ¨ "duke", "h√≥u" ‰æØ "marquis", "b√≥" ‰ºØ
"count", "z«ê" Â≠ê "viscount", and "n√°n" Áî∑ "baron". At times, a vigorous
duke would take power from his nobles and centralize the state. Centralization
became more necessary as the states began to war among themselves and
decentralization encouraged more war. If a duke took power from his nobles, the
state would have to be administered bureaucratically by appointed officials.
Despite these similarities, there are a number of important differences from
medieval Europe. One obvious difference is that the Zhou ruled from walled
cities rather than castles. Another was China's distinct class system, which
lacked an organized clergy but saw the Shang Zi-clan yeomen become masters of
ritual and ceremony known as "Shi" (Â£´). When a dukedom was centralized these
people would find employment as government officials or officers. These
hereditary classes were similar to Western knights in status and breeding, but
like Western clergy were expected to be something of a scholar instead of a
warrior. Being appointed, they could move from one state to another. Some would
travel from state to state peddling schemes of administrative or military
reform. Those who could not find employment would often end up teaching young
men who aspired to official status. The most famous of these was Confucius, who
taught a system of mutual duty between superiors and inferiors. In contrast,
the Legalists had no time for Confucian virtue and advocated a system of strict
laws and harsh punishments. The wars of the Warring States were finally ended
by the most legalist state of all, Qin. When the Qin Dynasty fell and was
replaced by the Han Dynasty, many Chinese were relieved to return to the more
humane virtues of Confucius. Military. The early Western Zhou supported a
strong army, split into two major units: "the Six Armies of the west" and "the
Eight Armies of Chengzhou". The armies campaigned in the northern Loess
Plateau, modern Ningxia and the Yellow River floodplain. The military prowess
of Zhou peaked during the 19th year of King Zhao's reign, when the six armies
were wiped out along with King Zhao on a campaign around the Han River. Early
Zhou kings were true commanders-in-chief. They were in constant wars with
barbarians on behalf of the fiefs called "guo", meaning "statelet" or
"principality." King Zhao was famous for repeated campaigns in the Yangtze
areas and died in his last action. Later kings' campaigns were less effective.
King Li led 14 armies against barbarians in the south, but failed to achieve
any victory. King Xuan fought the Quanrong nomads in vain. King You was killed
by the Quanrong when Haojing was sacked. Although chariots had been introduced
to China during the Shang Dynasty from Central Asia, the Zhou period saw the
first major use of chariots in battle. Mandate of Heaven. In the Chinese
historical tradition, the Zhou defeated the Shang and oriented the Shang system
of ancestor worship towards a universalized worship, away from the worship of
Shangdi and to that of Tian or "heaven". They legitimized their rule by
invoking the "Mandate of Heaven," the notion that the ruler (the "Son of
Heaven") governed by divine right and that his dethronement would prove that he
had lost the Mandate. Disasters and successful rebellions would thus show that
the ruling family had lost this Mandate. The doctrine explained and justified
the demise of the Xia and Shang dynasties and, at the same time, supported the
legitimacy of present and future rulers. Before conquering Shang, Zhou was a
state in Shaanxi. describes the Zhou state as a "city" which was in contact
with the barbarian peoples of the western regions and more warlike than the
Shang. The Zhou dynasty was founded by the Ji family and operated from four
capitals throughout its history. Sharing the language and culture of the Shang,
the early Zhou rulers, through conquest and colonization, established a large
imperial territory wherein states as far as Shandong acknowledged Zhou
rulership and took part in elite culture. The spread of Zhou bronzes, though,
was concurrent with the continued use of Shang-style pottery in the distant
regions, and these states were the last to recede during the late Western war.
The mandate of heaven was based on rules. The emperor was granted the right to
rule by heaven. Philosophy. During the Zhou Dynasty, the origins of native
Chinese philosophy developed, its initial stages beginning in the 6th century
BC. The greatest Chinese philosophers, those who made the greatest impact on
later generations of Chinese, were Confucius, founder of Confucianism, and
Laozi, founder of Taoism. Other philosophers, theorists, and schools of thought
in this era were Mozi, founder of Mohism; Mencius, a famous Confucian who
expanded upon Confucius' legacy; Shang Yang and Han Fei, responsible for the
development of ancient Chinese Legalism (the core philosophy of the Qin
Dynasty); and Xun Zi, who was arguably the center of ancient Chinese
intellectual life during his time, even more so than iconic intellectual
figures such as Mencius. Li. Established during the Western period, the "Li" )
ritual system encoded an understanding of manners as an expression of the
social hierarchy, ethics, and regulation concerning material life; the
corresponding social practices became idealized within Confucian ideology.
Agriculture. Agriculture in the Zhou Dynasty was very intensive and, in many
cases, directed by the government. All farming lands were owned by nobles, who
then gave their land to their serfs, a situation similar to European feudalism.
For example, a piece of land was divided into nine squares in the well-field
system, with the grain from the middle square taken by the government and that
of surrounding squares kept by individual farmers. This way, the government was
able to store surplus food and distribute it in times of famine or bad harvest.
Some important manufacturing sectors during this period included bronze
smelting, which was integral to making weapons and farming tools. Again, these
industries were dominated by the nobility who directed the production of such
materials. China's first projects of hydraulic engineering were initiated
during the Zhou Dynasty, ultimately as a means to aid agricultural irrigation.
The chancellor of Wei, Sunshu Ao, who served King Zhuang of Chu, dammed a river
to create an enormous irrigation reservoir in modern-day northern Anhui
province. For this, Sunshu is credited as China's first hydraulic engineer. The
later Wei statesman Ximen Bao, who served Marquis Wen of Wei (445-396 BC), was
the first hydraulic engineer of China to have created a large irrigation canal
system. As the main focus of his grandiose project, his canal work eventually
diverted the waters of the entire Zhang River to a spot further up the Yellow
River. Kings. The rulers of the Zhou dynasty were titled "Wang" () like the
Shang rulers before them. The position is normally translated into English as
"king", although sometimes the later title of "emperor" is also used. In
addition to these rulers, King Wu's immediate ancestors Danfu, Jili, and Wen
are also referred to as "Kings of Zhou", despite having been nominal vassals of
the Shang kings under the titles "Duke" () or "Count of the West" (). NB: Dates
in Chinese history before the first year of the Gonghe Regency in 841 BC are
contentious and vary by source. Those below are those published by the PRC's
official Xia‚ÄìShang‚ÄìZhou Chronology Project. Nobles of the Ji family
proclaimed Duke Hui of Eastern Zhou as King Nan's successor after their
capital, Chengzhou, fell to Qin forces in 256 BC. Ji Zhao, a son of King Nan
led a resistance against Qin for five years. The dukedom fell in 249 BC. The
remaining Ji family ruled Yan and Wei until 209 BC. Zhou in astronomy. Zhou is
represented by two stars, Eta Capricorni ( ', "the First Star of Zhou") and 21
Capricorni ( ', "the Second Star of Zhou"), in "Twelve States" asterism. Zhou
is also represented by the star Beta Serpentis in asterism "Right Wall",
Heavenly Market enclosure (see Chinese constellation).
