1965 Yerevan demonstrations The 1965 Yerevan demonstrations were a 24 hour
protest in Yerevan, Armenian SSR on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the
Armenian Genocide. It is said that this event constitutes the first step in the
struggle for the recognition of the Armenian Genocide of 1915. On April 24,
1965, for the first time for any such demonstration in the entire Soviet Union,
from 30,000 to 400,000 protesters held a 24-hour demonstration in front of the
Opera House on the 50th anniversary of the commencement of the Armenian
Genocide, and demanded that the Soviet Union government officially recognize
the Armenian Genocide committed by the Young Turks in the Ottoman Empire, and
build a memorial in Armenia's capital city of Yerevan to perpetuate the memory
of the victims of the Armenian Genocide. The posters said "Just solution to the
Armenian question" and other patriotic/nationalistic slogans concerning Western
Armenia, Karabakh and Nakhichevan. To the shouts of "our land, our lands" the
major demonstration marked the first public awakening of the Armenian
consciousness in Soviet Armenia. The Kremlin taking into account the demands of
the demonstraters, commissioned a memorial for the genocide. The memorial, on
Tsitsernakaberd hill, was completed in 1967. Following the example of this
demonstration, similar protests were made throughout the world, in whichever
country the Armenian Diaspora exists. Since the day of the protests, Armenians
(and other Soviets as well) to this day visit the memorial and make protests
around the world to gain acceptance of the Armenian Genocide by Turkey.
