2007 Abkhazia plane downing incident The 2007 Georgia plane downing incident
refers to the possible downing, by Georgia's anti-aircraft system, of a
military plane that violated Georgia's air space on August 21, 2007. While it
is still not confirmed by Georgia whether the plane was downed, Abkhazia's
break-away government confirmed that a plane went down, but denies that it was
shot down. Reactions and views. Georgia. On the official website of the
Georgia's Foreign Ministry a statement was published that on August 21 a
fighter jet flying from Russia twice violated Georgian airspace in Georgia's
breakaway Abkhazia region. It further reported that Georgian anti-aircraft
systems tracked the incursions and that an official note of protest demanding
an explanation had been sent to Russia's Foreign Ministry. According to Georgia
the planes were flying at a speed of between 450 and 490 km/h (about 280 to
300Â mph). While at first it seemed that a second similar incident happened on
August 22, it later appeared to be the same incident as that of August 21. A
senior Georgian government official stated on 24 August that Georgian forces
had fired at the allegedly Russian aircraft. He could not confirm whether the
plane was shot down, but added that a nearby section of forest, in Abkhazia's
Kodori Gorge (Upper Abkhazia) was on fire, and Georgian Interior Ministry
spokesman Shota Utiashvili said residents reported hearing "an explosion" after
Georgian forces fired on the plane. Investigators have been dispatched to
examine whether the plane was downed. Georgian officials said that the possible
downing was not reported earlier because they were still checking information.
On August 26, the Georgian Foreign Ministryâ€™s website published a statement
saying that from August 20â€“22, the "continuous violation of Georgian airspace
was observed by the radars of the Defense Ministry and eyewitnesses" in Upper
Abkhazia. Utiashvili explained that "these planes entered from, and returned
to, Russia, therefore we think they were Russian planes. This is why we want
Russia to take part in the investigation." Georgian Deputy Foreign Minister
Georgy Mandzhgaladze stated earlier that Georgia was close to participating in
a NATO program that would integrate Georgia's radar system into that of NATO.
This would give the alliance more information about Georgia's airspace and
would help determine the truth if similar incidents would occur. Russia. The
Russian Ministry of Defence denied the accusation and General Yuri Baluyevsky
dismissed Georgia's claim of Russian planes violating its airspace as
"hallucinations" because "warplanes do not fly at such speed. Even helicopters
fly at only slightly lower speeds." Russia also suggested that Georgian leaders
fabricated the incidents to derail planned consultations about South Ossetia.
On August 26, the Russian Ministry of Defence strongly denied that Russian jets
violated Georgian territory, referring to Georgia's accusation that Russian
jets violated Georgia's air space continuously during August 20â€“22. Aleksandr
Drobyshevsky said that "All our jets were at the airdromes at the time when the
ostensible intrusion into Georgian airspace took place,â€œ as saying. He added
that Air Force jets "didn't make any flights in the area." Abkhazia. The de
facto foreign minister of Abkhazia, Sergei Shamba, confirmed on August 26 that
an unidentified plane went down over its territory this week and said that he
believed it to be a Georgian plane or perhaps even a US spy plane. He further
added the plane "has in the past repeatedly violated our airspace. It went down
by itself, no one downed it." He said the plane came from the Black Sea and
went down in the mountains of Upper Abkhazia.
