2007 Georgia helicopter incident The 2007 Georgia helicopter incident refers to
the accusation by Georgia that three Russian helicopters fired on March 11,
2007 on the Kodori Gorge, located in the only part of Abkhazia, a break-away
autonomous republic in north-western Georgia, that at the time was still under
Georgia's control. and the government headquarters of the Georgian-backed
Abkhaz government-in-exile. Russia denied any attacks and said all its aircraft
near the area were grounded over the weekend. Views. Georgia. Georgian
President Mikheil Saakashvili held an emergency meeting after the alleged
occurrence/incident and told the Security Council that the incident created a
grave situation and constituted "a very dangerous, serious and far-reaching
provocation" but he stopped short of pointing the finger at Russia directly. He
said that he didn't "want to make accusations against one particular side. The
foreign minister has received instructions to contact his Russian counterpart
and firmly demand that Russia react to this situation." On March 14, Nikoloz
Rurua, the then deputy chairman of the Georgian parliament's Committee for
Defense and Security, did point the finger at Russia as he said that the
helicopters came from Russian territory. "From the Russian side, it is
impossible for helicopters to find a passage to fly through because of the high
mountains. Mount Elbrus is over 5,000 meters high. Helicopters cannot fly over
the Caucasus mountain range for technical reasons," Yevnevich said. Russian
Foreign Ministry spokesman Mikhail Kamynin added that Russia was investigating
the circumstances of the shooting, but noted that the air force said it did not
conduct flights in the area at the time. Abkhazia. Abkhaziaâ€™s separatist
leader Sergei Bagapsh denied any incident. United Nations. A quadripartite
Joint Fact-Finding Group (JFFG) was convened to investigate the incident. The
JFFG, headed by the UN Observer Mission in Georgia, also involved
representatives of Russian peacekeepers, and both the Georgian and Abkhaz
sides. The interim report was released on April 2, 2007, followed by a
supplementary report on June 13. The report was inconclusive, but it confirmed
that "helicopters used multiple approaches from the north" to reach the upper
Kodori Gorge. It also ruled out the possibility of Georgia's involvement in the
incident. Aftermath. Georgia accused Russia of a similar incident in August
2007 when a missile was allegedly fired upon Georgian soil, which was denied by
Russia. Georgia pressed the UN Security Council to look into both the
helicopter and the missile incident.
