A Quaker Action Group A Quaker Action Group was founded in Philadelphia during
the summer of 1966 to "apply nonviolent direct action as a witness against the
war in Vietnam". Founding member Lawrence Scott was a Quaker and radical
pacifist who had worked for the American Friends Service Committee in the
1950s, but resigned in protest at what he saw as the AFSC's preference for
words over action. AQAG, which was based in the peace committees of the
Religious Society of Friends' New York and Philadelphia Yearly meetings, aimed
to renew the Society of Friends commitment to its historic peace testimony. In
1966, AQAG attempted to mail relief packages to North Vietnam, only to have the
US Postal Service refuse the delivery. When they collected money for the North
and South Vietnamese Red Cross Societies, the Treasury seized the donated
funds. In March 1967, members of AQAG sailed to North Vietnam in the yacht
"Phoenix", carrying medical supplies for North Vietnamese wounded by American
bombing. The protest generated wide media coverage. In the early seventies,
AQAG, having abandoned its goal of transforming the Society of Friends, evolved
into the Movement for a New Society, a self-styled "transformational network"
which would play key role in the anti-nuclear movement of the 1970s. Other
Quaker Action Groups. Following the pattern of AQAG, several Quaker action
groups were formed in the UK in the late 1960s, most notably in Manchester and
London. These groups focused mainly on pacifist campaigns, community living,
and local projects such as providing food and shelter for homeless people.
