A Scientific Support for Darwinism A Scientific Support for Darwinism ("And For
Public Schools Not To Teach "Intelligent Design" As Science") was a four day,
word-of-mouth petition of scientists in support of evolution. Inspired by
Project Steve, it was initiated in 2005 by archaeologist R. Joe Brandon to
produce a public response to the Discovery Institute's 2001 petition "A
Scientific Dissent From Darwinism". The Discovery Institute's petition was
publicized in 2005 by media coverage of the Discovery Institute's efforts to
introduce "intelligent design" in science classrooms and the opposition to
those efforts in the Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District case. Brandon
noticed that only about 80 of those appearing on the "Dissent" petition had
expertise in an area relevant to evolution. Therefore, Brandon decided to
create a petition of his own of scientists supporting evolution. The petition
was hosted at ShovelBums.org, but has since been removed from the site. A total
of 7,733 scientists signed a statement affirming their support for evolution
over a 4 day period. Results. In four days in the fall of 2005, starting on
September 28, 2005 and ending at 4:09 pm Eastern Time, October 1, 2005, the
petition supporting "Darwinism" gathered 7,733 verified signatures from
concerned scientists. Of these, 6,965 were US residents and 4,066 had PhDs. The
"Four Day Petition" was carried out with no outside funding or assistance of
any professional society. The effort was carried out by e-mail and word-of-
mouth. Among the signatories were 21 U.S. National Academy of Science members,
nine MacArthur Fellowship awardees, and a Nobel laureate. According to
Brandon's analysis, of those who signed his petition, there were Therefore,
about 68 percent of those signing the Brandon petition work in biology-related
fields (using the first four categories from the list above). This "Scientific
Support" petition collected signatures at a rapid pace. The responses to the
Brandon petition arrived at a rate 697,000% faster than the signatures
collected on the Discovery Institute Darwin Dissent petition. History.
Brandon's original goal was to get 400 petition signatures in four hours.
However, Brandon found he was 75 signatures short after four hours, and so he
decided to extend his collection period to four days. The emails became more
frequent, and at one point, petition responses were arriving every 3.5 seconds.
However, the 325 signatures collected in the first four hours can be compared
to the Discovery Institute's gathering of 400 signatures of self-identified
scientists, most in irrelevant fields, in four years. In the week after the
close of the four day period, another several thousand signatures arrived, but
were not included in the official tally. One signatory, Dr. Steve Brill of
Rutgers University, stated, ""To be called a scientific theory, Intelligent
Design must be at the very least, disprovable. Since there is no way for
Intelligent Design to be disproved, it fails the simplest test of scientific
theory."" In a press release on October 20, 2005 announcing the results of the
"Four Day Petition", Brandon drew attention to the remarks of Discovery
Institute Senior Fellow Michael Behe's faculty colleagues in the biological
sciences at Lehigh University. Twenty of Behe's peers remarked collectively
that Another signatory, biologist Mark Siddall of the American Museum of
Natural History stated, ""This is not a fight about what the nature of science
is. Scientists have already determined that. It's a fight about what our
daughters and sons will be taught is the nature of science."" Siddall, added,
""R. Joe's efforts elicited an overwhelming response from the scientific
communityâ€”one that cut across lines of faith as deeply as it did across
fields of scientific study."" Siddall also assisted Brandon in checking that
the IP addresses of the respondents corresponded to the institutions they
claimed to be affiliated with. Brandon's original plan was to compile the
signatures that he obtained and pass them on to Judge John E. Jones III who was
handling the Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District case, as well as announce
the results in a press release. The petition was not completed sufficiently
early to submit it as part of an "amicus curae" brief for the Dover case.
However, if the case was to go to the US Supreme Court, the petition could have
been submitted as an "amicus" brief at that time. R. Joe Brandon emphasized
that this "Four Day Petition" did not mean that scientific issues are settled
by majority vote. What Brandon maintains is that this is an indication of the
level of scientific consensus that accepts evolution as a viable established
scientific theory that has passed a large number of hurdles and is supported by
an immense amount of evidence.
