Ableism Ableism () is a form of discrimination or social prejudice against
people with disabilities. It is known by many names, including disability
discrimination, physicalism, handicapism, and disability oppression. It is also
sometimes known as disablism, although there is some dispute as to whether
ableism and disablism are synonymous, and some people within disability rights
circles find the latter term's use inaccurate. Discrimination faced by those
who have or are perceived to have a mental disorder is sometimes called
mentalism rather than ableism. Definition. Similar to many of the assumptions
underlying the medical model of disability amongst many clinicians, the
"ableist" societal world-view is that the able-bodied are the norm in society,
and that people who have disabilities must either strive to become that norm or
should keep their distance from able-bodied people. A disability is thus,
inherently, a "bad" thing that must be overcome. The ableist worldview holds
that disability is an error, a mistake, or a failing, rather than a simple
consequence of human diversity, akin to race, ethnicity, sexual orientation or
gender. Campbell draws a distinction between disablism and ableism. Disablism,
she notes, has been the traditional focus of study within the field of
disability studies. Disablism promotes the unequal treatment of the
(physically) disabled versus the able-bodied. It marks the disabled as the
Other, and works from the perspective of the able-bodied. A network of beliefs,
processes and practices that produces a particular kind of self and body (the
corporeal standard) that is projected as the perfect, species-typical, and
therefore essential and fully human. Disability is then cast as a diminished
state of being human. Other definitions of ableism include those of Chouinard,
who defines it as "ideas, practices, institutions, and social relations that
presume able-bodiedness, and by so doing, construct persons with disabilities
as marginalized [â€¦] and largely invisible 'others'" and Amundson and Taira,
who define it as "a doctrine that falsely treats impairments as inherently and
naturally horrible and blames the impairments themselves for the problems
experienced by the people who have them". Harpur argues that the term ableism
is a powerful label that has the capacity to ameliorate the use of negative
stereotypes and facilitate cultural change by focusing attention on the
discriminator rather than on the victim or impairment. Laws in the United
States defending people with disabilities. In the US, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
(ADA) enacted into law certain civil penalties for failing to make public
places comply with access codes known as the ADA Access Guidelines (ADAAG);
this law also helped expand the use of certain adaptive devices, such as TTYs
(phone systems for the hearing/speech impaired), some computer-related hardware
and software, and wheelchair ramps or lifts on public transportation and
private automobiles. In the UK, meanwhile, the 1995 Disability Discrimination
Act and Disability Discrimination Act 2005 and the Equality Act 2010 attempt
the same. However, none of these laws requires all buildings constructed before
the date of the Act to be modified to fit the physical directives of the Act.
Instead, these directives are applied to three general categories of buildings:
existing government administration buildings and structures regardless of age;
all newly-constructed buildings and structures; and significantly renovated
and/or refurbished buildings and structures. California. In addition to the
federal protections provided by the ADA, California's Fair Employment and
Housing Act (FEHA) provides additional protections to California employees.
Notably, FEHA applies to employers with 5 or more employees and offers more
extensive protection than the ADA.
