Supermajority A supermajority or a qualified majority is a requirement for a
proposal to gain a specified greater level of support than a 50% simple
majority. In some jurisdictions, for example, parliamentary procedure requires
that any action that may alter the rights of a minority has a supermajority
requirement (such as a two-thirds majority). Changes to constitutions,
especially those with entrenched clauses, commonly require supermajority
support in a legislature. A supermajority is absolute if the required
percentage or fraction is based on the entire membership rather than on those
present and voting. Fractional supermajorities. Three-fifths majority. In the
United States Senate, a three-fifths (60%) majority is required to bring out a
vote of cloture, to end a filibuster. In Rhode Island, USA a three-fifths
majority of the Rhode Island General Assembly is required to overturn a veto.
In New York, a three-fifths majority is required to pass most tax increases.
Two-thirds majority. A two-thirds majority is a potentially ambiguous
supermajoritarian requirement in some elections, especially if minority rights
can be changed (e.g., constitutional amendments). There are two kinds of two-
thirds majority: the simple or the absolute. An unqualified or "simple" two-
thirds majority requires that the number of votes in favour must be at least
twice the number of votes against. Abstaining votes or neutral votes are not
considered in a simple two-thirds majority. An "absolute" two-thirds majority
requires that at least two-thirds of the entire membership of a body vote in
favor. In parliamentary procedure where a two-thirds majority is required,
rather than speaking of a two-thirds majority the unambiguous phrases such as
"two-thirds of those present and voting", "two-thirds of those present" (which
has the effect of counting abstentions as votes against the proposal), or "two-
thirds of the entire membership" ("two-thirds of those members duly elected and
sworn" in American politics) are used. The US Mason's Manual notes, "A
deliberative body cannot by its own act or rule require a two-thirds vote to
take any action where the constitution or controlling authority requires only a
majority vote. To require a two-thirds vote, for example, to take any action
would be to give to any number more than one-third of the members the power to
defeat the action and amount to a delegation of the powers of the body to a
minority." Majority of the entire membership. An absolute majority or majority
of the entire membership is a voting basis that requires that more than half of
"all" the members of a body (including those absent and those present but not
voting) to vote in favour of a proposition in order for it to be passed. In
practical terms, it may mean that abstention from voting is equivalent to a
"no" vote. It may be contrasted with a simple majority which only requires a
majority of those actually voting to approve a proposition for it to be
enacted. Requirements to reach an absolute majority is a common feature of
voting in the European Parliament (EP) where under the ordinary legislative
procedure the EP is required to act by an absolute majority if it is to either
to amend or reject proposed legislation. By way of illustration, in February
2007 the Italian Government fell after it "won" a vote in the Italian Senate by
158 votes to 136 (with 24 abstentions). The government needed an absolute
majority in the 318 member house but fell two votes short of the required 160
when two of its own supporters abstained. Majority of the fixed membership. A
majority of the fixed membership is a supermajority that is based on the total
number of the established fixed membership of the deliberative assembly. It is
used only when a specific number of seats or memberships is established in the
rules governing the organization, e.g. a board of seven members. This majority
of the fixed members is set at any number greater than one-half of the total
possible memberships or seats. For example, on an 8-member board, the majority
of the fixed membership is 5 or more. Most private organizations do not use
this standard. The popular parliamentary manual, Robert's Rules of Order, does
not require it for any action. It is sometimes the standard set to adopt some
or all actions in state and local government legislative bodies in the United
States. It is possible for organizations that use majority of the fixed
membership to be caught in a stalemate if at least half the membership consists
of vacancies, making it impossible to perform any actions until those vacancies
are filled. However, the United Nations Security Council does require a
supermajority of the fixed membership on substantive matters (procedural
matters require a simple majority of those present and voting). According to
Article 27 of the United Nations Charter, at least nine of the Security
Council's 15 members (i.e., a three-fifths supermajority) must vote in favor of
a draft resolution in order to achieve passage. Specifying the fixed membership
has the effect of making abstentions count as votes againstâ€”absences are not
normal but would be treated the same way. This is useful for the five permanent
members of the Council (the United States, the Russian Federation, the People's
Republic of China, the United Kingdom, and France) because a vote against from
any one of them constitutes a veto, which cannot be overridden. Permanent
members who do not support a measure, but are unwilling to be seen to block it
against the wishes of the majority of the Council, tend to abstain; abstentions
by veto powers are generally seen by close observers of the UN as the
equivalent of not vetoing votes against and have the same impact on the
decision of the Security Council. Around the world. The European Union Council
of Ministers uses a qualified majority system for its decision-making to
balance the interests of small and large member states. The Indian Constitution
requires a supermajority of two-thirds of members present and voting in both
houses of Indian Parliament, subject to at least a simple majority of
Parliament members voting, to amend the constitution. The amendment needs
approval by the President. In addition, in matters affecting the states, one
half of the affected states need to approve the amendment. The Clarity Act in
Canada gives the Parliament of Canada the power to decide if a referendum
relating to provincial secession has obtained a "clear majority", implying that
some sort of supermajority is needed. If it is determined it has not obtained a
supermajority, the results of the referendum will be dismissed and the province
cannot declare independence legally. Referendums on the Republic of China on
Taiwan require a majority of all registered voters (not merely those voting)
for passage. According to the Danish Constitution, the Danish Parliament may
delegate specific parts of the country's sovereignty to international
authorities, provided that five-sixths of its members approve of the bill. In
the Northern Ireland Assembly certain resolutions must receive "cross community
support", or the support of a minimum number of MLAs from both main communities
United States. The Constitution of the United States requires supermajorities
in order for certain significant actions to occur. Amendments to the
Constitution may be proposed in one of two ways: a two-thirds supermajority
votes of each house of Congress or a constitutional convention called by two
thirds (currently 34) of the states. Once proposed, the amendment must be
ratified by three quarters (currently 38) of the states. Many state
constitutions allow or require constitutional amendments to be proposed by
supermajorities of the state legislature; these amendments must usually be
approved by the voters at one or more subsequent elections. Michigan, for
instance, allows the Legislature to propose an amendment to the Michigan
Constitution; it must then be ratified by the voters at the next general
election (unless a special election is called).[http://www.legislature.mi.gov/
(S(p22jjt45odksm455blth42nj))/mileg.aspx?page=getObject&objectName=mcl-Article-
XII-1] Congress may pass bills by simple majority votes. If the president
vetoes a bill, Congress may override the veto by a two-thirds supermajority of
both houses. A treaty may be ratified by a two-thirds supermajority of the
Senate; this last happened in 2010 when the Senate voted 71-26 to ratify the
New START Treaty with Russia. Section 4 of the 25th Amendment gives Congress a
role to play in the event of a presidential disability. If the vice president
and a majority of the president's cabinet declares that the president is unable
to serve in that role, the vice president becomes acting president. Within 21
days of such a declaration (or, if Congress is in recess when a president is
disabled, 21 days after Congress reconvenes), Congress must vote by two-thirds
supermajorities to continue the disability declaration; otherwise, such
declaration expires after 21 days and the president resumes his or her role.
While Section 3 of this amendment (in which the president declares himself or
herself disabled) has been invoked three times, Section 4 has yet to be
invoked. The House may, by a simple majority vote, impeach a federal official
(such as the president, vice president, or a federal judge). Removal from
office requires a two-thirds supermajority of the Senate. In 1842, the House
failed to impeach president John Tyler. In 1868, the Senate fell one vote short
of removing president Andrew Johnson following his impeachment. In 1999,
efforts to remove Bill Clinton following his impeachment in 1998 fell just
short of a simple majority, and 17 votes short of the two-thirds supermajority.
The impeachment procedure was last used in 2010, when Judge Thomas Porteous was
removed from office. Each chamber may expel one of its own members by a two-
thirds supermajority vote; this last happened when the House expelled James
Traficant in 2002. Theoretically, a two-thirds supermajority in the Senate is
67 out of 100 senators, while a two-thirds supermajority in the House is 290
out of 435 representatives. However, since few votes take place with every seat
in the House filled and representative participating, it does not often require
67 senators or 290 representatives to achieve this supermajority. Apart from
these constitutional requirements, a Senate rule requires a supermajority of
three fifths to move to a vote through a cloture motion, which closes debate on
a bill or nomination, thus ending a filibuster by a minority of members. In
current practice, the mere threat of a filibuster prevents passing almost any
measure that has less than three-fifths agreement in the Senate, 60 of the 100
senators if every seat is filled and voting.
