Activism at Ohio Wesleyan University Activism has played an important role in
the history of Ohio Wesleyan University; The founders of Ohio Wesleyan
University expressed a hope that the university "is forever to be conducted on
the most liberal principles." OWU has espoused activism in its academic
philosophy. Alumni of the school have prominently engaged in controversial
issues of their times on three central issues â€” the scope of justice;
distributive justice based on race, gender, and income; and institutions
related to preserving social structures. Early history. On August 5, 1846, the
university's first president, Edward Thomson, delivered his inaugural address.
He maintained that the college was a product of the liberality of the people of
Delaware, and it was fortunate that Ohio Wesleyan was founded in a community
divided in religious and political opinions; Thomson believed that the friction
of a mixed society prevented dogmatism and developed energy. The spirit of the
college, he said, is the spirit of liberty. Thomson stated in the early days of
Wesleyan that a college education should be a barrier to avarice by furnishing
"the understanding, the taste, and the perspective that directs us to life's
higher purposes ... It would serve political tranquillity, both by accrediting
the truly apt candidates for office and by creating citizenry astutely able to
assert its liberty against any government's tendency to encroach". Thomson was
frequently vocal in the national political debates of his time, notably slavery
and the expansion of the United States. In 1857 he denounced the argument that
southern Christians The Underground Railroad, used as a "transportation system"
for anti-slavery activists to free black slaves fleeing from the South to
Canada, was extensively utilized in Ohio. In the 19th century, Ohio had one of
the most active Underground Railroad operations in the nation. One of the
state's most frequently used corridors on the Underground Railroad passed
through Delaware County near Ohio Wesleyan University, now marked along the
bikeway trail at U.S. Routes 23 and 36 in the city of Delaware. Elizabeth
Boynton Harbert (class of 1864), a women's suffrage activist, published several
books on women's issues and suffrage, "Out of Her Sphere" and "The Woman's
Kingdom", and was the chief editor of a women's suffrage newspaper, "The New
Era", in 1885 Despite women's suffrage being a controversial issue, Harbert
became an associate president of the World's Unity League, vice-president of
the Woman's Civic League of Pasadena, vice-president of the Southern California
Woman's Press Association, and president of the National Household Economic
Association. Early 20th century: the effect of wars and politics. Branch
Rickey, a 1903 graduate of Ohio Wesleyan, is regarded as a significant figure
in the history of professional baseball for breaking the sport's racial
barrier. An racial incident early in Rickey's life when he was as a baseball
coach for Ohio Wesleyan in 1910 would play an important role in his decision
thirty years later. Rickey's team visited a hotel in South Bend, Indiana, where
the hotel manager refused to provide a room for Rickey's black baseball player
Charley Thomas. Rickey eventually convinced the manager to allow him to share
his own room with Thomas. Rickey recalled Thomas rubbing at his hands, ashamed
of the color of his skin and vowed, "Charley, the day will come when they won't
have to be white." In 1943 Rickey became president and general manager of the
Brooklyn Dodgers. Beginning with the 1946 signing of African American player
Jackie Robinson for the Dodgers, Rickey became renowned for his role in the
racial integration of the game. Rickey's feelings on integration were a primary
motivating factor in his decision. In the war years of 1917-1919, the break
between the United States and Germany struck a military tone on campus.
Individual students were volunteering in the Marines, in the Canadian Forces,
and other forms of service. As America entered World War I the U.S. War
Department inaugurated the Students' Army Training Corps, a program designed to
use existing colleges and universities as training facilities for new military
personnel. On the morning of October 1, 1918, about 150,000 college boys on US
campuses transformed into student soldiers. This was the induction into the
Students' Army Training Corps. In Delaware, on campus, approximately 400
students were given the oath of allegiance. The men received the regular army
training and academic instruction prescribed by the Committee on Education and
Special Training of the War Department. The mode of student activities changed:
campus traditions were put aside, and athletic events were cancelled throughout
the fall semester of 1918. Campus climate in the swinging sixties. In 1966,
students established an Upward Bound program, funded by the Economic
Opportunity Act of 1964, to help prepare students from lower-income and poverty
areas for college. The Arts Castle, the Early Childhood Center, the Big Pal/
Little Pal Program, the Andrews House, the Office of Community Service, and the
International Ambassador High School Program are among the many programs
founded since the 1970s to provide services to the larger community in
Delaware. Elden Smith, Wesleyan's 11th president, appointed a commission in
1968 to study student life and to refine and further edit Wesleyan's previously
too-broad Statement of Aims. The commission's report recommended four criteria
that OWU's educators should foster: perception, critical judgement, enjoyment,
and active responsibility for the problems of society. On "active
responsibility for the problems of society", the report stated, "A socially
concerned individual who had no capacity for enjoyment, who exercised glib and
trite rather than critical judgement, and who had no perception of reality,
would be a public menace. Perhaps this is the meaning of 'do-gooder'. On the
other hand, the absence of active responsibility for social problems might
degenerate into obsession with self, and that perception might become
dilettantism." In 1969, the Commission on Student Life drafted a new form of
student life. It formed the Wesleyan Council of Student Affairs (WCSA) with the
right to decide basic policies on matters related to student life. The group
was controversial from the start: more than two hundred students held a sit-in
at the student union to gain faculty approval for issues-oriented
representation. WCSA became involved in the first major controversy on the
Wesleyan campus in the 1960s: its representatives called for the elimination of
academic credit and existence for ROTC and demanded access to the University's
budget and general financial statements. Vietnam war and Wenzlau controversy.
The escalation of the Vietnam War in the early 1960s had a significant impact
on Ohio Wesleyan students. A small minority had been concerned with the war for
several years, but the bombing of North Vietnam and the Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution in August 1964 raised campus-wide awareness almost overnight. The
Vietnam War, so distant, became a huge presence on campus, affected ideas of
community, student power, and free speech, and influenced daily decisions like
class choices and social interactions. The first stirrings of protest against
the war occurred in late 1964. In December, the Wesleyan Council of Student
Affairs voted to send a letter to President Lyndon B. Johnson opposing the
expansion of the war and advocating withdrawal. Opposing expansion was a fairly
moderate position, but calling for withdrawal was much more radical. Wesleyan
was the first college campus in the country to demonstrate against President
Richard Nixon's decision to invade Cambodia on April 30, 1970. Following the
demonstration, two hundred students occupied the Air Force ROTC building on
campus to protest both the war and the awarding of academic credit for ROTC
participation. The ROTC was seen as an extension of the "Pentagon's war
machine." President Wenzlau, then the president of OWU, attempted to disperse
the protesters but was shouted down. The students demanded that the school hold
a campus referendum on the issue of ROTC campus disbandment and that the vote
be binding on university policy. Wenzlau called for an emergency faculty
meeting on May 1, 1970. The faculty body, surrounded by more than 300 students,
decided to hold a faculty meeting later in the month when the entire faculty
body would be present. The faculty meeting authorized sending a telegram to
Nixon demanding an immediate unilateral cease-fire for all US troops in
Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam. The student referendum was held on May 22, 1970.
The student body was split on the issue of ROTC, while 67 percent voted to
censure the Vietnam War. Involvement in college affairs in the 1970s. OWU
students continued to demand more say in university affairs, in addition to
making a strong stand on national issues. The Wesleyan Council for Student
Affairs and the administration battled over appropriate wording for alcohol and
visitation policies. Several hundred students staged a "drink-in" at the MUB
(the student union) in 1971. In the spring of 1971, students set up a tent
community called "The People's Park" in front of Sturges Hall to protest
housing policies. Students became involved in decisions on several faculty
tenure denials, the academic schedule, and plans for a new gymnasium. Starting
in 1970, the Board of Trustees approved a student seat on its board, which was
to be filled every three years. On racial equality again. Mary King, class of
1963, worked alongside the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in the U.S.
civil rights movement when she was a young student, and was a member of the
staff of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). Reverend Martin
Luther King frequently spoke in the U.S. against the South African government
in the 1960s, urging Americans to end trade and investments in that country.
Following political activity by South Africa's blacks in 1985, the government
declared a state of emergency. The resurgence of campus activism regarding
racism existing elsewhere in the world came in response to David Warren's, the
13th president, involvement in the issue. In his inauguration Warren stated:
"If there is one phrase which I believe best characterizes our Wesleyan
education, it is: 'Here I stand.' Within these three words of Martin Luther -
- 'Here I stand' -- is compressed the whole of our historical endeavor..." In
the 1980s the most organized campus movement was against investments in
companies doing business in South Africa. By February 1987, student political
action had brought Ohio Wesleyan to pledge to fully divest any holdings
connected to South Africa. The OWU Committee on Divestment was organized in
1988 and funded many activities related to its cause. It sponsored an Anti-
Apartheid Week, candlelight vigils, and protest marches. One event which drew a
lot of media attention was the 1988 demonstration before the Board of Trustees.
Students carried a black and white paper chain as they climbed up the student
union ballroom. As their leader announced "Divest!", students broke the
symbolic paper chain. Recent activism. Recent years have witnessed activism by
student groups on the issues of the Iraq war, race, globalization, and women's
reproductive rights. In April 2002 about a hundred Wesleyan students gathered
on The Mall in Washington, D.C. during a weekend of protests for an array of
causes, including the Middle East crisis, and also to denounce lending policies
of the World Bank. In February 2003 approximately 100 OWU students travelled to
New York City to protest US actions in Iraq, with partial funding from the
Wesleyan Chaplain's office. During "Ohio Wesleyan University Against the War"
on October 5 and November 17, 2004, more than one hundred students held peace
rallies in front of Delaware's City Hall. In 2004 the awarding of the Lilly
Grant, "Vocation: Identity, Intellect, and Life Choices: A Move Toward
Wholeness", and the prospect of the participation by Ohio Wesleyan in the Lilly
Endowment program on vocation, evoked an intense and adverse response from a
significant group of faculty members. An open letter signed by more than 40
faculty members questioned the appropriateness of the predominantly Christian
focus of the grant. On March 17, 2005, the Student Union on Black Awareness
(SUBA) and the College Democrats organized a protest on Sandusky Street in
Delaware against racial injustice on campus and in the country. University
president Mark Huddleston also participated in the protest. During his own
college years, President Huddleston had mediated between protesters and
administration, favoring classic liberal education over brick-throwers.
Academic pursuit and activism have found an intersection in the form of an
annual event called The "Sagan National Colloquium". Established in 1984, the
SNC annually spotlights an issue of concern in the liberal arts â€” the impact
of science on society, race and reality, censorship and power, and the role of
globalization.
