Adaptive expectations In economics, adaptive expectations means that people
form their expectations about what will happen in the future based on what has
happened in the past. For example, if inflation has been higher than expected
in the past, people would revise expectations for the future. where formula_5
is between 0 and 1. This says that current expectations of future inflation
reflect past expectations and an "error-adjustment" term, in which current
expectations are raised (or lowered) according to the gap between actual
inflation and previous expectations. This error-adjustment is also called
""partial adjustment"." where formula_7 equals actual inflation formula_8 years
in the past. Thus, current expected inflation reflects a weighted average of
all past inflation, where the weights get smaller and smaller as we move
further in the past. Once a forecasting error is made by agents, due to a
stochastic shock, they will be unable to correctly forecast the price level
again even if the price level experiences no further shocks since they only
ever incorporate part of their errors. The backward nature of expectation
formulation and the resultant systematic errors made by agents (see Cobweb
model) was unsatisfactory to economists such as John Muth, who was pivotal in
the development of an alternative model of how expectations are formed, called
rational expectations. This has largely replaced adaptive expectations in
macroeconomic theory since its assumption of optimality of expectations is
consistent with economic theory.
