Advocacy Advocacy is a political process by an individual or group which aims
to influence public-policy and resource allocation decisions within political,
economic, and social systems and institutions. Advocacy may be motivated from
moral, ethical or faith principles or simply a desire to protect an asset of
interest. Advocacy can include many activities that a person or organization
undertakes including media campaigns, public speaking, commissioning and
publishing research or polls or the filing of an amicus brief. Lobbying (often
by lobby groups) is a form of advocacy where a direct approach is made to
legislators on an issue which plays a significant role in modern politics.
Research is beginning to explore how advocacy groups use social media to
facilitate civic engagement and collective action. Forms of advocacy. There are
several forms of advocacy, which each represent a different approach in the way
change is brought into society. One of the most popular forms is social justice
advocacy. Transnational advocacy. Advocates and advocacy groups represent a
wide range of categories and support several issues as listed on
WorldAdvocacy.com. The Advocacy Institute, a US-based global organization, is
dedicated to strengthening the capacity of political, social, and economic
justice advocates to influence and change public policy. The phenomenon of
globalization draws a special attention to advocacy beyond countriesâ€™
borders. The core existence of networks such as World Advocacy or the Advocacy
Institute demonstrates the increasing importance of transnational advocacy and
international advocacy. Transnational advocacy networks are more likely to
emerge around issues where external influence is necessary to ease the
communication between internal groups and their own government. Groups of
advocates willing to further their mission also tend to promote networks and to
meet with their internal counterparts to exchange ideas. Advocacy and the
Internet. For more than ten years, groups involved in advocacy work have been
using the Internet to accomplish organizational goals. It has been argued that
the Internet helps to increase the speed, reach and effectiveness of advocacy-
related communication as well as mobilization efforts, and as a result has had
a positive impact on the advocacy community.
