Agent-based computational economics Agent-based computational economics (ACE)
is the area of computational economics that studies economic processes,
including whole economies, as dynamic systems of interacting agents. As such,
it falls in the paradigm of complex adaptive systems.Â Â  â€¢ Leigh Tesfatsion,
2003. "Agent-based Computational Economics: Modeling Economies as Complex
Adaptive Systems," "Information Sciences", 149(4), pp. 262-268. In
corresponding agent-based models, the "agents" are "computational objects
modeled as interacting according to rules" over space and time, not real
people. The rules are formulated to model behavior and social interactions
based on incentives and information. Such rules could also be the result of
optimization, realized through use of AI methods (such as Q-learning and other
reinforcement learning techniques) The theoretical assumption of mathematical
optimization by agents in equilibrium is replaced by the less restrictive
postulate of agents with bounded rationality "adapting" to market forces.Â Â 
â€¢ Thomas C. Schelling (1978 "Micromotives and Macrobehavior", Norton. [http:/
/books.wwnorton.com/books/978-0-393-32946-9/ Description, preview.Â Â  â€¢
Thomas J. Sargent, 1994. "Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics", Oxford.
Description and chapter-preview 1st-page links. ACE models apply numerical
methods of analysis to computer-based simulations of complex dynamic problems
for which more conventional methods, such as theorem formulation, may not find
ready use. Starting from initial conditions specified by the modeler, the
computational economy evolves over time as its constituent agents repeatedly
interact with each other, including learning from interactions. In these
respects, ACE has been characterized as a bottom-up culture-dish approach to
the study of economic systems.Â Â  â€¢ _____ (1997). "How Economists Can Get
Alife," in W. B. Arthur, S. Durlauf, and D. Lane, eds., "The Economy as an
Evolving Complex System, II", pp. 533-564. Addison-Wesley. Pre-pub PDF. ACE has
a similarity to, and overlap with, game theory as an agent-based method for
modeling social interactions.Â Â  â€¢ Yoav Shoham (2008). "Computer Science and
Game Theory," "Communications of the ACM", 51(8), pp. 75-79.Â Â  â€¢ Alvin E.
Roth (2002). "The Economist as Engineer: Game Theory, Experimentation, and
Computation as Tools for Design Economics," "Econometrica", 70(4), pp.
1341â€“1378. But practitioners have also noted differences from standard
methods, for example in ACE events modeled being driven solely by initial
conditions, whether or not equilibria exist or are computationally tractable,
and in the modeling facilitation of agent autonomy and learning. The method has
benefited from continuing improvements in modeling techniques of computer
science and increased computer capabilities. The ultimate scientific objective
of the method is to "test theoretical findings against real-world data in ways
that permit empirically supported theories to cumulate over time, with each
researcherâ€™s work building appropriately on the work that has gone
before."Â Â  â€¢ Kenneth L. Judd (2006). "Computationally Intensive Analyses in
Economics," "Handbook of Computational Economics", v. 2, ch. 17, pp. 881- 893.
Pre-pub PDF.Â Â  â€¢ Leigh Tesfatsion and Kenneth L. Judd, ed. (2006).
"Handbook of Computational Economics", v. 2. Description & and chapter-preview
links. The subject has been applied to research areas like asset pricing,
competition and collaboration, transaction costs, market structure and
industrial organization and dynamics,Â Â  â€¢ Joshua M. Epstein (2006).
"Growing Adaptive Organizations: An Agent-Based Computational Approach," in
"Generative Social Science: Studies in Agent-Based Computational Modeling", pp.
309 - 344. Description and abstract. welfare economics, and mechanism
design,Â Â Â Â  Roger B. Myerson "mechanism design." Abstract. Â Â Â Â  _____.
"revelation principle." Abstract.Â Â Â Â  Tuomas Sandholm. "computing in
mechanism design." Abstract.Â Â  â€¢ Noam Nisan and Amir Ronen (2001).
"Algorithmic Mechanism Design," "Games and Economic Behavior", 35(1-2), pp.
166â€“196.Â Â  â€¢ Noam Nisan "et al"., ed. (2007). "Algorithmic Game Theory",
Cambridge University Press. Description. information and uncertainty,
macroeconomics,Â Â  â€¢ Thomas J. Sargent (1994). "Bounded Rationality in
Macroeconomics", Oxford. Description and chapter-preview 1st-page links.Â Â 
â€¢ M. Oeffner (2009). 'Agent-based Keynesian Macroeconomics'. PhD thesis,
Faculty of Economics, University of WÃ¼rzburg. and Marxist economics. Overview.
The "agents" in ACE models can represent individuals (e.g. people), social
groupings (e.g. firms), biological entities (e.g. growing crops), and/or
physical systems (e.g. transport systems). The ACE modeler provides the initial
configuration of a computational economic system comprising multiple
interacting agents. The modeler then steps back to observe the development of
the system over time without further intervention. In particular, system events
should be driven by agent interactions without external imposition of
equilibrium conditions. Issues include those common to experimental economics
in general and development of a common framework for empirical validation and
resolving open questions in agent-based modeling. ACE is an officially
designated special interest group (SIG) of the Society for Computational
Economics. Researchers at the Santa Fe Institute have contributed to the
development of ACE. Example: finance. One area where ACE methodology has
frequently been applied is asset pricing. W. Brian Arthur, Eric Baum, William
Brock, Cars Hommes, and Blake LeBaron, among others, have developed
computational models in which many agents choose from a set of possible
forecasting strategies in order to predict stock prices, which affects their
asset demands and thus affects stock prices. These models assume that agents
are more likely to choose forecasting strategies which have recently been
successful. The success of any strategy will depend on market conditions and
also on the set of strategies that are currently being used. These models
frequently find that large booms and busts in asset prices may occur as agents
switch across forecasting strategies. More recently, Brock, Hommes, and Wagener
(2009) have used a model of this type to argue that the introduction of new
hedging instruments may destabilize the market, and some papers have suggested
that ACE might be a useful methodology for understanding the recent financial
crisis.
