Alta controversy The Alta controversy refers to a political controversy in
Norway in the late 1970s and early 1980s concerning the construction of a
hydroelectric power plant in the Alta river in Finnmark, Northern Norway. Key
events. The background for the controversy was a published plan by the
Norwegian Water Resources and Energy Directorate (NVE) that called for the
construction of a dam and hydroelectric power plant that would create an
artificial lake and inundate the Sami village of MÃ¡ze. After the initial plan
met political resistance, a less ambitious project was proposed that would
cause less displacement of Sami residents and less disruption for reindeer
migration and wild salmon fishing. In 1978, the popular movement against
development of the Alta-Kautokeino waterway (Folkeaksjonen mot utbygging av
Alta-Kautokeinovassdraget) was founded, creating an organizational platform for
first opposing and then resisting construction work. This group and others
filed for an injunction in Norwegian courts against the Norwegian government to
prevent construction from beginning. In the fall of 1979, as construction was
ready to start, protesters performed two acts of civil disobedience: at the
construction site itself at Stilla, activists sat down on the ground and
blocked the machines, and at the same time, Sami activists began a hunger
strike outside the Norwegian parliament. Documents that have since been
declassified, show that the government planned to use military forces as
logistical support for police authorities in their efforts to stop the
protests.[http://www.aftenposten.no/nyheter/iriks/article1280217.ece] The prime
minister at the time, Odvar Nordli, pre-empted such an escalation by promising
a review of the parliament's decision, but the Norwegian parliament
subsequently confirmed its decision to dam the river. More than one thousand
protesters chained themselves to the site when the work started again in
January 1981. The police responded with large forces; at one point 10% of all
Norwegian police officers were stationed in Alta (during which time they were
quartered in a cruise ship). The protesters were forcibly removed by police.
For the first time since World War II, Norwegians were arrested and charged
with violating laws against rioting. The central organizations for the Sami
people discontinued all cooperation with the Norwegian government. Two Sami
women even travelled to Rome to petition the Pope. The Supreme Court ruled in
favor of the government in early 1982, at which point organized opposition to
the power plant ceased, and the power plant was built.
