Alternative Views Alternative Views was one of the longest running Public-
access television cable TV programs in the United States. Produced in Austin,
Texas in 1978, it produced 563 hour-long programs featuring news, interviews
and opinion pieces from a progressive political perspective. Show founders and
on-air hosts, Douglas Kellner and Frank Morrow, produced the show on virtually
no budget using facilities at Austin Community Television (ACTV) and The
University of Texas at Austin.[http://www.axisoflogic.com/artman/publish/
printer_18971.shtml] They also pioneered an innovative syndication system that
placed the program in almost 80 television markets around the country. Audience
share. Viewership was on a par with the local PBS station. Two surveys, one
undertaken by the cable company, and another commissioned by it, indicate that
from 20,000 to 30,000 Austin viewers watched "Alternative Views" each week.
Distribution network. The audience for "Alternative Views" went well beyond the
confines of Austin, Texas. Many Public-access television channels allow members
to sponsor programs for exhibition in their cable market. In spring 1984
"Alternative Views" began sending program tapes to Public-access TV contacts in
Dallas and San Antonio. In Fall 1984 they added Fayetteville, Atlanta,
Minneapolis, Pittsburgh, and Urbana, Illinois. Cities around the United States
subsequently joined, and, by the late 1980s, the program was shown in New York,
Boston, Portland, San Diego, Marin County, California, Fairfax and Arlington
Virginia, Cincinnati, San Francisco, Columbus, Ohio, New Haven, and many other
cities.[http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/battle/Alternative%20Media.pdf]
Content. Each installment of "Alternative Views" included a regular news
section that utilized material from mostly non-mainstream news sources to
provide stories ignored by establishment media, or interpretations of events
different from the mainstream. "Alternative Views" landed many significant
interviews during its run, and it was often ahead of mainstream media in
identifying major stories. Its first program featured an Iranian student who
discussed opposition to the Shah of Iran and the possibility of his overthrow.
It also had a detailed discussion of the Sandinista movement struggling to
overthrow Anastasio Somoza. It would be several weeks before national broadcast
media discovered these movements. Early shows included long-form interviews
with Senator Ralph Yarborough, a Texas progressive responsible for legislation
like the National Defense Education Act, and former CIA officials like John
Stockwell and Philip Agee, who both presented arguments for shuttering the CIA.
Anti-war and anti-nuclear activists like Helen Caldicott, George Wald, Ramsey
Clark, Daniel Ellsberg, Michael Klare, David Dellinger, and representatives of
the European peace movement.[http://zmagsite.zmag.org/Jun2003/mamoun0603.html]
US New Left activists like David MacReynolds, Stokely Carmichael, Greg Calvert,
and Dr. Benjamin Spock. Feminists, gay activists, union activists, and
representatives of local progressive groups appeared on the show; and officials
from the Soviet Union, Nicaragua, Allende's former government in Chile, the
democratic front in El Salvador, and many other Third World countries and
revolutionary movements. In addition, "Alternative Views" broadcast many
documentaries, both self-produced and produced by others, and it screened raw
video footage of the bombing of Lebanon and aftermath of the massacres at Sabra
and Shatila, of the assassinations of five communist labor organizers by the Ku
Klux Klan in Greensboro, North Carolina, and of counterrevolutionary activity
in Nicaragua. Staff. "Alternative Views" was staffed exclusively by volunteers,
many of whom have become influential filmmakers and television producers. It
was founded by Douglas Kellner and Frank Morrow at the University of Texas at
Austin. (Kellner is now a chair at UCLA.) There were other producers and hosts,
many of whom were drawn from Kellnerâ€™s philosophy courses, including Ali
Hossaini, Tommy Pallotta, Noah Khoshbin, Richard Linklater, Steven Best, James
Scott and Danny Postel. Notes. This entry was summarized from the article by
Douglas Kellner Public Access: Alternative Views and from the Guerilla TV
Archive, a repository of documents collected by media scholar Deidre Boyle at
New York University. Video links. The Internet Archive hosts a growing
collection of "Alternative Views" videos. By June, 2008, over 200 programs were
available to view or download. Ten hour-long "Alternative Views" programs are
also available as streaming videos on Douglas Kellner's multimedia page
