Merger (politics) A merger or amalgamation in a political or administrative
sense is the combination of two or more political or administrative entities
such as municipalities (in other words cities, towns, etc.), counties,
districts, etc. into a single entity. This term is used when the process occurs
within a sovereign entity. In United States politics, such an entity may be
called a consolidated city–county. Unbalanced growth or outward expansion of
one neighbor may necessitate an administrative decision to merge (see urban
sprawl). In some cases, common perception of continuity may be a factor in
prompting such a process (see conurbation). Some cities (see below) that have
gone though amalgamation or a similar process had several administrative sub-
divisions or jurisdictions, each with a separate person in charge. Notable
municipal mergers. Over the years political parties have taken aim at cities as
part of a larger political agenda. Often the abolishment of a level of
government results in the growth of another level — negating the original
purpose of the merger. Some of the more politically charged transformations of
city governments have been led by conservative parties, as to target the
usually more liberal voting urban regions. Belgium. In 1977, the 2,359
municipalities of Belgium were merged to 596 new municipalities. Brazil. In
1975, the state of Guanabara and the state of Rio de Janeiro in Brazil were
merged. The former consisted of only the territorial limits of the city of Rio
de Janeiro, formerly the Federal District as Brazilian capital until 1960, when
it was moved to newly-built Brasília. When merged, Guanabara became the
municipality of Rio de Janeiro within the new state. In geographical terms, it
would seem the state of Rio would have incorporated Guanabara; but, as the
administrative and financial resources of the former capital were significant
and even larger than the rest of the state, the change was more correctly
referred to as a merger ("fusão"). Canada. In Canada, the 1990s saw the forced
amalgamation of several municipal entities in the provinces of Nova Scotia,
Ontario and Quebec into larger new municipalities. The process created what was
labeled a "megacity" by the media, although none of the created municipalities
fit in the definition of a megacity in the international sense and some of them
have fewer than a million inhabitants. Denmark. In 1970, mergers brought the
number of municipalities of Denmark from 1,098 to 277. In 2007, the (by then)
270 municipalities were consolidated into 98 municipalities, most of them
results of mergers. Finland. An ongoing series of mergers has reduced the
number of municipalities of Finland from 432 in 2006 to 336 in 2011. Germany.
Several states of West Germany carried out municipal merger programmes in the
1960s and 1970s. In Baden-Württemberg, the number of municipalities dropped
from 3,379 to 1,110 between 1968 and 1975; in Bavaria, from roughly 7,000 to
roughly 2,000 between 1972 and 1978; in Hesse, from 2,642 to 421 between 1972
and 1977; in North Rhine-Westphalia, from 2,365 to 396 between 1967 and 1975;
and in Saarland, from 345 to 50 in 1974. In the Bavarian town of Ermershausen,
citizens occupied the town hall to resist the merger with Maroldsweisach —
unsuccessfully, although Ermershausen was reconstituted as an independent
municipality in 1994 — and Horgau, also in Bavaria, successfully appealed its
merger with Zusmarshausen to the Constitutional Court of Bavaria ("Bayerischer
Verfassungsgerichtshof"). Mergers have also taken place in the former East
Germany after 1990, for example in Brandenburg in 2003. Greece. The Kallikratis
Programme replaced the 1033 municipalities and communities of Greece with 325
new municipalities in 2011. Portugal. Portugal was one of the first countries
in the world to make an enlarged modern administrative reform, particularly
during the 19th century. In early 19th century, the country was divided into
more than 800 municipalities. In 1832, during Portuguese Civil War, a law from
Mouzinho da Silveira, minister from the liberal government-in-exile (which then
ruled only in the Azores) simplified the public administration, and reduced the
number of municipalities to 796. In 1836, after the liberal victory, Passos
Manuel, minister from the government of the Marquess of Sá da Bandeira made a
profound administrative reform which reduced significantly the number of
municipalities, fixing it in 351. Passos Manuel reform followed a trend very
decentralist, creating an elected municipal administration. In 1855, another
series of mergers reduced the number of municipalities to 254. In the rest of
the 19th century, some series of mergers occurred (particularly during the
1890s), meanwhile other municipalities were restored. Thereafter, the changes
to the municipal map focused mainly on the restoration and creation of new
municipalities, particularly in the 20th century. Nowadays, there are 308
municipalities in Portugal. The last alteration to the municipal map, occurred
in 1998, with the creation of the municipalities of Odivelas (in Lisbon
district), Trofa (in Porto district) and Vizela (in Braga district). Sweden.
Many rural municipalities of Sweden were merged in 1952; the number of them
decreasing from 2,281 to 816. Another series of mergers, this time also
including cities and market towns, reduced the total number of municipalities
from roughly 1,000 in the early 1960s to 278 in 1974.
