Moral nihilism Moral nihilism (also known as ethical nihilism or amoralism) is
the meta-ethical view that nothing is intrinsically moral or immoral. For
example, a moral nihilist would say that killing someone, for whatever reason,
is neither inherently right nor inherently wrong. Moral nihilists consider
morality to be constructed, a complex set of rules and recommendations that may
give a psychological, social, or economical advantage to its adherents, but is
otherwise without universal or even relative truth in any sense. Moral nihilism
is distinct from moral relativism, which does allow for moral statements to be
true or false in a non-objective sense, but does not assign any static truth-
values to moral statements, and of course moral universalism, which holds moral
statements to be objectively true or false. Insofar as only true statements can
be known, moral nihilism implies moral skepticism. Forms of moral nihilism.
According to Sinnott-Armstrong (2006a), the basic thesis of moral nihilism is
that "nothing is morally wrong" (Â§3.4). There are, however, several forms that
this thesis can take (see Sinnott-Armstrong, 2006b, pp.Â 32â€“37 and Russ
Shafer-Landau, 2003, pp.Â 8â€“13). There are two important forms of moral
nihilism: Error theory and Expressivism p.Â 292. Expressivism. One form of
moral nihilism is expressivism. Expressivism denies the principle that our
moral judgments try and fail to describe the moral features, because
expressivists believe when someone says something is immoral they are not
saying it is right or wrong; expressivists are not trying to speak the truth
when making moral judgments, they are simply trying to express their feelings.
"We are not making an effort to describe the way the world is. We are not
trying to report on the moral features possessed by various actions, motives,
or policies. Instead, we are venting our emotions, commanding others to act in
certain ways, or revealing a plan of action. When we condemn torture, for
instance, we are expressing our opposition to it, indicating our disgust at it,
publicizing our reluctance to perform it, and strongly encouraging others not
to go in for it. We can do all of these things without trying to say anything
that is true." p.Â 293. This makes expressivism a form of non-cognitivism. Non-
cognitivism in ethics is the view that moral statements lack truth-value and do
not assert genuine propositions. This involves a rejection of the cognitivist
claim, shared by other moral philosophies, that moral statements seek to
"describe some feature of the world" (Garner 1967, 219-220). This position on
its own is logically compatible with realism about moral values themselves.
That is, one could reasonably hold that there are objective moral values but
that we cannot know them and that our moral language does not seek to refer to
them. This would amount to an endorsement of a type of moral skepticism, rather
than nihilism. Typically, however, the rejection of the cognitivist thesis is
combined with the thesis that there are, in fact, no moral facts (van Roojen,
2004). But if moral statements cannot be true, and if one cannot know something
that is not true, non-cognitivism implies that moral knowledge is impossible
(Garner 1967, 219-220). Not all forms of non-cognitivism are forms of moral
nihilism, however: notably, the universal prescriptivism of R.M. Hare is a non-
cognitivist form of moral universalism. Error theory. Error theory is built by
three principles: Thus we always lapse into error when thinking in moral terms.
We are trying to state the truth when we make moral judgments. But since there
is no moral truth, all of our moral claims are mistaken. Hence the error. These
three principles lead to the conclusion that there is no moral knowledge.
Knowledge requires truth. If there is no moral truth, there can be no moral
knowledge. Thus moral values are make-believe. Error theorists combine the
cognitivist thesis that moral language consists of truth-apt statements with
the nihilist thesis that there are no moral facts. Like moral nihilism itself,
however, error theory comes in more than one form: "Global falsity" and
"Presupposition failure". Global falsity. The first, which one might call the
"global falsity" form of error theory, claims that moral beliefs and assertions
are false in that they "claim" that certain moral facts exist that do not
exist. J. L. Mackie (1977) argues for this form of moral nihilism. Mackie, for
example, argues that moral assertions are only true if there are moral
properties that are intrinsically motivating, but there is good reason to
believe that there are no such intrinsically motivating properties (see the
argument from queerness and motivational internalism). Presupposition failure.
The second form, which one might call the "presupposition failure" form of
error theory, claims that moral beliefs and assertions are not true because
they are neither true nor false. This is not a form of non-cognitivism, since
moral assertions are still thought to be truth-apt. Rather, this form of moral
nihilism claims that moral beliefs and assertions "presuppose" the existence of
moral facts that do not exist. This is analogous to presupposition failure in
cases of non-moral assertions. Take, for example, the claim that the present
king of France is bald. Some argue that this claim is truth-apt in that it has
the logical form of an assertion, but it is neither true nor false because it
presupposes that there is currently a king of France, but there is not. The
claim suffers from "presupposition failure." Richard Joyce (2001) argues for
this form of moral nihilism under the name "fictionalism." Moral nihilists in
history. The philosophy of NiccolÃ² Machiavelli is sometimes presented as a
model of moral nihilism, but this is at best ambiguous. His book "Il Principe"
("The Prince") praised many acts of violence and deception, which shocked a
European tradition that throughout the Middle Ages had inculcated moral lessons
in its political philosophies. Machiavelli does say that the Prince must
override traditional moral rules in favor of power-maintaining reasons of
State, but he also says, particularly in his other works, that the successful
ruler should be guided by Pagan, rather than Christian virtues. Hence,
Machiavelli presents an alternative to the ethical theories of his day, rather
than an all-out rejection of all morality. Closer to being an example of moral
nihilism is Thrasymachus, as portrayed in Plato's "Republic". Thrasymachus
argues, for example, that rules of justice are structured to benefit those who
are able to dominate political and social institutions. Thrasymachus can,
however, be interpreted as offering a revisionary "account" of justice, rather
than a total rejection of morality and normative discourse. "Glover" has cited
realist views of amoralism held by early Athenians, and in some ethical
positions affirmed by Joseph Stalin. Criticisms. Criticisms of moral nihilism
come primarily from moral realists, who argue that there are positive moral
truths. Still, criticisms do arise out of the other anti-realist camps (i.e.
subjectivists and relativists). Not only that, but each school of moral
nihilism has its own criticisms of one another (e.g. the non-cognitivists'
critique of error theory for accepting the semantic thesis of moral realism).
Still other detractors deny that the basis of moral objectivity need be
metaphysical. The moral naturalist, though a form of moral realist, agrees with
the nihilists' critique of metaphysical justifications for right and wrong.
Moral naturalists prefer to define "morality" in terms of observables, some
even appealing to a science of morality.
