Anarcho-syndicalism Anarcho-syndicalism is a branch of anarchism which views
revolutionary industrial unionism or syndicalism as an appropriate vehicle for
subjugated classes in capitalist society to regain control over the course of
their own destiny. Syndicalism is viewed both a strategy for facilitating
worker self-activity to that end as well as being an alternative co-operative
economic system upon which to base a democratic regime of production for the
satisfaction of human need once the injustices understood to be inherent to
capitalist society have been overcome. Adherents view it as a potential force
for revolutionary social change, combining general defense of rights and
advance of interests in the present with longer term strategies designed to
facilitate development in workers of the class consciousness and capacity for
self-activity necessary before capitalism and the state can be replaced with a
new democratically self-managed society. This strategy is viewed as necessary
on the basis that means employed determine outcomes achieved, and that since
outcomes desired must be consistent with the means used to bring them about,
only workers capable of freedom can actually bring about a free society. This
is also why self-activity is viewed as a primary value and why anarcho-
syndicalists seek to nurture it through modes of organisation and action such
as solidarity, direct action (meaning action undertaken without the
intervention of third parties such as politicians, bureaucrats and arbitrators)
and direct democracy, or workers' self-management. The end goal of anarcho-
syndicalism is to abolish the wage system, which adherents regard as wage
slavery being as it is based on economic compulsion and hierarchical control,
and state or private ownership of the means of production, which they argue
lead to class divisions, with all that follows in terms of unequal distribution
of decision-making power and oppressively hierarchical and autocratic relations
of production. Anarcho-syndicalist theory therefore generally focuses on the
labour movement, though there have been moves in recent times to broaden
anarcho-syndicalism in the direction of a syndicalist intersectionality.
Anarcho-syndicalists regard the state as a profoundly anti-worker institution,
agreeing with James Madison that the primary function of government is to
'protect the minority of the opulent from the majority.' They view the primary
purpose of the state as being the defence of private property and therefore of
economic, social and political privilege, even when such defence denies its
citizens the ability to enjoy material independence and the social autonomy
which springs from it. In contrast to other bodies of thought
(Marxism‚ÄìLeninism being a prime example), anarcho-syndicalists deny that
there can be any kind of workers' state, or a state which acts in the interests
of workers, as opposed to those of the powerful. Reflecting the anarchist
philosophy from which it draws its primary inspiration, anarcho-syndicalism
holds to the idea that power corrupts. Theory. The principles of anarcho-
syndicalism are workers' solidarity, direct action, and workers' self-
management. Workers' solidarity means that anarcho-syndicalists believe all
workers, no matter what their gender or ethnic group, are in a similar
situation in regard to their bosses (class consciousness). Furthermore, it
means that, in a capitalist system, any gains or losses made by some workers
from or to bosses will eventually affect all workers. Therefore, to liberate
themselves, all workers must support one another in their class conflict.
Anarcho-syndicalists believe that only direct action¬ ‚Äî that is, action
carried out by the workers themselves, which is concentrated on attaining a
goal directly, as opposed to indirect action, such as electing a representative
to a government position¬ ‚Äî will allow workers to liberate themselves.
Anarcho-syndicalists believe that workers‚Äô organizations¬ ‚Äî the
organizations that struggle against the wage system, and which, in anarcho-
syndicalist theory, will eventually form the basis of a new society¬ ‚Äî should
be self-managing. They should not have bosses or "business agents"; rather, the
workers alone should decide on that which affects them. Etymology. The word
"syndicalism" comes from the French word "syndicat" which means trade union
("syndic" meaning "administrator"), from the Latin word "syndicus" which in
turn comes from the Greek word œÉœçŒΩŒ¥ŒπŒ∫ŒøœÇ ("syndikos") which means
"caretaker of an issue". History. Hubert Lagardelle wrote that Pierre-Joseph
Proudhon laid out the fundamental theories of anarcho-syndicalism, through his
repudiation of both capitalism and the state, his flouting of political
government, his idea of free, autonomous economic groups, and his view of
struggle, not pacifism, as the core of humanity. The earliest expressions of
anarcho-syndicalist structure and methods were formulated in the International
Workingmen's Association or First International, particularly in the Jura
federation. The First International, however, split between two main tendencies
within the organization over the question of political, parliamentary action;
the anarchist wing represented by Mikhail Bakunin and the socialist wing
represented by Karl Marx. Marxists would form mass-based labour and social
democratic parties throughout Europe (initially grouped around the Second
International), with major strongholds in Germany and England. Some Marxists,
notably Anton Pannekoek, would formulate positions remarkably close to anarcho-
syndicalism through council communism (see main article Anarchism and Marxism).
In 1895, the Conf√©d√©ration G√©n√©rale du Travail (CGT) in France expressed
fully the organizational structure and methods of revolutionary syndicalism
influencing labour movements the world over. The CGT was modelled on the
development of the Bourse de Travail (labour exchange), a workers' central
organization which would encourage self-education and mutual aid, and
facilitate communication with local workers' syndicates. Through a general
strike, workers would take control of industry and services and self-manage
society and facilitate production and consumption through the labour exchanges.
The Charter of Amiens, adopted by the CGT in 1906, represents a key text in the
development of revolutionary syndicalism rejecting parliamentarianism and
political action in favour of revolutionary class struggle. The Central
Organisation of the Workers of Sweden (SAC) (in Swedish the Sveriges Arbetares
Centralorganisation), formed in 1910, is a notable example of an anarcho-
syndicalist union influenced by the CGT. Today, the SAC is one the largest
anarcho-syndicalist unions in the world in proportion to the population, with
some strongholds in the public sector. The International Workers Association,
formed in 1922, is an international anarcho-syndicalist federation of various
labour unions from different countries. At its peak, the International Workers
Association represented millions of workers and competed directly for the
hearts and minds of the working class with social democratic unions and
parties. The Spanish Confederaci√≥n Nacional del Trabajo played and still plays
a major role in the Spanish labour movement. It was also a decisive force in
the Spanish Civil War, organizing worker militias and facilitating the
collectivization of vast sections of the industrial, logistical, and
communications infrastructure, principally in Catalonia. Another Spanish
anarcho-syndicalist union, the Confederacion General del Trabajo de Espa√±a, is
now the third largest union in Spain and the largest anarchist union with tens
of thousands of members. The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), although
not explicitly anarcho-syndicalist, were informed by developments in the
broader revolutionary syndicalist milieu at the turn of the 20th century. At
its founding congress in 1905, influential members with strong anarchist or
anarcho-syndicalist sympathies like Thomas J. Haggerty, William Trautmann, and
Lucy Parsons contributed to the union's overall revolutionary syndicalist
orientation. Although the terms anarcho-syndicalism and revolutionary
syndicalism are often used interchangeably, the anarcho-syndicalist label was
not widely used until the early 1920s (some credit Sam Mainwaring with coining
the term). ‚ÄúThe term ‚Äòanarcho-syndicalist‚Äô only came into wide use in
1921-1922 when it was applied polemically as a pejorative term by communists to
any syndicalists‚Ä¶who opposed increased control of syndicalism by the
communist parties.‚Äù In fact, the original statement of aims and principles of
the International Workers Association (drafted in 1922) refers not to anarcho-
syndicalism, but to revolutionary syndicalism or revolutionary unionism,
depending on the translation. Relationship with party politics. The anarcho-
syndicalist orientation of many early American labour unions arguably played an
important role in the formation of the American political spectrum, most
significantly of the Industrial Workers of the World. The United States is the
only industrialized country that does not have a major labour-based political
party. This has not always been the case. In 1912, for example, Eugene Debs (a
founding member of the IWW) polled 6% of the popular vote as the Socialist
Party presidential candidate ‚Äî a significant portion of the popular vote
considering that this was 8 years before the adoption of universal suffrage in
the U.S. Some political scientists would, in part, attribute the lack of an
American labour party to the single member plurality electoral system, which
tends to favour a two-party system. This phenomenon is sometimes referred to as
Duverger's law. Controversially, the Confederaci√≥n Nacional del Trabajo
participated in the Spanish Republican Popular Front government in the Spanish
Civil War. In November 1936, four anarchist ministers ‚Äî Garcia Oliver,
Federica Montseny, Joan Peir√≥, and Juan L√≥pez ‚Äî accepted positions in the
government. This move was criticized by rank-and-file groups like the Friends
of Durruti. The French CGT leadership under L√©on Jouhaux faced similar
criticism from its own left-wing, after its close collaboration with Government
during the First World War and, later, the Popular Front (France); However,
unlike the Spanish anarcho-syndicalists, on both occasions the CGT stopped
short of full Cabinet participation. Notable theorists. Rudolf Rocker is one of
the most influential figures in the anarcho-syndicalist movement. He dedicated
himself to the organisation of Jewish immigrant workers in London's East End
and led the 1912 garment workers strike. He outlined a view of the origins of
the movement, what it sought, and why it was important to the future of labour
in his 1938 pamphlet "Anarcho-Syndicalism". In his article "Anarchism and
Anarcho-Syndicalism", Rocker points out that the anarcho-syndicalist union has
a dual purpose, "1. To enforce the demands of the producers for the
safeguarding and raising of their standard of living; 2. To acquaint the
workers with the technical management of production and economic life in
general and prepare them to take the socio-economic organism into their own
hands and shape it according to socialist principles." In short, laying the
foundations of the new society "within the shell of the old." Up to the First
World War and the Russian Revolution, anarcho-syndicalist unions and
organizations were the dominant actors in the revolutionary left. Noam Chomsky
was influenced by Rocker, writing the introduction to a modern edition of
"Anarcho-syndicalism: Theory and Practice". A member of the Industrial Workers
of the World (IWW), Chomsky is a self-described Anarcho-Syndicalist, a position
which he sees as the appropriate application of classical liberal political
theory to contemporary industrial society: "Now a federated, decentralized
system of free associations, incorporating economic as well as other social
institutions, would be what I refer to as anarcho-syndicalism; and it seems to
me that this is the appropriate form of social organization for an advanced
technological society in which human beings do "not" have to be forced into the
position of tools, of cogs in the machine. There is no longer any social
necessity for human beings to be treated as mechanical elements in the
productive process; that can be overcome and we must overcome it to be a
society of freedom and free association, in which the creative urge that I
consider intrinsic to human nature will in fact be able to realize itself in
whatever way it will." Criticisms and responses. Thus, anarcho-syndicalism is
not apolitical but instead sees political and economic activity as the same.
Unlike the propositions of some of its critics, anarcho-syndicalism is
different from reformist union activity in that it aims to obliterate
capitalism ""(Anarcho-syndicalism) has a double aim: with tireless persistence,
it must pursue betterment of the working class's current conditions. But,
without letting themselves become obsessed with this passing concern, the
workers should take care to make possible and imminent the essential act of
comprehensive emancipation: the expropriation of capital."" While collectivist
and communist anarchists criticize syndicalism as having the potential to
exclude the voices of citizens and consumers outside of the union, anarcho-
syndicalists argue that labor councils will work outside of the workplace and
within the community to encourage community and consumer participation in
economic and political activity (even workers and consumers outside of the
union or nation) and will work to form and maintain the institutions necessary
in any society such as schools, libraries, homes, etc. Murray Bookchin argues
