Annexation Annexation (Latin "ad", to, and "nexus", joining) is the permanent
acquisition and incorporation of some territory into another geo-political
entity (either adjacent or non-contiguous). Usually, it is implied that the
territory and population being "annexed" is the smaller, more peripheral, and
weaker of the two merging entities, barring physical size. It can also imply a
certain measure of coercion, expansionism or unilateralism on the part of the
stronger of the merging entities. Because of this, more positive terms like
political union or reunification are sometimes preferred. Annexation differs
from cession and amalgamation, because unlike cession where territory is given
or sold through treaty, or amalgamation (where the authorities of both sides
are asked if they agree with the merge), annexation is a unilateral act where
territory is seized and held by one state and legitimized via general
recognition by the other international bodies (i.e. countries and
intergovernmental organisations). During World War II the use of annexation
deprived whole populations of the safeguards provided by international laws
governing military occupations. The authors of the Geneva Convention IV made a
point of "giving these rules an absolute character", thus making it much more
difficult for a state to bypass international law through the use of
annexation. International law after 1948. Protocol I (1977): "Protocol
Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the
Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts" has additional articles
which cover military occupation, but many countries including the United States
are not signatory to this additional protocol. Examples since 1948. Portuguese
India. In 1954, the residents of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, a Portuguese enclave
within India, ended Portuguese rule with the help of nationalist volunteers.
From 1954 to 1961, the territory enjoyed "de facto" independence. In 1961, the
territory was merged with India after its government signed an agreement with
the Indian government. In 1961, India and Portugal engaged in a brief military
conflict over Goa and Daman and Diu, Portuguese enclaves within India. India
invaded and conquered the areas after 36 hours of fighting, ending 451 years of
Portuguese colonial rule in India. The action was seen in India as a liberation
of historically Indian territory. In Portugal however, the loss of Goa and the
Daman and Diu was seen as a national tragedy. Goa and Daman and Diu were
incorporated into India. Sikkim. In 1947, a popular vote rejected Sikkim's
joining the Indian Union and the prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, agreed to a
special protectorate status for Sikkim. Sikkim came under the suzerainty of
India, which controlled its external affairs, defence, diplomacy and
communications, but Sikkim otherwise retained autonomy. A state council was
established in 1955 to allow for constitutional government under the Chogyal.
Meanwhile trouble was brewing in the state after the Sikkim National Congress
demanded fresh elections and greater representation for the Nepalese. In 1973,
riots in front of the palace led to a formal request for protection from India.
The Chogyal was proving to be extremely unpopular with the people. In 1975, the
Kazi (Prime Minister) appealed to the Indian Parliament for a change in
Sikkim's status so that it could become a state of India. In April, the Indian
Army moved into Sikkim, seizing the city of Gangtok and disarming the Palace
Guards. A referendum was held in which 97.5% of the voting people (59% of the
people entitled to vote) voted to join the Indian Union. A few weeks later, on
May 16, 1975, Sikkim officially became the 22nd state of the Indian Union and
the monarchy was abolished. Ogaden. In 1954, former British Ogaden (a Somali
Region) was annexed by Abyssinia. Somali nationalists have waged wars of
liberation since 1954. Currently, the Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF)
leads this nationalist effort and is engaged in a fierce military confrontation
with Ethiopia, the new name of Abyssinia. Rockall. On 18 September 1955 at
precisely 10:16 am, in what would be the final territorial expansion of the
British Empire, Rockall was declared officially annexed by the British Crown
when Lieutenant-Commander Desmond Scott RN, Sergeant Brian Peel RM, Corporal AA
Fraser RM, and James Fisher (a civilian naturalist and former Royal Marine),
were deposited on the island by a Royal Navy helicopter from (coincidentally
named after the man who first charted the island). The team cemented in a brass
plaque on Hall's Ledge and hoisted the Union Flag to stake the UK's claim.
However this annexation is not recognised by Denmark (for the Faroe Islands),
the Republic of Ireland or Iceland. East Timor. Following an Indonesian
invasion in 1975, East Timor was annexed by Indonesia and was known as Timor
Timur. It was regarded by Indonesia as the country's 27th province, but this
was never recognised by the United Nations. The people of East Timor was
divided between resisted Indonesian forces in a prolonged guerilla campaign and
accepted the process of integration. (See: Indonesian rule in East Timor).
Following a referendum held in 1999, under a UN sponsored agreement between
Indonesia and the people of East Timor, 78.5% of voters rejected the offer of
autonomy within Indonesia. East Timor achieved independence in 2002 and is now
officially known as Timor-Leste. Western Sahara. In 1975, and following the
Madrid Accords (illegal according to international laws) between Morocco,
Mauritania and Spain, the latter withdrew from the territory and ceded the
administration to Morocco and Mauritania. This was challenged by a national
liberation movement, the Polisario Front, that waged a guerilla war against
both Morocco and Mauritania. In 1979, and after a military putsch, Mauritania
withdrew from the territory which left it occupied by Morocco. A United Nations
peace process was initiated in 1991, but it has been stalled, and as of mid-
2010, the UN is holding direct negotiations between Morocco and the Polisario
Front to reach a solution to the conflict. West Bank. The part of former
Mandatory Palestine occupied by the Jordanian Army during the Israeli War of
Independence, which some Israelis call "Judea and Samaria", was renamed "the
West Bank". It was annexed to Jordan in 1950 at the request of a Palestinian
delegation. Although only the United Kingdom and Pakistan recognized annexation
by Jordan, the British did not consider it Sovereign to Jordan . It was not
condemned by the UNSC and it remained under Jordanian rule until 1967 when it
was occupied, though not annexed ('INITIALLY' or 'OFFICIALLY'), by Israel.
Jordan did not officially relinquish its claim to rule the West Bank until
1988. Israel has not taken the step of annexing the territory, as that might
have entailed giving the vote to its Palestinian inhabitants; rather, there
were enacted a complex (and highly controversial) system of military government
decrees in effect applying Israeli law in many spheres to Israeli settlements
and to them alone. East Jerusalem. During the 1967 Six Day War, Israel captured
the East Jerusalem, then a part of the West Bank, from Jordan. On June 27,
1967, Israel extended its law and jurisdiction to East Jerusalem and some of
the surrounding area, incorporating about 70 square kilometers of territory
into the Jerusalem Municipality. Although at the time Israel informed the
United Nations that its measures constituted administrative and municipal
integration rather than annexation, later rulings by the Israeli Supreme Court
indicated that East Jerusalem had become part of Israel. In 1980, Israel passed
the Jerusalem Law as part of its Basic Law, which declared Jerusalem the
"complete and united" capital of Israel. In other words, Israel purported to
annex East Jerusalem. The annexation was declared null and void by UNSC
Resolutions 252, 267, 271, 298, 465, 476 and UNSC res 478 Jewish neighborhoods
have since been built in East Jerusalem, and Israeli Jews have since also
settled in Arab neighborhoods there, though some Jews may have returned from
their 1948 expulsion after the Siege of Jerusalem (1948). No countries
recognized Israel's annexation of East Jerusalem, except Costa Rica, and those
who maintained embassies in Israel did not move them to Jerusalem. Not to be
mistaken with International Law or Conventions, the United States Congress has
passed the Jerusalem Embassy Act, which recognizes Jerusalem as the united
capital of Israel and instructs the government to relocate the U.S. embassy
there, but the bill has been waived by Presidents Clinton, Bush, and Obama on
national security grounds. Golan Heights. Israel captured two-thirds of the
Golan Heights from Syria during the 1967 Six-Day War, and subsequently built
Jewish settlements in the area. In 1981, Israel passed the Golan Heights Law,
which extended Israeli "law, jurisdiction, and administration" to the area,
including the Shebaa farms area. This declaration was declared "null and void
and without international legal effect" by United Nations Security Council
Resolution 497. The only state that recognized the annexation is the Federated
States of Micronesia. Kuwait. After being allied with Iraq during the Iran â€“
Iraq War (largely due to desiring Iraqi protection from Iran), Kuwait was
invaded and declared annexed by Iraq (under Saddam Hussein) in August 1990.
Hussein's primary justifications included a charge that Kuwaiti territory was
in fact an Iraqi province, and that annexation was retaliation for "economic
warfare" Kuwait had waged through slant drilling into Iraq's oil supplies. The
monarchy was deposed after annexation, and an Iraqi governor installed. United
States President George H. W. Bush ultimately condemned Iraq's actions, and
moved to drive out Iraqi forces. Authorized by the UN Security Council, an
American-led coalition of 34 nations fought the Gulf War to reinstate the
Kuwaiti Emir. Iraq's invasion (and annexation) was deemed illegal and Kuwait
remains an independent nation today. Subnational annexation. Within countries
that are subdivided noncontiguously, annexation can also take place whereby a
lower-tier subdivision can annex territory under the jurisdiction of a higher-
tier subdivision. An example of this is in the United States, where
incorporated cities and towns often expand their boundaries by annexing
unincorporated land adjacent to them. Municipalities can also annex or be
annexed by other municipalities, though this is less common in the United
States. Laws governing the ability and the extent cities can expand in this
fashion are defined by the individual states' constitutions. Annexation of
neighbouring communities occurs in Canada, where the Unicity concept of city
planning is popular. The city of Calgary, for example, has in the past annexed
the communities of Bridgeland, Riverside, Sunnyside, Hillhurst, Hunter,
Hubalta, Ogden, Forest Lawn, Midnapore, Shepard, Montgomery, and Bowness.
