Anti-nationalism Anti-nationalism denotes the sentiments associated with the
opposition to nationalism, arguing that it is undesirable or dangerous. Some
anti-nationalists are humanitarians or humanists who pursue an idealist form of
world community, and self-identify as world citizens. They reject chauvinism,
jingoism and militarism, and want humans to live in peace rather than perpetual
conflict. They do not necessarily oppose the concepts of countries, nation
states, national boundaries, cultural preservation or identity politics. Some
anti-nationalists oppose all types of nationalism, including ethnic nationalism
among oppressed minority groups. This strain of anti-nationalism typically
advocates the elimination of national boundaries. Variations on this theme are
often seen in Marxist theory. Marx and Engels rejected nationalism as a whole,
believing ""the working class have no country"". More recently, certain groups
descended from the Maoist tradition of Marxism have moved towards this fiercely
anti-nationalist stance in a different way than Trotskyists, saying that
although it may be a painful and unpopular position to hear, ultimately
opposing all nationalism strengthens proletarian internationalism. Many
Trotskyists, however, such as Chris Harman, were critical of nationalism while
advocating support for what they saw as progressive national struggles. In
recent times, Islamism has been described as an anti-nationalist movement,
calling for unity of all Muslims and discarding the notion of nationality.
Anarchism has developed a critique of nationalism that focuses on nationalism's
role in justifying and consolidating state power and domination. Through its
unifying goal, nationalism strives for centralization, both in specific
territories and in a ruling elite of individuals, while it prepares a
population for capitalist exploitation. Within anarchism, this subject has been
treated extensively by Rudolf Rocker in "Nationalism and Culture" and by the
works of Fredy Perlman, such as "Against His-Story, Against Leviathan" and "The
Continuing Appeal of Nationalism". In his "Aphorisms on the Wisdom of Life",
Arthur Schopenhauer rejected nationalism, seeing it as an abandonment of
personal identity. The philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche can also be seen as
opposing all forms of nationalism, although he opposed virtually every other
form of social movement and ideology as well. SÃ¸ren Kierkegaard's philosophy
is a criticism and vehement rejection of Christian nationalism.
