Antidisestablishmentarianism Antidisestablishmentarianism (listen to , ) is a
political position that originated in 19th-century Britain in opposition to
proposals for the disestablishment of the Church of England, that is, to remove
the Anglican Church's status as the state church of England, Ireland, and
Wales. The establishment was maintained in England, but in Ireland the Church
of Ireland (Anglican) was disestablished in 1871. In Wales, four Church of
England dioceses were disestablished in 1920, subsequently becoming the Church
in Wales. The question of disestablishment of the Church of England is still
current, often tied with the position of the English monarch as "Supreme
Governor" of the Church (see Act of Settlement 1701). Those who wish to
continue the establishment of the Church of England are referred to as
Antidisestablishmentarians. Word length. The word is often referenced in
English-speaking popular culture on account of its unusual length of 28 letters
and 12 syllables. It is one of the longest words in the English language. It is
commonly believed to be the longest word in English found in major dictionaries
(www.oxforddictionary.com), excluding coined and technical terms. A slightly
longer but less commonly accepted variant of the word can be found in the Duke
Ellington song "You're Just an Old Antidisestablishmentarianismist" although
the correct construction of that word would be "antidisestablishmentarianist"
(without the "ism") or "antidisestablishmentarian". J.E. Littlewood pointed out
that the word is all "form" apart from the Latin stem "st".
