Anti-Stalinist left The anti-Stalinist left describes plural forms of left-wing
politics critical of Joseph Stalin, of Stalinism as a political philosophy, and
of the actual system of governance Stalin implemented as Premier of the Soviet
Union. It may also refer to left-wing opposition to dictatorship, cults of
personality, and police states, features commonly attributed to Stalin's
regime. (Anti-Stalinism might "also" include opposition to Maoism and to the
current regime in North Korea). Trotskyism. Associates and followers of Leon
Trotsky were organised in the Left Opposition within the Communist parties
before they were purged in the Moscow Trials in the 1930s. Subsequently, his
followers formed the Fourth International in opposition to the Stalinist Third
International. Trotsky saw the Stalinist states as deformed workers states,
where a political structure gave most workers very little power in decision
making. Trotsky and his followers were very critical of the lack of internal
debate among Stalinist organizations and societies and political repression
enacted by Stalinist governments (i.e., The Great Purge); nationalist elements
of Stalinist theory (the Socialism in One Country thesis, for example, adopted
by Stalin as state policy), that led to a very poor revolutionary strategy in
an international contest (and breaking with the internationalist traditions of
Marxism); and its dictatorial, bureaucratic, obscurantist, personalistic, and
high repressive methods (which Trotsky called "inquisitorial", in a speech that
was read and broadcast in English). Less orthodox Trotskyists and other critics
of Stalin have seen it as a new form of class state, called bureaucratic
collectivism (James Burnham, Milovan ƒêilas, and Max Shachtman) or as state
capitalist (Tony Cliff and C. L. R. James). Left communism. The communist left
was initially enthusiastic about the Bolshevik revolution, but lines of tension
between the communist left and the leadership of the Communist International
opened up very soon. Left communists such as Sylvia Pankhurst and Rosa
Luxemburg were among the first left-wing critics of Bolshevism. Left communists
see communism as something that can only be achieved by the proletariat itself,
and not through the dictatorship of a vanguard party acting on its behalf. (See
also council communism, Marxist humanism, ultra-left, luxemburgism.) Anarchism.
Anarchists like Emma Goldman were initially enthusiastic about the Bolsheviks,
particularly after dissemination of Vladimir Lenin's pamphlet "State and
Revolution", which painted Bolshevism in a very libertarian light. However, the
relations between the anarchists and the Bolsheviks soured in Soviet Russia
(e.g. in the suppression of the Kronstadt rebellion and the Makhnovist
movement). Anarchists and Stalinist Communists were also in armed conflict
during the Spanish civil war. Anarchists are critical of the statist,
totalitarian nature of Stalinism (and Marxism-Leninism in general), as well as
its cult of personality around Stalin (and subsequent leaders seen by
anarchists as Stalinists, such as Fidel Castro or Mao Zedong). Democratic
socialism. A significant current of the democratic socialist movement has
defined itself in opposition to Stalinism. This includes George Orwell, H. N.
Brailsford, Fenner Brockway, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. highlighted the group's
growing power in a popular 1948 essay titled "Not Right, Not Left, But a Vital
Center", making a case for a permanent end to the Left as a unified bloc.
Another key publication was "The God that Failed" (1948), a complation of
essays from six former communists. Winning over and harnessing the power of the
NCL became central to the US propaganda struggle against the USSR during the
early Cold War. This strategy directly inspired the creation of the Congress
for Cultural Freedom (CCF), as well as international journals like "Der Monat"
and "Encounter"; it also influenced existing publications such as the "Partisan
Review". Under these auspices (and consequently in fashionable intellectual
circles in the US and Europe), anti-Stalinism became "almost a professional
stance", "a total outlook on life, no less, or even a philosophy of history."
Prominent figures in this group include Arthur Koestler, Melvin J. Lasky,
Dwight Macdonald, Sidney Hook, Stephen Spender, Nicolas Nabokov, and Isaiah
Berlin. (The NCL notably excluded Jean-Paul Sartre because it could not accept
his individualistic existentialist views.) Key organizers of the CIA's Non-
Communist Left operation, titled QKOPERA, included Frank Wisner, Lawrence de
Neufville, Thomas Braden, C.D. Jackson, and Michael Josselson. (Other
supporters within the intelligence community included George Kennan, Averell
Harriman, and General Lucius D. Clay.) The NCL began to loose its cohesion and
its appeal to the CIA during the radicalism of the late 1960s. Opposition to
the Vietnam War fractured the coalition, and 1967 revelations of CIA funding
(by "Ramparts" and others) were embarrassing for many of the intellectuals
involved. Soon after the story broke, Braden (with tacit support from the CIA)
wrote an article in the Saturday Evening Post which exposed CIA involvement
with the Non-Communist Left and organized labor. Some argued that this article
represented an intentional and final break of the CIA with the NCL. The New
Left. The emergence of the New Left and the new social movements in the 1950s
and 1960s led to a revival of interest alternative forms of Marxism. Figures
associated with British cultural studies (e.g., Raymond Williams), Italian
autonomism and workerism (e.g., Antonio Negri), French groups like the
Situationist International (e.g., Guy Debord) and Socialisme ou Barbarie (e.g.,
Cornelius Castoriadis) as well as the magazine " Telos" in America, were
examples of this. Notable figures in the anti-Stalinist left. http://
www.marxists.org/archive/sik/1972/third-way/introduction.htm
