Anti-Poverty Committee The Anti-Poverty Committee (APC) was a left-wing
anarchist organisation based in Vancouver, British Columbia that campaigned
against poverty and homelessness. The APC participated in direct action events
such as sit-ins, squats, and vandalism to protests closure of low-income
housing projects and garnered considerable attention with disruptive protests
centred around the 2010 Winter Olympics, to be held in Vancouver. According to
its website, the Anti-Poverty Committee was "an organization of poor and
working people, who fight for poor people, their rights and an end to poverty
by any means necessary." The APC ceased meeting in the summer of 2010, when
they stopped renting an office space for meetings, and is no longer an active
organization. Opposition to the 2010 Winter Olympics. On a May weekend in 2007,
Vancouver Police used a ruse to arrest APC organizer David Cunningham as part
of their investigation into threats made to "evict" 2010 Winter Olympic Games
board members from their homes and offices. The police had pretended to be a
reporter with Vancouver's commuter newspaper "24 Hours". This ruse was
criticised in newspaper editorials as endangering the media's appearance of
independence. On May 22, 2007, following Cunningham's arrest, three APC
activists pretended to be delivering flowers as a ruse to gain entry to the
Vancouver offices of BC Premier Gordon Campbell. The group began destroying
glassware, as well as overturning furniture and scattering documents. The group
stated that this action was an eviction of 2010 Winter Olympic Games special
advisor Ken Dobell from his office.
