Anti-nuclear movement in Australia Nuclear testing, uranium mining and export,
and nuclear energy have often been the subject of public debate in Australia,
and the anti-nuclear movement in Australia has a long history. Its origins date
back to the 1972â€“73 debate over French nuclear testing in the Pacific and the
1976â€“77 debate about uranium mining in Australia. Several groups specifically
concerned with nuclear issues were established in the mid-1970s, including the
Movement Against Uranium Mining and Campaign Against Nuclear Energy (CANE),
cooperating with other environmental groups such as Friends of the Earth and
the Australian Conservation Foundation. The movement suffered a setback in 1983
when the newly elected Labor Government failed to implement its stated policy
of stopping uranium mining. But by the late 1980s, the price of uranium had
fallen, the costs of nuclear power had risen, and the anti-nuclear movement
seemed to have won its case; CANE was disbanded in 1988. About 2003, proponents
of nuclear power advocated it as a solution to global warming and the
Australian government began taking an interest. Anti-nuclear campaigners and
some scientists in Australia argued that nuclear power could not significantly
substitute for other power sources, and that uranium mining itself could become
a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions. As of 2010, Australia has no
nuclear power stations and the current Gillard Labor government is opposed to
nuclear power for Australia. Australia has three operating uranium mines at
Olympic Dam (Roxby) and Beverley â€“ both in South Australia's north â€“ and at
Ranger in the Northern Territory. As of April 2009, construction has begun on
South Australia's third uranium mineâ€”the Honeymoon Uranium Mine. Australia
has no nuclear weapons. History. 1950s and 1960s. In 1952 the Australian
Government established the Rum Jungle Uranium Mine 85 kilometres south of
Darwin. Local aboriginal communities were not consulted and the mine site
became an environmental disaster. Also in 1952, the Liberal Government passed
legislation, the "Defence (Special Undertakings) Act 1952", which allowed the
British Government access to remote parts of Australia to undertake atmospheric
nuclear weapons tests. The general public were largely unaware of the risks
from the testing program, stemming from official secrecy about the testing
program and the remote locations of the test sites. But as the "Ban the Bomb"
movement gathered momentum in Western societies throughout the 1950s, so too
did opposition to the British tests in Australia. An opinion poll taken in 1957
showed 49 per cent of the Australian public were opposed to the tests and only
39 per cent in favour. In 1964, Peace Marches which featured "Ban the bomb"
placards, were held in several Australian capital cities. In 1969, a 500 MW
nuclear power plant was proposed for the Jervis Bay Territory, 200Â km south of
Sydney. A local opposition campaign began, and the South Coast Trades and
Labour Council (covering workers in the region) announced that it would refuse
to build the reactor. Some environmental studies and site works were completed,
and two rounds of tenders were called and evaluated, but in 1971 the Australian
government decided not to proceed with the project, citing economic reasons.
1970s. The 1972â€“73 debate over French nuclear testing in the Pacific
mobilised several groups, including some trade unions. In 1972 the
International Court of Justice in a case launched by Australia and New Zealand,
ordered that the French cease atmospheric nuclear testing at Mururoa atoll. In
1974 and 1975 this concern came to focus on uranium mining in Australia and
several Friends of the Earth groups were formed. The Australian Conservation
Foundation also began voicing concern about uranium mining and supporting the
activities of the grass-roots organisations. Concern about the environmental
effects of uranium mining was a significant factor and poor management of waste
at an early uranium mine, Rum Jungle, led it to become a significant pollution
problem in the 1970s. The Australian anti-nuclear movement also acquired
initial impetus from notable individuals who publicly voiced nuclear concerns,
such as nuclear scientists Richard Temple and Rob Robotham, and poets Dorothy
Green and Judith Wright. The years 1976 and 1977 saw uranium mining become a
major political issue, with the Ranger Inquiry (Fox) report opening up a public
debate about uranium mining. Several groups specifically concerned with nuclear
issues were established, including the Movement Against Uranium Mining (founded
in 1976) and Campaign Against Nuclear Energy (formed in South Australia in
1976), cooperating with other environmental groups such as Friends of the Earth
(which came to Australia in 1975) and the Australian Conservation Foundation
(formed in 1975). In November and December 1976, 7,000 people marched through
the streets of Australian cities, protesting against uranium mining. The
Uranium Moratorium group was formed and it called for a five-year moritorium on
uranium mining. In April 1977 the first national demonstration co-ordinated by
the Uranium Moratorium brought around 15,000 demonstrators into the streets of
Melbourne, 5,000 in Sydney, and smaller numbers elsewhere. A National signature
campaign attracted over 250,000 signatures calling for a five-year moratorium.
In August, another demonstration brought 50,000 people out nationally and the
opposition to uranium mining looked like a potential political force. In 1977,
the Australian Labor Party (ALP) national conference passed a motion in favour
of an indefinite moratorium on uranium mining, and the anti-nuclear movement
acted to support the Labor Party and help it regain office. However, a setback
for the movement occurred in 1982 when another ALP conference overturned its
anti-uranium policy in favour of a "one mine policy". After the ALP won power
in 1983, the 1984 ALP conference voted in favour of a "Three mine policy". This
referred to the then three existing uranium mines in Australia, Nabarlek,
Ranger and Roxby Downs/Olympic Dam, and articulated ALP support for pre-
existing mines and contracts, but opposition to any new mining. 1980s and
1990s. Between 1979 and 1984, the majority of what is now Kakadu National Park
was created, surrounding but not including the Ranger uranium mine. Tension
between mining and conservation values led to long running controversy around
mining in the Park region. The two themes for the 1980 Hiroshima Day march and
rally in Sydney, sponsored by the Movement Against Uranium Mining (MAUM), were:
"Keep uranium in the ground" and "No to nuclear war." Later that year, the
Sydney city council officially proclaimed Sydney nuclear-free, in an action
similar to that taken by many other local councils throughout Australia. In the
1980s, academic critics (such as Jim Falk) discussed the "deadly connection"
between uranium mining, nuclear reactors and nuclear weapons, linking
Australia's nuclear policy to nuclear proliferation and the "plutonium
economy". In the 1980s, Australia experienced a significant growth of nuclear
disarmament activism: On Palm Sunday 1982, an estimated 100,000 Australians
participated in anti-nuclear rallies in the nation's biggest cities. Growing
year by year, the rallies drew 350,000 participants in 1985. The movement
focused on halting Australia's uranium mining and exports, abolishing nuclear
weapons, removing foreign military bases from Australia's soil, and creating a
nuclear-free Pacific. Public opinion surveys found that about half of
Australians opposed uranium mining and export, as well as the visits of U.S.
nuclear warships, that 72 percent thought the use of nuclear weapons could
never be justified, and that 80 percent favoured building a nuclear-free world.
The Nuclear Disarmament Party won a Senate seat in 1984, but soon faded from
the political scene. The years of the Hawke-Keating ALP governments
(1983â€“1996) were characterised by an "uneasy standoff in the uranium debate".
The ALP acknowledged community feeling against uranium mining but was reluctant
to move against the industry. The 1986 Palm Sunday anti-nuclear rallies drew
250,000 people. In Melbourne, the seamen's union boycotted the arrival of
foreign nuclear warships. Australia's only nuclear energy education facility,
the former School of Nuclear Engineering at the University of New South Wales,
closed in 1986. By the late 1980s, the price of uranium had fallen, and the
costs of nuclear power had risen, and the anti-nuclear movement seemed to have
won its case. The Campaign Against Nuclear Energy disbanded itself in 1988, two
years after the Chernobyl Disaster. The government policy preventing new
uranium mines continued into the 1990s, despite occasional reviews and debate.
Following protest marches in Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane during 1998, a
proposed mine at Jabiluka was blocked. Also in 1998, there was a proposal from
an international consortium, Pangea Resources, to establish a nuclear waste
dump in Western Australia. The plan, to store 20 per cent of the world's spent
nuclear fuel and weapons material, was "publicly condemned and abandoned".
2000s. In 2000, the Ranger Uranium Mine in the Northern Territory and the Roxby
Downs/Olympic Dam mine in South Australia continued to operate, but Narbarlek
Uranium Mine had closed. A third uranium mine, Beverley Uranium Mine in SA, was
also operating. Several advanced projects, such as Honeymoon in SA, Jabiluka in
the Northern Territory and Yeelirrie in WA were on hold because of political
and indigenous opposition. In May 2000 there was an anti-nuclear demonstration
at the Beverley Uranium Mine, which involved about 100 protesters. Ten of the
protesters were mistreated by police and were later awarded more than $700,000
in damages from the South Australian government. Following the McClelland Royal
Commission, a large clean-up was completed in outback South Australia in 2000,
after nuclear testing at Maralinga during the 1950s contaminated the region.
The cleanup lasted three years, and cost over A$100Â million, but there was
controversy over the methods used and success of the operation. As uranium
prices began rising from about 2003, proponents of nuclear power advocated it
as a solution to global warming and the Australian government began taking an
interest. However, in June 2005, the Senate passed a motion opposing nuclear
power for Australia. Then, in November 2006, the House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Industry and Resources released a pro-nuclear report into
Australia's uranium. In late 2006 and early 2007, then Prime Minister John
Howard made widely reported statements in favour of nuclear power, on
environmental grounds. Faced with these proposals to examine nuclear power as a
possible response to climate change, anti-nuclear campaigners and scientists in
Australia emphasised claims that nuclear power could not significantly
substitute for other power sources, and that uranium mining itself could become
a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions. Anti-nuclear campaigns were
given added impetus by public concern about the sites for possible reactors:
fears exploited by anti-nuclear power political parties in the lead-up to a
national election in 2007. The Rudd Labor government elected in 2007 opposed
nuclear power for Australia. The anti-nuclear movement continues to be active
in Australia, opposing expansion of existing uranium mines, lobbying against
the development of nuclear power in Australia, and criticising proposals for
nuclear waste disposal sites, the main candidate being Muckaty station in the
Northern Territory. As of October 2009, the Australian government was
continuing to plan for a nuclear waste dump in the Northern Territory. However,
there has been opposition from indigenous people, the NT government, and wider
NT community. In November 2009, about 100 anti-nuclear protesters assembled
outside the Alice Springs parliamentary sittings, urging the Northern Territory
Government not to approve a nearby uranium mine site. 2010s. As of early April
2010, more than 200 environmentalists and indigenous people gathered in Tennant
Creek to oppose a radioactive waste dump being built on Muckaty Station in the
Northern Territory. Western Australia has a significant share of the
Australia's uranium reserves, but between 2002 and 2008, a state-wide ban on
uranium mining was in force. The ban was lifted when the Liberal Party was
voted into power in the state and, as of 2010, many companies are exploring for
uranium in Western Australia. One of the industry's major players, the mining
company BHP Billiton, plans to develop the Yeelirrie uranium project in 2011 in
a 17Â billion dollar project. Two other projects in Western Australia are
further advanced then BHP's Yeelirrie, these being the Lake Way uranium
project, which is pursued by Toro Energy and scheduled for production by 2013,
and the Lake Maitland uranium project, pursued by Mega Uranium, which has a
proposed start-of-production date of 2012. As of late 2010, there are calls for
Australians to debate whether the nation should adopt nuclear power as part of
its energy mix. Nuclear power is seen to be "a divisive issue that can arouse
deep passions among those for and against". Following the March 2011 Fukushima
nuclear emergency in Japan, where three nuclear reactors were damaged by
explosions, Ian Lowe sees the nuclear power option as being risky and
unworkable for Australia. Lowe says nuclear power is too expensive, with
insurmountable problems associated with waste disposal and weapons
proliferation. It is also not a fast enough response to address climate change.
Lowe advocates renewable energy which is "quicker, less expensive and less
dangerous than nuclear". In December 2011, the sale of uranium to India was a
contentious issue. MPs clashed over the issue and protesters were marched from
Sydney's convention centre before Prime Minister Julia Gillard's motion to
remove a party ban on uranium sales to India was narrowly supported 206 votes
to 185. Long-time anti-nuclear campaigner Peter Garrett MP spoke against the
motion. In March 2012, hundreds of anti-nuclear demonstrators converged on the
Australian headquarters of global mining giants BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto. The
500-strong march through southern Melbourne called for an end to uranium mining
in Australia, and included speeches and performances by representatives of the
expatriate Japanese community as well as Australia's Indigenous communities,
who are concerned about the effects of uranium mining near tribal lands. There
were also events in Sydney. A site within Muckaty Station is being considered
for Australia's low-level and intermediate-level radioactive waste storage and
disposal facility. However, the plan is subject to a Federal Court challenge
due to be heard early in 2013. More than 400 people joined a "Lizard's Revenge
march" to the Olympic Dam site in July 2012. The anti-nuclear activists,
including Elder Kevin Buzzacott, protested against the mine expansion and the
uranium industry. They say the company and the government have put short-term
economic gain ahead of environmental and health concerns. Organiser Nectaria
Calan said police harassed protesters, demanding identification and controlling
access to and from their campsite. Ban on nuclear reactors. Nuclear reactors
are banned in Queensland and Tasmania. Uranium mining was previously prohibited
in New South Wales under the Uranium Prohibition Act of 1986, however in 2012
Premier Barry O'Farrell amended the legislation to allow prospecting and mining
of uranium in that State. Issues. The case against nuclear power and uranium
mining in Australia has been concerned with the environmental, political,
economic, social and cultural impacts of nuclear energy; with the shortcomings
of nuclear power as an energy source; and with presenting a sustainable energy
strategy. The most prominent adverse impact of nuclear power is seen to be its
potential contribution towards proliferation of nuclear weapons. For example,
the 1976 Ranger Inquiry report stated that "The nuclear power industry is
unintentionally contributing to an increased risk of nuclear war. This is the
most serious hazard associated with the industry". The health risks associated
with nuclear materials have also featured prominently in Australian anti-
nuclear campaigns. This has been the case worldwide because of incidents like
the Chernobyl disaster, but Australian concerns have also involved specific
local factors such as controversy over the health effects of nuclear testing in
Australia and the South Pacific, and the emergence of prominent anti-nuclear
campaigner Helen Caldicott, who is a medical practitioner. The economics of
nuclear power has been a factor in anti-nuclear campaigns, with critics arguing
that such power is uneconomical in Australia, particularly given the country's
abundance of coal resources. According to the anti-nuclear movement, most of
the problems with nuclear power today are much the same as in the 1970s.
Nuclear reactor accidents still occur and there is no convincing solution to
the problem of long-lived radioactive waste. Nuclear weapons proliferation
continues to occur, notably in Pakistan and North Korea, building on facilities
and expertise from civilian nuclear operations. The alternatives to nuclear
power, efficient energy use and renewable energy (especially wind power), have
been further developed and commercialised. Public opinion. A 2009 poll
conducted by the Uranium Information Centre found that Australians in the 40 to
55 years age group are the "most trenchantly opposed to nuclear power". This
generation was raised during the Cold War, experienced the anti-nuclear
movement of the 1970s, witnessed the 1979 partial meltdown of the Three Mile
Island reactor in the USA, and the 1986 Chernobyl disaster. It was the
generation which was also subject to cultural influences including feature
films such as the "nuclear industry conspiracies" "The China Syndrome" and
"Silkwood" and the apocalyptic "Dr Strangelove". Younger people are "less
resistant" to the idea of nuclear power for Australia. Indigenous land owners
have consistently opposed uranium mining and have spoken out about the adverse
impact it has on their communities.
