Antinaturalism (politics) As a political movement in France, antinaturalism is
closely linked to the animal welfare movement; some antinaturalists posit that
any reference to Natural law, such as the reintroduction of wolf predators into
a forest to curb deer overpopulation, is a form of speciesism, and encourage
veganism in human beings as well as in predator animals, as a way of showing
equal respect to the lives of prey as to the lives of predators. Affinities.
Antinaturalism is also closely linked to anti-sexist and gay liberation
movements, in part a reaction against religious fundamentalists who justify
male subjugation of women, social exclusion of homosexuality, and the primacy
of a gender binary featuring patriarchal men, maternal women, and no room for
weakness or disability, as expressions of Natural law. Philosophy. Some French
antinaturalists defend the inherent and absolute moral permissibility of
abortion, body modification, divorce, contraception, sex reassignment surgery,
and other means by which they believe human beings can assume control of their
own bodies and their own environments (see also transhumanism). Antinaturalism
stands in contrast to some radical environmentalist movements, which state that
Nature itself is sacred, and should be preserved for its own sake;
antinaturalism posits that all human acts are natural, and that ecological
preservation is important inasmuch as it is necessary for the well-being of
sentient life, not because of some inherently sacred attribute of Nature as a
whole.
