Aristocracy Aristocracy (Greek ἀριστοκρατία "aristokratía", from
ἄριστος "aristos" "excellent," and κράτος "kratos" "power"), is a
form of government in which a few elite citizens rule. The term derives from
the Greek "aristokratia", meaning "rule of the best". In origin in Ancient
Greece, it was conceived of as rule by the best qualified citizens, and
contrasted with monarchy. In later times, aristocracy was usually seen as rule
by a privileged group (the aristocratic class), and contrasted with democracy.
Concept. The concept evolved in Ancient Greece, whereby a council of famous
citizens was commonly used and contrasted with direct democracy in which a
council of male citizens was appointed as their "senate". The Greeks did not
like the concept of monarchy, and as their democratic system fell, aristocracy
was upheld. In Rome, the Republic consisted of an aristocracy as well as
consuls, a senate, and a tribal assembly. Later, aristocracies primarily
consisted of an elite aristocratic class, privileged by birth and often by
wealth. Since the French Revolution, aristocracy has generally been contrasted
with democracy, in which all citizens hold some form of political power.
However this distinction is often oversimplified. In "Leviathan", Thomas Hobbes
describes an aristocracy as a commonwealth in which the representative of the
citizens is an assembly by part. Simply put, a government when only a certain
part of the general public can represent the public. Modern depictions of
aristocracy regard it not as a legitimate aristocracy (rule by the best) but
rather as a plutocracy (rule by the wealthy).
