Arizona State University Arizona State University (commonly referred to as ASU
or Arizona State) is a public research university located in the Phoenix
Metropolitan Area of the U.S. state of Arizona. With a 2011 enrollment of
72,254, ASU is one of the largest universities in the United States by
enrollment. Founded in 1885 as the Tempe Normal School for the Arizona
Territory, the school came under control of the Arizona Board of Regents in
1945 and was renamed "Arizona State College." A 1958 statewide ballot measure
gave the university its present name. ASU awards bachelors, masters, and
doctoral degrees, and is broadly organized into 15 divisions and various
institutes spread across four campuses: the original Tempe campus, the West
campus in northwest Phoenix, the Polytechnic campus in eastern Mesa, and the
Downtown Phoenix campus. All four campuses are accredited as a single
institution by the Higher Learning Commission.The University is categorized as
a Research University with very high research activity (RU/VH) as reported by
the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education, and with a
research expenditure of $310 million annually which has doubled since the
fiscal year of 2003. ASU's athletic teams compete in Division I of the NCAA and
are collectively known as the Arizona State Sun Devils. They are members of the
Pacific-12 Conference and have won 23 national championships. History.
1885â€“1929. Originally named the "Tempe Normal School", the institution was
founded on March 12, 1885, after John Samuel Armstrong first introduced House
Bill 164, "An Act to Establish a Normal school in the Territory of Arizona to
the 13th Legislative Assembly of the Arizona Territory. Instruction was
instituted on February 8, 1886 under the supervision of Principal Hiram
Bradford Farmer. Land for the school was donated by Tempe residents George and
Martha Wilson, allowing 33 students to meet in a single room. At the beginning
of the 20th century, the school's name was changed from Tempe Normal School to
the "Normal School of Arizona". Before becoming a college, the Normal School
enrolled high school students with no other secondary education facilities.
Under the 30 year tenure of president Arthur John Matthews the school was given
all-college student status. The first dormitories built in the state were
constructed under his supervision. Of the 18 buildings constructed while
Matthews was president, six are still currently in use. Matthews envisioned an
"evergreen campus," with many shrubbery brought to the campus. He also
implemented the planting of Palm Walk, now one of the feature landmarks of the
Tempe campus. His legacy is being continued to this day with the main campus
having the honor of being declared a nationally recognized arboretum. During
the Great Depression, Ralph W. Swetman was hired as president for a three-year
term. Although enrollment increased by almost 100% during his tenure due to the
depression, many faculty were terminated and faculty salaries were cut.
1930â€“1989. In 1933, Grady Gammage, then president of Arizona State Teachers
College at Flagstaff, became president of "Arizona State Teachers College at
Tempe", a tenure that would last for nearly 28 years. Like his predecessor,
Gammage oversaw the construction of a number of buildings on the Tempe campus.
Dr. Gammage oversaw the development of the university, graduate programs, and
the renaming of the "Arizona State College" to Arizona State University in
1958. By the 1960s, with the presidency of Dr. G. Homer Durham, Arizona State
University began to expand its academic curriculum by establishing several new
colleges and beginning to award Doctor of Philosophy and other doctoral
degrees. The next three presidentsâ€”Harry K. Newburn, 1969â€“71, John W.
Schwada, 1971â€“81, and J. Russell Nelson, 1981â€“89â€”and Interim President
Richard Peck, 1989, led the university to increased academic stature, creation
of the West Campus, and rising enrollment. 1990â€“present. Under the leadership
of Dr. Lattie F. Coor, from 1990 to June 2002, ASU grew through the creation of
the Polytechnic campus and extended education sites. His commitment to
diversity, quality in undergraduate education, research, and economic
development underscored the university's significant gains in each of these
areas over his 12-year tenure. Part of Dr. Coor's legacy to the university was
a successful fund-raising campaign: Through private donations, more than $500
million was invested in targeted areas that would significantly impact the
future of ASU. Among the campaign's achievements were the naming and endowing
of the Barrett Honors College, the Katherine K. Herberger College of Fine Arts,
and the Morrison School of Agribusiness and Resource Management; the creation
of many new endowed faculty positions; and hundreds of new scholarships and
fellowships. On July 1, 2002, Michael Crow became the university's 16th
president. At his inauguration, President Crow outlined his vision for
transforming ASU into a "New American University"â€”one that would be open and
inclusive. Further, Crow initiated the idea of transforming ASU into "One
University in Many Places" by merging ASU's several campuses into a single
institution, sharing students, faculty, staff and accreditation. Aided by
hundreds of millions of dollars in donations, ASU embarked on an aggressive
years-long research facility capital building effort, resulting in the
establishment of the Biodesign Institute and several large interdisciplinary
research buildings. Along with the research facilities, the university faculty
was expanded, including the addition of three Nobel Laureates. In addition,
ASU's Downtown Phoenix campus was vastly expanded with several of the
University's colleges and schools relocated to the downtown campus. The
economic downturn that began in 2008 took a particularly hard toll on Arizona,
resulting in large cuts to ASU's budget. In response to these cuts, ASU
underwent several rounds of reorganizations, combining academic departments,
consolidating colleges and schools, and reducing university staff and
administrators. But, with an economic recovery underway in 2011, ASU continued
its campaign by expanding the West and Polytechnic Campuses, and establishing a
set of low-cost, teaching-focused extension campuses in Lake Havasu City and
Payson, Arizona In late 2011, ASU launched a collaboration with the Mayo Clinic
to create a medical school.. As part of the collaboration with Mayo, ASU moved
some academic departments onto the Mayo Clinic campus in Scottsdale, Arizona..
Mayo Medical and ASU have instituted a "Premedical Scholar Program" to further
ASC Clinical partnering program mission. ASU has created a network with its
clinical partners â€”area hospitals and healthcare organizationsâ€”to provide
inspiration, test innovations and real-world training for its students, and to
bring research back to the community in which it exists [http://
clinicalpartnerships.asu.edu/home]. Organization and administration. The
Arizona Board of Regents governs Arizona State University as well as the other
state's public universities; University of Arizona and Northern Arizona
University.The Board of Regents is composed of twelve members including eleven
voting, and one non-voting. Members of the boards are the Governor and the
Superintendent of Public Instruction that act as an ex-officio members, eight
volunteer Regent members with eight years term that are appointed by the
Governor, and two Student Regents with two years term, being a non-voting
apprentice term on its first year. ABOR provides policy guidance to the state
universities of Arizona. ASU has multiple campus locations, covering the
Phoenix metropolitan areas including the Main Tempe campus in Tempe, the West
campus and Downtown Phoenix campus both in Phoenix, and the Polytechnic campus
in Mesa. It also offers courses and degrees through ASU online to forward the
mission of the university. The Arizona Board of Regents appoints and elects the
president of the university, who is considered as the chief executive officer
and the chief budget officer of the institution.The president is responsible
for the execution of measures enacted by the Board of Regents, controls the
property of the university, and acts as the official representative of the
university to the Board of Regents. The chief executive officer is assisted
through the administration of the institution by the provost, vice presidents,
deans, faculty, directors, department chairs, and other officers. The president
also selects and appoints administrative officers and general counsels. The
16th and current ASU president is Michael M. Crow, and has served since July 1,
2002. ASU is organized into 16 schools and colleges that are spread out across
the four campuses. It offers 153 bachelor's degree programs, 147 master's
degree program, 83 doctoral programs and one law degree program. Campuses and
locations. ASU's academic programs are spread across four campuses in the
Phoenix Metropolitan Area; however, unlike most multi-campus institutions, ASU
describes itself as "one university in many places," meaning that it is not a
university system with separate campuses, and not one main campus with branch
campuses. Inter-campus shuttles and light rail allow students and faculty to
easily travel between the campuses. In addition to the physical campuses, ASU
includes a fifth "virtual campus" for online and extended education. Tempe
campus. ASU's Tempe campus is located in downtown Tempe, Arizona, about eight
miles (13Â km) east of downtown Phoenix. The campus is considered urban, and is
approximately in size. The campus is arranged around broad pedestrian malls and
is completely encompassed by an arboretum. The Tempe campus is also the largest
of ASU's campuses, with 59,794 students enrolled in at least one class on
campus. The Tempe campus is ASU's original campus, and Old Main, the first
building constructed, still stands today. There are many notable landmarks on
campus, including Grady Gammage Memorial Auditorium, designed by Frank Lloyd
Wright, Palm Walk, which is lined by 111 palm trees, Charles Trumbull Hayden
Library, the University Club Building, and University Bridge. In addition, the
campus has an extensive public art collection, considered one of the ten best
among university public art collections in America according to "Public Art
Review". Against the northwest edge of campus is the Mill Avenue district (part
of downtown Tempe) which has a college atmosphere that attracts many students
to its restaurants and bars. The Tempe campus is also home to all of the
university's athletic facilities. West campus. The West campus was established
in 1984 by the Arizona Legislature and sits on in a suburban area of northwest
Phoenix. The West campus lies about northwest of downtown Phoenix, and about
northwest of the Tempe campus. The West campus is designated as a Phoenix Point
of Pride, and is nearly completely powered by a 4.6MW solar array. This campus
is home to the New College of Interdisciplinary Arts and Sciences, the Mary Lou
Fulton Teachers College, and selected programs of the W.P. Carey School of
Business. The campus, patterned after the University of Oxfordâ€™s
architecture, is currently building a new residence hall, dining facility and
recreation center to open in 2012. Polytechnic campus. Founded in 1996 as "ASU
East," the ASU Polytechnic campus serves 10,521 students and is home to more
than 40 bachelorâ€™s, masterâ€™s and doctoral degrees in professional and
technical programs through the College of Technology and Innovation, and
selected programs of the W.P. Carey School of Business/Morrison School of
Agribusiness and Resource Management, Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College, the
School of Letters and Sciences, and College of Nursing and Health Innovation.
The campus located in southeast Mesa, Arizona, approximately southeast of the
Tempe campus, and southeast of downtown Phoenix. The Polytechnic campus sits on
the former Williams Air Force Base. Downtown Phoenix campus. The newest of
ASU's four campuses, the Downtown Phoenix campus was established in 2006 on the
north side of Downtown Phoenix. The campus has an urban design, with several
large modern academic buildings intermingled with commercial and retail office
buildings. In addition to the new buildings, the campus included the adaptive
reuse of several existing structures, including a 1930s era Post Office that is
on the National Register of Historic Places. Serving 17,151 students, the
campus houses the College of Nursing and Health Innovation, College of Public
Programs, Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication, and
School of Criminology and Criminal Justice. Colleges @ ASU. In response to
demands for lower-cost public higher education in Arizona, ASU is developing a
number of small, undergraduate-only college locations throughout Arizona.
Colleges @ ASU locations will be teaching-focused, and will provide a selection
of popular undergraduate majors. The first is being planned for Lake Havasu
City with programs available as early as fall 2012. Online degree programs. ASU
offers more than 50 undergraduate and graduate degree programs through an
entirely online platform, known as ASU Online. The degree programs delivered
online hold the same accreditation as the university's traditional face-to-face
programs, and students earn many of the same degrees as those who attended
courses in person. Online students are taught by the same faculty and receive
the same diploma as on-campus students. As of spring 2012, more than 5,000
students were enrolled at ASU Online. ASU Online is headquartered at ASU's
Skysong campus in Scottsdale, Arizona. ASU Online was ranked #1 in online
Student Services and Technology by U.S. News and World Report. Academics.
Admissions. Admission to any of the public universities in Arizona is ensured
to residents in the top 25% of their high-school class with a GPA of 3.0 in
core competencies. In 2011-2012, ASU admitted 86.6% of all applicants and is
considered a "selective" university by U.S. News and World Report. Barrett, The
Honors College is ranked 1st in the nation among peer institutions (1300-1400
minimum SAT) and 5th in Overall Excellence among all universities. Like most of
ASU's colleges and schools (e.g. Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass
Communication, W.P. Carey School of Business, Sandra Day O'Conner College of
Law, College of Nursing and Health Innovation, etc.), Barrett College maintains
much more strict admissions standards. Furthermore, Barrett College provides a
more rigorous curriculum with smaller classes and increased faculty
interaction. Although there are no set minimum admissions criteria for Barrett
College, the average GPA of incoming freshmen was 3.84, with average SAT scores
of 1314/1600 and ACT scores of 29. The Honors college enrolls 3523
undergraduate students, 613 of whom are National Merit Scholars. Academic
programs. ASU offers over 250 majors to undergraduate students, and more than
100 graduate programs leading to numerous masters and doctoral degrees in the
liberal arts and sciences, design and arts, engineering, journalism, education,
business, law, nursing, public policy, technology, and sustainability. These
programs are divided into 15 colleges and schools which are spread across ASU's
four campuses. ASU uses a plus-minus grading system with highest cumulative GPA
awarded of 4.0 (at time of graduation). Rankings. ASU's undergraduate program
is ranked 65th for public universities and 132nd of 280 "national universities"
by the 2012 "US News and World Report" ranking of US colleges and universities;
and, for the fourth year in a row, ASU was ranked in the top 10 for "Up and
Coming" universities in the US, for substantial improvements to academics and
facilities. In addition, ASU is ranked 78th in the world / 45th in the US by
the Academic Ranking of World Universities and was named as one of "America's
Best College Buys" by "Forbes" magazine. In 2012, "ASU students ranked fifth
among all public universities in National Science Foundation grants for
graduate study and 11th among all universities, including the Ivy institutions.
Among other things, the high achievement in this area of excellence points to
consistently strong advising and support, a logical outcome of Barrett (Arizona
State University's honor college) investing more in honors staff than any other
honors program that" Public University Honors reviewed. For its efforts to be a
national leader in campus sustainability, ASU was named one of the top 20 "cool
schools" by the Sierra Club, was named to the "Green Honor Roll" by the
Princeton Review, and earned an "A-" grade on the 2010 College Sustainability
Report Card. Several of ASU's graduate schools also appear among the top of the
US News & World Report rankings, including the 30th-ranked W. P. Carey School
of Business (along with its 4th-ranked program in Supply Chain Management and
the 15th-ranked program in Information Systems), the 26th-ranked Sandra Day
O'Connor College of Law, the 43rd-ranked Ira A. Fulton School of Engineering
(including five individual programs ranked in the top 30), the 16th-ranked
School of Public Affairs, the 26th-ranked Mary Lou Fulton Teachers College, the
21st-ranked College of Nursing and Health, and 25th-ranked Healthcare
Management. In addition, the individual Ph.D. programs in Psychology (36th of
240), Earth Science (17th of 108), and Criminology (12th) also earned high
rankings. Libraries. ASU's faculty and students are served by two dedicated
general-topic libraries: Hayden Library, which is the largest of the ASU
libraries and is located on the Tempe campus, and Fletcher Library, located on
the west campus. In addition, the Ross-Blakley Law Library and the Noble
Science Library are housed in dedicated facilities on the Tempe campus. Music
and Architecture collections are housed in facilities within the schools of
Music and Architecture, respectively. Smaller library facilities are also
located on the Polytechnic and Downtown campuses. As of 2009, ASU's libraries
held 4.4 million volumes. Student life. Extracurricular programs. Arizona State
University has an active extracurricular involvement program (Sun Devil
Involvement Center) with over 600 registered clubs and organizations on campus.
Located on the 3rd floor of the Memorial Union, the Sun Devil Involvement
Center (SDIC) provides opportunities for student involvement through clubs,
sororities, fraternities, community service, leadership, student government,
and co-curricular programming. Changemaker Central is student-run centralized
resource hub for student involvement in social entrepreneurship, civic
engagement, service learning and community service that catalyzes student-
driven social change. Changemaker Central locations have opened on all campuses
in Fall 2011, providing flexible, creative workspaces for everyone in the ASU
community. The project is entirely student run and advances ASUâ€™s
institutional commitments to social embeddedness and entrepreneurship. The
space allows students to meet, work and join new networks and collaborative
enterprises while taking advantage of ASUâ€™s many resources and opportunities
for engagement. Changemaker Central has signature programs, including
Innovation Challenge and 10,000 Solutions, that support students in their
journey to become changemakers by creating communities of support around new
solutions/ideas and increasing access to early stage seed funding. The
Innovation Challenge seeks undergraduate and graduate students from across the
university who are dedicated to making a difference in our local and global
communities through innovation. Students can win up to $10,000 to make their
innovative project, prototype, venture or community partnership ideas happen.
The 10,000 Solutions Project leverages the power of collaborative imagination
and innovation to create a solutions bank. As an experimental problem solving
platform, the project showcases and collects ideas at scale with local and
global impact. The 10,000 Solutions Project aims to see what can be
accomplished when passionate people join a collaborative community that builds
upon each otherâ€™s innovative ideas. In addition to Changemaker Central, the
Freshman Year Residential Experience (FYRE) and the Greek community (Greek
Life) at Arizona State University have been important in binding students to
the university, and providing social outlets. The Freshman Year Residential
Experience at Arizona State University was developed to improve the freshman
experience at Arizona State University and increase student retention figures.
FYRE provides advising, computer labs, free walk-in tutoring, workshops, and
classes for students. In 2003, "U.S. News and World Report" ranked FYRE as the
23rd best first year program in the nation. The second Eta chapter of
Phrateres, a non-exclusive, non-profit social-service club, was installed here
in 1958. Between 1924 and 1967, 23 chapters of Phrateres were installed in
universities across North America. Student media. "The State Press" is a daily
paper published on Monday through Friday during the fall and spring semesters,
and weekly during the summer sessions. The State Press covers news and events
on all four ASU campuses. Student editors and managers are solely responsible
for the content of the State Press newspaper and its associated website. These
publications are overseen by an independent board and guided by a professional
adviser employed by the University. "@west news" is an independent, student-run
newspaper covering news and events on ASU's west campus. ASU has two radio
stations. KASC The Blaze 1330 AM, is a broadcast station that is owned and
funded by the Cronkite School of Journalism, and is completely student-run save
for a faculty and professional adviser. The Blaze broadcasts local, alternative
and independent music 24 hours a day, and also features news and sports updates
at the top and bottom of every hour. W7ASU is an amateur radio station that was
first organized in 1935. W7ASU has about 30 members that enjoy amateur radio,
and is primarily a contesting club. Student government. Associated Students of
Arizona State University (ASASU) is the student government at Arizona State
University. It is composed of the Undergraduate Student Government and the
Graduate & Professional Student Association (GPSA). Members and officers of
ASASU are elected annually by the student body. The Residence Hall Association
(RHA) of Arizona State University is the student government for every ASU
student living on-campus. Each ASU campus has an RHA that operates
independently of each other. The purpose of RHA is to enhance the quality of
residence hall life and provide a cohesive voice for the residents by
addressing the concerns of the on-campus populations to university
administrators and other campus organizations; providing cultural, diversity,
educational, and social programming; establishing and working with individual
hall councils. Athletics. Arizona State University's Division I athletic teams
are called the Sun Devils, which is also the nickname used to refer to students
and alumni of the university. They compete in the Pac-12 Conference in 20
varsity sports. Historically, the university has shown great athletic dominance
in men's, women's, and mixed archery; men's, women's, and mixed badminton;
women's golf; women's swimming and diving; and baseball. The Sun Devils have
played in the Fiesta Bowl five times, and in 1987 the ASU football team won the
Rose Bowl, defeating the University of Michigan 22â€“15. Arizona State
University's NCAA Division I-A program competes in 9 varsity sports for men and
11 for women. The Sun Devil mascot is named Sparky. The university is a member
of the Pacific-12 Conference in all varsity sports. ASU's current athletic
director is Steve Patterson. In 2012 he took over for Lisa Love, formerly
senior associate athletic director at the University of Southern California.
Love was responsible for the hiring of coaches Herb Sendek, the men's
basketball coach, and Dennis Erickson, the men's football coach. Erickson was
also fired in 2012, and replaced by Todd Graham. ASU has won 23 national
collegiate team championships in the following sports: baseball (5), men's golf
(2), women's golf (7), men's gymnastics (1), softball (2), men's indoor track
(1), women's indoor track (2), men's outdoor track (1), women's outdoor track
(1), and wrestling (1). In September 2009 criticism over the seven-figure
salaries earned by various coaches at Arizona's public universities (including
ASU) prompted the Arizona Board of Regents to re-evaluate the salary and
benefit policy for athletic staff. Arizona State Sun Devils football was
founded in 1897 under coach Fred Irish. Currently, the team has played in the
2007 Holiday Bowl, 1997 Rose Bowl and also won the Rose Bowl in 1987 as well as
the Fiesta Bowl in 1982, 1975, 1973, 1972, and 1971. In 1970 they were co-
champions of the NCAA Division I FBS National Football Championship.
Additionally, the Sun Devils were Pac-10 Champions in 1986, 1996, and 2007.
People. Faculty. ASU faculty have included former CNN host Aaron Brown, meta-
analysis developer Gene V. Glass, feminist and author Gloria Feldt, and
Pulitzer Prize winner and "The Ants" author Bert HÃ¶lldobler. Donald Johanson,
who discovered the 3.18 million year old fossil hominid Lucy (Australopithecus)
in Ethiopia, is also a professor at ASU, as well as George Poste, Chief
Scientist for the Complex Adaptive Systems Initiative. Nobel laureate faculty
include Leland Hartwell, Edward C. Prescott, and Elinor Ostrom.
