Artists United Against Apartheid Artists United Against Apartheid was a 1985
protest group founded by activist and performer Steven Van Zandt and record
producer Arthur Baker to protest apartheid in South Africa. The group produced
the song "Sun City" and the album "Sun City" that year. Sun City. Van Zandt,
who had parted with Bruce Springsteen and The E Street Band at the height of
their success to go out on his own, traveled to South Africa to research his
next record. He was interested in South Africa because he had read that the
apartheid system was actually modeled after America's system of Indian
reservations, an issue that was his major passion. While in South Africa, he
was distressed by a place called Sun City, an interracial gambling resort
located in a bantustan, a nominally independent area supposedly ruled by black
Africans, in the middle of an impoverished rural homeland. Writing and
recording. Van Zandt became interested in writing a song about Sun City to make
parallels with the plight of native Americans. Danny Schechter, a journalist
who was then working with ABC News' 20/20, suggested turning the song into a
different kind of "We Are the World", or as Schechter explains, "a song about
change not charity, freedom not famine." When Van Zandt was finished writing
"Sun City", he, Schechter and producer Arthur Baker spent the next several
months searching for artists to participate in recording it. Van Zandt
initially declined to invite Springsteen, not wanting to take advantage of
their friendship, but Schechter had no problem asking himself; Springsteen
accepted the invitation. Van Zandt was also shy about calling legendary jazz
artist Miles Davis, whom Schechter also contacted; with minimal persuasion,
Davis also accepted. Eventually, Van Zandt, Baker and Schechter would gather a
wide array of artists, including Kool DJ Herc, Grandmaster Melle Mel, Ruben
Blades, Bob Dylan, Pat Benatar, Herbie Hancock, Ringo Starr and his son Zak
Starkey, Lou Reed, Runâ€“D.M.C., Peter Gabriel, Bob Geldof, Clarence Clemons,
David Ruffin, Eddie Kendricks, Darlene Love, Bobby Womack, Afrika Bambaataa,
Kurtis Blow, The Fat Boys, Jackson Browne and then-girlfriend Darryl Hannah,
Peter Wolf, U2, George Clinton, Keith Richards, Ronnie Wood, Bonnie Raitt, Hall
& Oates, Jimmy Cliff, Big Youth, Michael Monroe, Stiv Bators, Peter Garrett,
Ron Carter, Ray Barretto, Gil-Scott Heron, Nona Hendryx, Lotti Golden,
Lakshminarayana Shankar and Joey Ramone. These artists also vowed never to
perform at Sun City, because to do so would in their minds seem to be an
acceptance of apartheid. Schechter had also taken on the job of documenting the
sessions on video and producing a behind-the-scenes documentary, working with
16Â mm crews and independent production companies, directed by Jonathan Demme.
Paul "Lucky" Goldberg, director, producer and cinematographer for ThunderVision
Media Ltd and president of Hollywood New York International since 1993, worked
with producer and partner Paul Allen of ThunderVision Media Ltd, based in New
York at Kaufman Astoria Studios to capture the action. Lucky and Paul
introduced a new camera technology to work alongside the 16mm crews, the one-
piece camera - Panasonic's Recam format for extensive handheld coverage of two
days of the artists in the streets of Manhattan as well as a rendition of "Sun
City" in Washington Square Park. Approximately 150 policemen surrounded the
entire park on horseback and foot to secure the area for the performance, which
included Van Zandt, Bono, Springsteen, the Fat Boys, MÃ¶tley CrÃ¼e, Afrika
Bambaataa, Nona Hendryx and many others. One of the most notable shots was
caught when Bono gave a huge kiss on the cheek to one of the Fat Boys, in his
signature yellow satin jacket and red hat. They went on to shoot Sun City II in
Central Park, capturing the politics and music of the spirit of Little Steven's
award-winning "Sun City", including interviews with Peter Gabriel and Bono.
Schecther invited MTV to get involved and asked a friend, Hart Perry, to film
the sessions. During the course of the film, Schechter asks the artists to
explain their involvement in the project in their own words: "Sun City's become
a symbol of a society which is very oppressive and denies basic rights to the
majority of its citizens," said Jackson Browne. "In a sense, Sun City is also a
symbol of that society's 'right' to entertain itself in any way that it wants
to, to basically try to buy us off and to buy off world opinion." Recalls
Schechter, "I was surprised that many of the best-known rock 'n rollers were so
publicity shy. Most of them had publicists who staged their media appearances.
They weren't used to cameras poking them in the face. Bruce Springsteen at
first turned down my request for an interview, but just as I was walking away
from him dejected, he ran after me and agreed to say a few words for the
documentary. "When Miles started improvising in the studio...Steven and ]
insisted I not approach him with a camera. 'It's Miles, man," Baker said. "He's
erratic, idiosyncratic, explosive. Wild. Don't mess with him when he's
playing...' I barged into the booth while Davis was setting up, introduced
myself and asked if we could videotape him. Through the glass I could see Steve
and Arthur, heads in hands, convinced that I had blown it. Miles smiled. 'Bring
it on,' he ordered, 'bring it on.' And we did, getting priceless footage in the
bargain." In addition to "Sun City," a number of other songs were recorded,
making up the album "Sun City". Release. For a time, they were making the
record without a record company or any outside financial support. Van Zandt
financed much of it while producer Arthur Baker (notable for his work with
Afrika Bambaataa and New Order) donated studio time. Manhattan Records, under
Bruce Lundvall's direction, came on board, acquiring the record and enabling
them to pay some of the bills. A committed record company attorney, the late
Rick Dutka, also donated his time, along with noted music industry attorney,
the late Owen Epstein as well as Van Zandt's assistant, ZoÃ« Yanakis. Also, the
cream of New York's recording engineers, studio musicians and recording studios
donated their time. Schechter's connections with ABC News posed some risks. "I
couldn't tell ABC what I was doing on the side," recalls Schechter. "They would
not have approved. I knew I couldn't propose a story about Sun City either,
because I had stepped over the line and become part of the story. I tried and
mostly succeeded in keeping my name out of the papers and my mug out of the
video. I was terrified that 20/20 would dump me if they knew what I was doing,
especially if my affiliation with ABC was dragged into it, even though the
network had nothing to do with the project. I worked even harder at ABC,
producing more stories than many of my colleagues, so I couldn't be accused of
slacking off." Reaction. Song. The song "Sun City" was only a modest success in
the US, reaching #38 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart in December 1985. Only
about half of American radio stations played "Sun City," with some objecting to
the lyrics' explicit criticism of President Ronald Reagan's policy of
"constructive engagement." Meanwhile, "Sun City" was a major success in
countries where there was little or no radio station resistance to the record
or its messages, reaching #4 in Australia, #10 in Canada and #21 in the UK.
Unsurprisingly, the song was banned in South Africa. Documentary. Van Zandt and
Schechter also struggled to get the documentary seen. Public Broadcasting
Service (PBS) refused to broadcast the non-profit film "The Making of Sun City"
even though it won the International Documentary Association's top honors in
1986; PBS claimed the featured artists were also involved in making the film
and were therefore "self-promoting." (In contrast, PBS chose to broadcast "The
Making of "Raiders of the Lost Ark"", which was made as a promotional exercise
by the for-profit Paramount Pictures and Lucasfilm Ltd..) In 1987, WNYC-TV, the
New York City-owned public television station, aired an updated version of the
documentary, produced by filmmaker Bill Lichtenstein along with Schechter. The
film included updates about the Sun City resort and apartheid as well as the
success of the Sun City video. In addition to airing the documentary, WNYC-TV
made the film available over the PBS system to public television stations
across the country for broadcast. Overall impact. The album and single raised
more than a million U.S. dollars for anti-apartheid projects. It premiered at
the United Nations, thanks to the Special Committee Against Apartheid and UN
officers such as Aracelly Santana. The record never achieved the financial
success of "We Are the World," although Oliver Tambo and the ANC's school in
Tanzania "was sure happy when we gave them a big check," according to
Schechter. In South Africa, "Sun City" would later inspire musician Johnny
Clegg to create a local organization similar to Van Zandt's, and "Sun City"
also became the catalyst for the "South Africa Now" TV series. Post-apartheid.
With the end of the apartheid regime in 1994 and the reintegration of Sun City
and other former nominally-independent regions into the South African state,
"Sun City" ceased to be a contemporary protest and became a historical
document; any pledge to boycott Sun City or other similar places in South
Africa became superfluous. In 1997, the man who created Sun City, Sol Kerzner,
came to America to build the Mohegan Sun, a Native American gambling casino.
References. "The More You Watch, The Less You Know" by Danny Schechter
