Asset-based egalitarianism Asset-based egalitarianism is a form of
egalitarianism which theorises that equality is possible by a redistribution of
resources, usually in the form of a capital grant provided at the age of
majority. Names for the implementation of this theory in policy include
universal basic capital and stakeholding, and are generally synonymous within
the equal opportunity egalitarian framework. Historical development. The idea
has been around since Thomas Paine (January 29, 1737 â€“ June 8, 1809) in his
work "Agrarian Justice" 1795, and complemented his other thesis of basic
income. Two independent schools of thought were developed on the subject,
involving individuals from the American Labour Movement and scholars of the
Belgian School. However, the same reasoning (given by both schools) behind the
basic capital proposal is the redistribution of wealth usually funded by an
inheritance tax in order to provide a universal and unconditional sum of money
(or capital assets) at the age of majority. From most authors, the intention
was to create a nominal grant for everyone based on a deserved natural
inheritance of the earth. Relationship with policy. In the policy format,
asset-based egalitarianism is usually seen as the opposite policy proposal of
Philippe Van Parijs and his thesis of basic income, but asset-based egalitarian
proposals have received less academic attention. However, more recently the
wave of third way politics has seen much more emphasis placed on responsibility
and equality of opportunity and has reopened an old debate. Some famous recent
work on the policy efficaciousness of universal basic capital or asset-based
egalitarianism has been conducted by Bruce Ackerman and Anne Alstott in "The
Stakeholder Society". In this policy proposal, the method of funding the
'stake' was by means of a wealth tax and provides a sum of $80,000 for those
reaching the age of majority. In actual policy, Gordon Brown and the British
Labour Party initiated the United Kingdom Child Trust Fund, while in the United
States the idea has been implemented in the form of Individual Development
Accounts and argued for by Michael Sherraden. These remain the nearest
practical examples. Criticism. Asset-based egalitarian policies, such as the
Ackerman and Alstott proposals, are often criticised as not being egalitarian.
Due to different people having different abilities and talents to utilise
financial wealth, there is always a risk that those without formal financial
education would alienate their own freedom by dissipating their capital or
'stakeblowing.' Stuart White argued that unless education corrected for this,
there would be an inegalitarian outcome, as people fundamentally have different
asset-management capacities. See Time preference and Deferred gratification.
