Australasia Australasia is a region of Oceania comprising Australia, New
Zealand, the island of New Guinea, and neighbouring islands in the Pacific
Ocean. The term was coined by Charles de Brosses in "Histoire des navigations
aux terres australes" (1756). He derived it from the Latin for "south of Asia"
and differentiated the area from Polynesia (to the east) and the southeast
Pacific ("Magellanica"). It is also distinct from Micronesia (to the
northeast). Australasia sits on the Indo-Australian Plate, together with India.
Human geography. Geopolitically, Australasia is sometimes used as a term for
Australia and New Zealand together in the absence of another word limited to
those two countries. Sometimes the island of New Guinea (Papua New Guinea and
the Indonesian part of the island) is encompassed by the term. There are many
organisations whose names are prefixed with "(Royal) Australasian Society" that
are limited to just Australia and New Zealand. In the past, Australasia has
been used as a name for combined Australia/New Zealand sporting teams. Examples
include tennis between 1905 and 1915, when New Zealand and Australia combined
to compete in the Davis Cup international tournament, and at the Olympic Games
of 1908 and 1912. Ecological geography. From an ecological perspective the
Australasia ecozone is a distinct region with a common geologic and
evolutionary history and a great many unique flora and fauna. In this context,
Australasia is limited to Australia, New Guinea, New Zealand, New Caledonia,
and neighbouring islands, including the Indonesian islands from Lombok and
Sulawesi eastward. The biological dividing line from the Indomalaya ecozone of
tropical Asia is the Wallace Line â€“ Borneo and Bali lie on the western, Asian
side. Australia, New Zealand, and New Caledonia are all fragments of the
ancient supercontinent Gondwana, the marks of which are still visible in the
Christmas Island Seamount Province and other geophysical entities. These three
land masses have been separated from other continents, and from one another,
for millions of years. All of Australasia shares the Antarctic flora, although
the northern, tropical islands also share many plants with Southeast Asia.
Australia, New Guinea, and Tasmania are separated from one another by shallow
continental shelves, and were linked together when the sea level was lower
during the Ice Ages. They share a similar fauna which includes marsupial and
monotreme mammals and ratite birds. Eucalypts are the predominant trees in much
of Australia and New Guinea. New Zealand has no native land mammals, but also
had ratite birds, including the kiwi and the extinct moa. The Australasia
ecozone includes some nearby island groups, like Wallacea, the Bismarck
Archipelago, Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu, which were not formerly part of
Gondwana, but which share many characteristic plants and animals with
Australasia. References. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Footnotes
for an explanation of how to generate footnotes using the tags, and the
template below.
