Axis of Justice Axis of Justice is a non-profit organization co-founded by Serj
Tankian and Tom Morello. Its purpose is to bring together musicians, fans of
music, and grassroots progressivism to fight for social justice together.
Formation. In a 2007 interview, Tom Morello remarked that he formed Axis of
Justice with Serj Tankian after witnessing some members of the audience at
Ozzfest 2002 promoting racist symbols and imagery. In an effort to promote a
staunchly anti-racist and anti-fascist message, Axis of Justice allied with
Anti-Racist Action shortly after its formation. Axis of Justice tents appeared
at music festivals where either Audioslave (now defunct) or System of a Down
were playing, as it did at Lollapalooza 2003. The Axis of Justice also puts out
a monthly radio show that can be heard on Pacifica Radio station KPFK (90.7 FM)
in Los Angeles, California, and on XM Satellite Radio. The shows are archived
in MP3 format on the AOJ website and are available as free downloads. They also
have a number of books on their website that they recommend to support their
views. In 2004, they released a live album/DVD entitled "". It contains
performances by Flea from Red Hot Chili Peppers, Brad Wilk from Rage Against
the Machine and Chris Cornell of Soundgarden and Audioslave, Serj Tankian from
System of a Down, Pete Yorn, Tim Walker, Maynard James Keenan of Tool, A
Perfect Circle and Puscifer, and Wayne Kramer among others. It was recorded
during a concert at the Avalon in Los Angeles. The concert was a benefit to
raise money for the Axis of Justice and a variety of causes.
