Babels Babels is an international network of volunteer interpreters and
translators that was born out of the European Social Forum (ESF) process and
whose main objective is to cover the interpreting needs of the various Social
Forums. It is a horizontal, non-hierarchical network, with no permanent
structures of any kind. originated in the process of preparation for the 2002
ESF, a left-wing conference of the anti-globalization movement held in
Florence. A small network of 'communication activists' associated with ATTAC
France proposed that the conference use only volunteers to interpret the
various languages of the speakers for the audience. There was some debate about
the quality of volunteer translators but the cost of professionals helped sway
the argument. A last-minute call went out for volunteers to which 600 people
responded and which finally resulted in around 350 volunteer interpreters and
translators for the Forum. The group had no official space to work from and
little funds so had to squat a medieval tower. After the first ESF the
organisers of the translation formed Babels groups in France and Italy and
groups also sprang up in Germany, the UK, and Spain.These groups went on to
participate in counter G8 conferences in Evian and Annemasse. For the second
ESF in Paris organisers gave Babels Â£200,000 funding, offices facilities and a
longer preparation period. Over 1000 Babelistas (Babels translation volunteers)
took part in the translation. The Babels organisation went on to provide
translation for the ESF's global partner the World Social Forum (WSF) in Mumbai
and the first Social Forum of the Americas in Ecuador and the third ESF in
London. Babels describes itself as ""not a provider of linguistic services""
but rather ""a political actor""[http://www.babels.org/a4.html] and will not
work on any project unless it has been involved in contributing to the
definition of the project with its ideas and demands.
