Backward induction Backward induction is the process of reasoning backwards in
time, from the end of a problem or situation, to determine a sequence of
optimal actions. It proceeds by first considering the last time a decision
might be made and choosing what to do in any situation at that time. Using this
information, one can then determine what to do at the second-to-last time of
decision. This process continues backwards until one has determined the best
action for every possible situation (i.e. for every possible information set)
at every point in time. In the mathematical optimization method of dynamic
programming, backward induction is one of the main methods for solving the
Bellman equation. In game theory, backward induction is a method used to
compute subgame perfect equilibria in sequential games. The only difference is
that optimization involves just one decision maker, who chooses what to do at
each point of time, whereas game theory analyzes how the decisions of several
players interact. That is, by anticipating what the last player will do in each
situation, it is possible to determine what the second-to-last player will do,
and so on. In the related fields of automated planning and scheduling and
automated theorem proving, the method is called backward search or backward
chaining. In chess it is called retrograde analysis. Backward induction has
been used to solve games as long as the field of game theory has existed. John
von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern suggested solving zero-sum, two-person games
by backward induction in their "Theory of Games and Economic Behavior" (1944),
the book which established game theory as a field of study. An example of
decision-making by backward induction. Consider an unemployed person who will
be able to work for ten more years "t" = 1,2...,10. Suppose that each year in
which she remains unemployed, she may be offered a 'good' job that pays $100,
or a 'bad' job that pays $44, with equal probability (50/50). Once she accepts
a job, she will remain in that job for the rest of the ten years. (Assume for
simplicity that she cares only about her monetary earnings, and that she values
earnings at different times equally, i.e., the discount rate is zero.) Should
this person accept bad jobs? To answer this question, we can reason backwards
from time "t" = 10. It can be verified by continuing to work backwards that bad
offers should only be accepted if one is still unemployed at times 9 or 10;
they should be rejected at all times up to "t" = 8. The intuition is that if
one expects to work in a job for a long time, this makes it more valuable to be
picky about what job to accept. A dynamic optimization problem of this kind is
called an optimal stopping problem, because the issue at hand is when to stop
waiting for a better offer. Search theory is the field of microeconomics that
applies problems of this type to contexts like shopping, job search, and
marriage. An example of backward induction in game theory. Consider the
ultimatum game, where one player proposes to split a dollar with another. The
first player (the proposer) suggests a division of the dollar between the two
players. The second player is then given the option to either accept the split
or reject it. If the second player accepts, both get the amount suggested by
the proposer. If rejected, neither receives anything. Consider the actions of
the second player given any arbitrary proposal by the first player (that gives
the second player more than zero). Since the only choice the second player has
at each of these points in the game is to choose between something and nothing,
one can expect that the second will accept. Given that the second will accept
all proposals offered by the first (that give the second anything at all), the
first ought to propose giving the second as little as possible. This is the
unique subgame perfect equilibrium of the Ultimatum Game. (However, the
Ultimatum Game does have several other Nash equilibria which are not subgame
perfect.) See also centipede game. Backward induction and economic entry.
Consider a dynamic game in which the players are an incumbent firm in an
industry and a potential entrant to that industry. As it stands, the incumbent
has a monopoly over the industry and does not want to lose some of its market
share to the entrant. If the entrant chooses not to enter, the payoff to the
incumbent is high (it maintains its monopoly) and the entrant neither loses nor
gains (its payoff is zero). If the entrant enters, the incumbent can "fight" or
"accommodate" the entrant. It will fight by lowering its price, running the
entrant out of business (and incurring exit costs â€” a negative payoff) and
damaging its own profits. If it accommodates the entrant it will lose some of
its sales, but a high price will be maintained and it will receive greater
profits than by lowering its price (but lower than monopoly profits). Say that,
the best response of the incumbent is to accommodate if the entrant enters. If
the incumbent accommodates, the best response of the entrant is to enter (and
gain profit). Hence the strategy profile in which the entrant enters and the
incumbent accommodates if the entrant enters is a Nash equilibrium consistent
with backward induction. However, if the incumbent is going to fight, the best
response of the entrant is to not enter, and if the entrant does not enter, it
does not matter what the incumbent chooses to do in the hypothetical case that
the incumbent does enter. Hence the strategy profile in which the incumbent
fights if the entrant enters, but the entrant does not enter is also a Nash
equilibrium. However, were the entrant to deviate and enter, the incumbent's
best response is to accommodate---the threat of fighting is not credible. This
second Nash equilibrium can therefore be eliminated by backward induction. A
paradox of backward induction. The unexpected hanging paradox is a paradox
related to backward induction. Suppose a prisoner is told that she will be
hanged sometime between Monday and Friday of next week. However, the exact day
will be a surprise (i.e. she will not know the night before that she will be
executed the next day). The prisoner, interested in outsmarting her
executioner, attempts to determine which day the execution will occur. She
reasons that it cannot occur on Friday, since if it had not occurred by the end
of Thursday, she would know the execution would be on Friday. Therefore she can
eliminate Friday as a possibility. With Friday eliminated, she decides that it
cannot occur on Thursday, since if it had not occurred on Wednesday, she would
know that it had to be on Thursday. Therefore she can eliminate Thursday. This
reasoning proceeds until she has eliminated all possibilities. She concludes
that she will not be hanged next week. To her surprise, she is hanged on
Wednesday. Here the prisoner reasons by backward induction, but seems to come
to a false conclusion. Note, however, that the description of the problem
assumes it is possible to surprise someone who is performing backward
induction. The mathematical theory of backward induction does not make this
assumption, so the paradox does not call into question the results of this
theory. Nonetheless, this paradox has received some substantial discussion by
philosophers. This paradox is similar to a shorter one: "guess heads or tails
but not what you think". While it is easy to come with a flip fulfilling the
statement, described reasoning leads to conclusion that there is no way to do
that.
