Ballot box A ballot box is a temporarily sealed container, usually square box
though sometimes a tamper resistant bag, with a narrow slot in the top
sufficient to accept a ballot paper in an election but which prevents anyone
from accessing the votes cast until the close of the voting period. Usage. It
will usually be located in a polling station although in some countries,
notably Ireland and Russia, there may also be ballot boxes that are taken to
people's homes where they would otherwise be unable to travel to the polling
station. When very large ballot papers are used, there may be a feeder
mechanism to assist in the deposit of the paper into the box. Transparent
ballot boxes may be used in order for people to be able to witness that the box
is empty prior to the start of the election (i.e. not stuffed with fraudulent
votes). At the close of the election all boxes can be taken to a single
location for tallying (The count) and the result declared. Alternately the
boxes can be tallied at the polling station, with individual stations
announcing their results to be tallied (known as precinct count). Ballot boxes
are in some jurisdictions obsolete, because of the increase in paperless
electronic voting. The word ballot derives from voting systems based upon the
use of a small ball instead of a voting paper: see blackball. History. The
first British secret ballot using ballot papers and a ballot box was held in
Pontefract on 15 August 1872, under the terms of the recently-enacted Ballot
Act 1872. In a ministerial by-election following his appointment as Chancellor
of the Duchy of Lancaster, Hugh Childers was re-elected as MP for Pontefract.
The original ballot box, sealed in wax with a liquorice stamp, is held at
Pontefract museum.
