Ballot access Ballot access rules, called nomination rules outside the United
States, regulate the conditions under which a candidate or political party is
either entitled to stand for election or to appear on voters' ballots. The
criterion to stand as a candidate depends on the individual legal system,
however they may include the age of a candidate, citizenship, endorsement by a
political party and profession. Legal restrictions, such as those based around
competence or moral aptitude, can be used in a discriminatory manner.
Restrictive and discriminatory ballot access rules can impact the civil rights
of candidates, political parties and voters. Overview of ballot access. Each
state has its own ballot access laws to determine who may appear on ballots and
who may not. According to Article I, Section 4, of the United States
Constitution, the authority to regulate the time, place, and manner of federal
elections is up to each State, unless Congress legislates otherwise. The
primary argument put forward by States for restricting ballot access has been
the presumption that setting ballot access criteria too low would result in
numerous candidates on the ballot, splitting the votes of similar minded
voters. Example: With Plurality voting, an old but common way to pick the
winner, the candidate with the most votes wins, even if the candidate does not
have a majority of the votes. Suppose 55% liberals and 45% conservatives vote
in a district. If two candidates appeal to liberals, but only one appeals to
conservatives, the votes of liberals will likely split between the two liberal
candidates, for example 25% may vote for one and 30% for the other, giving the
conservative the office although 55% preferred to see a liberal in the office.
Plurality races, also known as First past the post, tend to cause consolidation
among political parties for this reason. However, proponents of ballot access
reform say that reasonably easy access to the ballot does not lead to a glut of
candidates, even where many candidates do appear on the ballot, as was the case
in the crowded 2003 California recall. In that case, such actual crowding did
not confuse voters: "Even though 135 candidates appeared on the ballot,
newspapers reported that voters did not have trouble finding the candidate they
wished to vote for." Historically, there were generally no restrictions on
ballot access in the United States until after the introduction of the so-
called "Australian ballot" beginning in the 1880s. The 18th century prevalence
of "voice voting" gave way to paper ballots, but until the 1880s paper ballots
were not officially designed and printed by the government but were instead
privately produced "tickets" that were distributed (usually by political
parties) to the voter, who would take the ticket to the polling place and
deposit it in the ballot box. The 1880s reform movement that led to officially
designed secret ballots had some salutary effects, but it also gave the
government control over who could be on the ballot. As historian Peter
Argersinger has pointed out, the reform that conferred power on officials to
regulate who may be on the ballot carried with it the danger that this power
would be abused by officialdom and that legislatures controlled by established
political parties (specifically, the Republican and Democratic Parties), would
enact restrictive ballot access laws to influence election outcomes to ensure
re-election of their own party's candidates. Perhaps the most prominent
advocate of the 1880s ballot reform movement, Dean Wigmore, suggested that "ten
signatures" might be an appropriate requirement for nomination to the official
ballot for a legislative office. In the 20th century, ballot access laws
imposing signature requirements far more restrictive than Wigmore had
envisioned were enacted by many state legislatures; in many cases, the two
major parties wrote the laws in such a way that the burdens created by these
new ballot access requirements (usually in the form of difficult signature-
gathering nominating petition drives) fell on alternative candidates, but not
on major party candidates. Proponents of more open ballot access argue that
restricting access to the ballot has the effect of unjustly restricting the
choices available to the voters and typically disadvantages third party
candidates and other candidates who are not affiliated with the established
parties. State laws, the Constitution, and international human rights. The
United States has been criticized by the Organization for Security and Co-
operation in Europe (OSCE) for its harsh ballot access laws in the past. In
1996, United States delegates responded to the criticism by saying, unfair
ballot access "could be remedied through existing appeal and regulatory
structures and did not represent a breach of the Copenhagen commitments." The
OSCE published a report on the 2004 United States election, which, among other
things, noted restrictive ballot access laws. The United States and Switzerland
are the only countries in the world that donâ€™t have national ballot access
standards for federal elections; however in Swiss federal elections each Canton
elects its own representatives, and each candidate can only be listed in one
Canton. Since 1985, Democrats and Republicans (including Congressman John
Conyers (D-MI), Congressman Tim Penny (D-MN) and Congressman Ron Paul (R-TX))
have repeatedly introduced in the US House of Representatives a bill that would
set maximum ballot access requirements for House elections. The bill has only
made it to the House floor once, in 1998, when it was defeated 62-363. While
some supporters of easy ballot access seek congressional intervention, other
reformers are happy congress has not mandated stricter access laws in all
states. Reducing access requirements at the local level would be easier than
doing so federally if congress wanted to guarantee its re-elections. State
ballot access laws. Ballot access laws in the United States vary widely from
state to state. A brief outline of such laws follows (incomplete).
Constitutional dimensions of ballot access laws. The United States Supreme
Court precedent on ballot access laws cases has been a bit conflicting. In
"Williams v. Rhodes" (1969) the court struck down Ohio's ballot access laws on
First and Fourteenth Amendment grounds, but during the 1970s tended to uphold
strict ballot access law, with the newly declared 'compelling State interest'
being the, "preservation of the integrity of the electoral process and
regulating the number of candidates on the ballot to avoid voter confusion."
Right To Candidacy. Nicole A. Gordon Political Science Quarterly Volume 91
Number 3 1976 The United Supreme Supreme Court did strike down restrictive
provisions in a ballot access law in Anderson v. Celebrezze,' 460 U.S. 780
(1983), but most of the subsequent court rulings in the 1980s - 2000s (decade)
continued to upheld strict ballot access laws in both primary and general
elections. Among the most notable of these cases from the 1970s - 1990s would
include; The United States Supreme Court has not expressly ruled on the maximum
level of restrictions that can be imposed on an otherwise qualified candidate
or political party seeking ballot access. As a result, lower courts have often
reached difficult conclusions about whether or not a particular set of ballot
access rules are unconstitutional. Requiring an otherwise eligible candidate or
political party to obtain signatures greater than 5% of the eligible voters in
the previous election may be unconstitutional. This theory is based on the fact
that in "Jenness v. Fortson," 403 U.S. 431 (1971), the court upheld a
restrictive ballot access law with this 5% signature requirement, where as the
"Williams v. Rhodes" (1969) had involved a 15% signature requirement. Most
State ballot access requirements, even the more restrictive ones, are less than
5%, and court has generally refused to hear ballot access cases that involved
an Independent or minor party candidate challenging a ballot access law that
requires less than 5%. . International human rights law and ballot access.
International agreements that have the status of treaties of the U.S. are part
of the supreme law of the land, under Article VI of the United States
Constitution. Write-in status versus ballot access. Depending on the office and
the state, it may be possible for a voter to cast a write-in vote for a
candidate whose name does not appear on the ballot. It is extremely rare for
such a candidate to win office. In some cases, write-in votes are simply not
counted. Having one's name printed on the ballot confers an enormous advantage
over candidates who are not on the ballot. The United States Supreme Court has
noted that write-in status is absolutely no substitute for being on the ballot.
The two most notable cases of write-in candidates actually winning are the
elections of Lisa Murkowski in 2010 and Strom Thurmond in 1954, both to the
United States Senate. Other cases include the election of Charlotte Burks to
the Tennessee State Senate seat of her late husband, Tommy Burks, murdered by
his only opponent on the ballot; and the write-in primary victories in the re-
election campaign of Mayor Anthony A. Williams of the District of Columbia. All
of these cases involved unique political circumstances, a popular and well
known candidate, and a highly organized and well funded write-in education
campaign. Justification of strict ballot access laws by two party supporters.
Strict ballot access laws are not required for a two party system, as can be
seen by the experience of Canada and the United Kingdom. However, the following
arguments are put forth about the need for strict ballot access laws in the
United States
