Bob Dornan Robert Kenneth "Bob" Dornan (born April 3, 1933) is a Republican and
former member of the United States House of Representatives from California and
a vocal advocate of pro-life and social conservative causes. A boisterous
former actor and television talk show host, Dornan had a flair for the dramatic
that drew him supporters and detractors well beyond his congressional
districts. Though never a major power in Washington, he became one of the most
well-known members of the House of Representatives and has been described as
"one of the leading firebrands among American politicians." Biography. Dornan
attended Loyola University of Los Angeles (later renamed Loyola Marymount
University) until 1953. At age 19, Dornan volunteered to join the United States
Air Force. During his time in the USAF, he survived two emergency parachute
ejections and two "dead stick" forced landings (including one of an F-100).
Dornan also served as a photographer during the Vietnam War and flew relief
flights into Biafra. He was an active duty serviceman in USAF until 1958,
reaching the rank of Captain. He then served in the Air Force Reserve until
1975. Dornan was also involved in entertainment. He starred in the movie "The
Starfighters" (playing an Air Force pilot whose father is a U.S. congressman),
which was featured on "Mystery Science Theater 3000". He acted in television
series, including a frequent role as Captain Fowler on "Twelve O'Clock High"
and smaller roles on "Bewitched" and "I Dream of Jeannie." Dornan was also an
Emmy-award winning television talk show host on "Tempo" and "The Robert K.
Dornan Show" broadcast from Los Angeles from 1967 to 1973. Politics. Dornan
moved into politics in 1973 as national spokesman for the Citizens for Decency
Through Law advocacy group. He made an unsuccessful run for mayor of Los
Angeles the same year. In 1976, Dornan was elected to the House of
Representatives, representing the 27th Congressional District in western Los
Angeles County. He was re-elected twice. He was such an unswerving advocate for
the development of the B-1 bomber, that he was soon nicknamed "B-1 Bob." After
the 1980 census, California's congressional map was redrawn. Dornan's district,
previously a Republican-leaning swing district, was made significantly more
Democratic. Believing he had no chance of winning this new district, he opted
to run for the United States Senate in 1982. He finished fourth in the
Republican primary behind San Diego mayor and future Governor Pete Wilson, who
won in November. Dornan moved to Garden Grove, in the more Republican Orange
County. In 1984, he was elected to Congress from the 38th District in central
Orange County, defeating 10-year Democratic incumbent Jerry M. Patterson by a
53% to 45% margin amid Ronald Reagan's massive landslide that year. In 1986, he
won a tough race against Democratic state Assemblyman Richard Robinson, winning
by a 55% to 43% margin. He was re-elected four more times and served on the
Intelligence Committee. His district was renumbered as the 46th District after
the 1990 Census. Dornan made headlines in March 1985 for a confrontation with
Representative Thomas Downey (D-NY) on the House floor. Downey asked Dornan
about comments he had made calling Downey "a draft-dodging wimp." According to
Downey, Dornan, grabbing him by collar and tie, said, "It's good you're being
protected by the sergeant-at-arms. If I saw you outside, it would be a
different story" and threatened him "with some form of bodily harm." Dornan
claimed he was merely straightening Downey's tie and refused to apologize for
the incident or the derogatory comment. A Dornan aide said, "It will be a cold
day in hell before he gets an apology from Bob Dornan." Dornan was staunchly
conservative. However, he held some positions that some might call liberal,
including sponsoring animal protection acts, earning recognition by PETA. In
1995, he received a minor reprimand from the House for stating in a floor
speech that President Bill Clinton had "given aid and comfort to the enemy"
during the Vietnam War. In 1996, Dornan ran for President of the United States,
using his campaign primarily as a vehicle to continue to criticize Clinton. In
a GOP debate in Iowa on January 13, Dornan called Clinton a "criminal" and a
"pathological liar." When asked why voters should choose Dornan over his
Republican rivals to challenge Clinton in the general election, he argued that
he had more children and grandchildren than the others, with only Richard Lugar
coming anywhere near him on that score. In 1997, Dornan sought and received
information concerning reports that Israel had purportedly received from former
military men who had emigrated from the Soviet Union, concerning an alleged
successful water landing of the KAL 007 airliner, shot down by the Soviet Union
in 1983. These included what Dornan termed "credible reports" of the supposed
survival of Congressman Larry McDonald of Georgia, who had been a passenger on
KAL 007, and Dornan featured this on his radio program. For his final
successful run for Congress, Dornan had signs posted at polling places that
warned voters in Spanish that they should be prepared to prove their
citizenship in order to vote, suggesting that immigration officials would be
present. The success of this action was believed to have kept enough Latino
voters away from the polls to eke out a final victory for Dornan against Mike
Farber in an election that featured allegations of domestic violence by Dornan.
A long court battle deemed these signs illegal and inappropriate, and he was
not able to post them again at the next election, which he then lost to Loretta
Sanchez. Controversial statements. In 1994, a 120-page book of quotations of
Dornan was compiled by Nathan Callahan and William Payton and published as
"Shut Up, Fag!" The quotation that gives the book the title was actually
shouted by Dornan's wife, Sallie, at an AIDS activist during an Orange County
town forum. Dornan claimed the book was backed by director Oliver Stone, whom
Dornan labeled "a Bolshevik enemy". Dornan's comments and behavior have led his
political opponents to question his mental health. Mike Kaspar of the Orange
County Democratic Party said, "The primary issue is Bob Dornan, himself. I
think his character and his own sanity are an issue here." At a White House
Correspondents Dinner, Al Franken (who is actually a friend of Dornan) joked
"having Al D'Amato leading an ethics investigation is like getting Bob Dornan
to head up a mental health task force." Michael Moore devoted an entire chapter
of his book "Downsize This!" to his efforts to get Dornan involuntarily
committed for psychiatric examination. Defeat. Dornan's district had always
been considered the only Orange County district where a Democrat had a
realistic chance of winning. However, it became even more Democratic after the
1990 Census, when it absorbed a considerably larger number of Latino voters
than he had previously represented. After failing to win the GOP presidential
nomination in 1996, Dornan ran for reelection to the House against Loretta
Sanchez, a Latina and former Republican who had switched parties and run as a
Democrat. Dornan lost by 979 votes. Following the narrow defeat, Dornan alleged
that Sanchez's winning margin was provided by illegal voting from non-U.S.
citizens. A thirteen-month House of Representatives investigation ensued,
during which Sanchez was seated provisionally, pending the inquiry. A task
force found 748 votes that had been cast illegallyâ€”624 from non-citizens in
addition to 124 that had already been thrown out by California officials. This
was not enough to overturn Sanchez' margin of victory and she was allowed to
keep her seat. However, in consultation with the INS, the House committee
identified as many as 4,700 questionable registration affidavits. The probe was
dropped before these affidavits could be investigated. Attempt to revive
political career. Dornan sought a rematch against Sanchez in 1998, but was
badly defeated. In 2004, Dornan challenged Congressman Dana Rohrabacher, a
fellow Republican, in the primary. Dornan charged Rohrabacher with being soft
on terrorism and being too close to Islamic extremists. However, he lost by an
84% to 16% margin. Dornan remained in his Virginia home, appearing at
conservative functions and conservative talk radio shows. During the summer of
2005, Dornan briefly expressed interest in the 48th Congressional District seat
that became vacant when Christopher Cox resigned to become Chairman of the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission. He was interested in running as the nominee
of the American Independent Party, but was rebuffed by party leaders in Orange
County. In December 2005, Dornan substituted for radio talk show host Michael
Savage, criticizing George W. Bush for not moving for a formal Declaration of
War after 9/11. He did so again on 12 April 2006. Dornan currently works with
the American Life League, his primary mission as a member of the American Life
League team will be refocusing attention on the Right to Life Act, a proposal
that establishes the personhood of each human being as beginning at
fertilization.
