Brandeis University Brandeis University () is an American private research
university with a liberal arts focus. It is located in the southwestern corner
of Waltham, Massachusetts, nine miles (14Â km) west of Boston. The university
has an enrollment of approximately 3,200 undergraduate and 2,100 graduate
students. In 2011, it was ranked by the U.S. News and World Report as the
number 31 national university in the United States. Forbes listed Brandeis
University as number 57 among all national universities and liberal arts
colleges combined in 2010. Brandeis was founded in 1948 as a nonsectarian
Jewish-sponsored coeducational institution on the site of the former Middlesex
University. The university is named for Louis Brandeis (1856â€“1941), the first
Jewish Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. History. Founders.
Names associated with the conception of Brandeis include Israel Goldstein,
George Alpert, C. Ruggles Smith, Albert Einstein, and Abram L. Sachar. C.
Ruggles Smith was the son of Dr. John Hall Smith, founder of Middlesex
University, who had died in 1944. In 1946, the university was on the brink of
financial collapse. At the time, it was one of the few medical schools in the
U. S. that did not impose a Jewish quota; but it had never been able to secure
AMA accreditationâ€”in part, its founder believed, due to institutional
antisemitism in the AMAâ€”and, as a result, Massachusetts had all but shut it
down. Israel Goldstein was a prominent rabbi in New York from 1918 until 1960
(when he immigrated to Israel), and an influential Zionist. Before 1946, he had
headed the New York Board of Rabbis, the Jewish National Fund, and the Zionist
Organization of America, and helped found the National Conference of Christians
and Jews. On his eightieth birthday, in Israel, Yitzhak Rabin and other leaders
of the government, the parliament, and the Zionist movement assembled at his
house to pay him tribute. But among all his accomplishments, the one chosen by
the New York Times to headline his obituary was: "Rabbi Israel Goldstein, A
Founder of Brandeis." C. Ruggles Smith, desperate for a way to save something
of Middlesex University, learned of a New York committee headed by Goldstein
that was seeking a campus to establish a Jewish-sponsored secular university,
and approached Goldstein with a proposal to give the Middlesex campus and
charter to Goldstein's committee, in the hope that his committee might "possess
the apparent ability to reestablish the School of Medicine on an approved
basis." Goldstein was concerned about being saddled with a failing medical
school, but excited about the opportunity to secure a "campus not far from New
York, the premier Jewish community in the world, and only from Boston, one of
the important Jewish population centers." Goldstein agreed to accept Smith's
offer and then proceeded to recruit George Alpert, a Boston lawyer with fund-
raising experience as national vice president of the United Jewish Appeal.
George Alpert (1898-September 11, 1988) had worked his way through Boston
University School of Law and co-founded the firm of Alpert and Alpert. His firm
had a long association with the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad, of
which he was to become president from 1956 to 1961 He is best known today as
the father of Richard Alpert (Baba Ram Dass). He was influential in Boston's
Jewish community. His Judaism "tended to be social rather than spiritual." He
was involved in assisting children displaced from Germany. Alpert was to be
chairman of Brandeis from 1946 to 1954, and a director from 1946 until his
death. Goldstein also recruited Albert Einstein, whose involvement, while
stormy and short-lived, was extremely important, as it drew national attention
to the nascent university. The founding organization was named "The Albert
Einstein Foundation for Higher Learning, Inc." and early press accounts
emphasized his involvement. Einstein incident. The origin of what was to become
Brandeis was closely associated with the name of Albert Einstein from February
5, 1946, when he agreed to the establishment of the Albert Einstein Foundation
for Higher Learning, Inc., until June 22, 1947, when he withdrew his support.
The trustees offered to name the university after Einstein in the summer of
1946, but Einstein declined, and on July 16, 1946 the board decided the
university would be named after Louis Brandeis. On August 19, the plans for the
new university were announced by prominent rabbi and Zionist Israel Goldstein,
president of the Albert Einstein Foundation. Goldstein said that the planned
university was to be supported by contributions from Jewish organizations and
individuals, and stressed the point that the institution was to be without
quotas and open to all "regardless of race, color, or creed." The institution
was to be "deeply conscious both of the Hebraic tradition of Torah looking upon
culture as a birthright, and of the American ideal of an educated democracy."
In later stories the New York Times' capsule characterization of Brandeis was
"a Jewish-supported non-quota university." Einstein and Goldstein clashed
almost immediately. Einstein objected to what he thought was excessively
expansive promotion, and to Goldstein's sounding out Abram L. Sachar as a
possible president without consulting Einstein. Einstein took great offense at
Goldstein's having invited Cardinal Francis Spellman to participate in a
fundraising event. Einstein resigned on September 2, 1946. Believing the
venture could not succeed without Einstein, Goldstein quickly agreed to resign
himself, and Einstein returned; his brief departure was publicly denied. The
Foundation acquired the campus of the Middlesex University in Waltham, which
was almost defunct except for the Middlesex Veterinary and Medical College. The
charter of this small and marginal operation was transferred to the Foundation
along with the campus. The Foundation had pledged to continue operating it, but
began to feel that it would never be more than third-rate, while its operating
costs were burdensome at a time when the Foundation was trying to raise funds.
Disputes arose whether to try to improve itâ€”as Einstein wishedâ€”or to
terminate it. Einstein also became alarmed by press announcements that
exaggerated the school's success at fundraising, and on June 22, 1947 he made a
final break with the enterprise. The veterinary school was closed, despite
"indignant and well-publicized protests and demonstrations by the disappointed
students and their parents". George Alpert, a lawyer responsible for much of
the organizational effort, gave another reason for the break: Einstein's desire
to offer the presidency of the school to left-wing scholar Harold Laski. Alpert
characterized Laski as "a man utterly alien to American principles of
democracy, tarred with the Communist brush." He said, "I can compromise on any
subject but one: that one is Americanism." Six years later, Einstein would
decline the offer of an honorary degree from Brandeis, writing to Brandeis
president Abram L. Sachar that "what happened in the stage of preparation of
Brandeis University was not at all caused by a misunderstanding and cannot be
made good any more." Historians Slater and Slater commented that "plagued by
infighting, Brandeis in early 1948 seemed a project in serious trouble.
Nonetheless, the school opened in the fall with 107 students." The historians
list the opening of Brandeis as one of their "Great Moments in Jewish History."
In 1954 Brandeis inaugurated a graduate program and became fully accredited. In
1985, Brandeis was elected to membership in the Association of American
Universities, an association that focuses on graduate education and research.
Student takeover of Ford Hall. From January 8â€“18, 1969 about 70 students
captured and held then-student-center, Ford Hall. The student protesters
renamed the school "Malcolm X University" for the duration of the siege
(distributing buttons with the new name and logo) and issued a list of ten
demands for better minority representation on campus. Most of these demands
were subsequently met. Ford Hall was demolished in August 2000 to make way for
the Shapiro Campus Center, which was opened and dedicated October 3, 2002. Rose
Art Museum. But in response to a university budget shortfall of $10 million, a
formerly $700 million endowment now reduced, and the loss of longtime donors
who lost money through investments with Bernard Madoff, on January 26, 2009 the
university announced it would close the Rose Art Museum in September 2009 and
sell off a prized collection of contemporary American art, stating "The bottom
line is that the students, the faculty and core academic mission come first.
(Trustees) had to look at the college's assets and came to a decision to
maintain that fundamental commitment to teaching." Amidst protests and
criticism, the Massachusetts Attorney General plans to review the planned sale
and wills and agreements between the museum and donors. The university
subsequently indicated that it would sell only a limited number of pieces, if
any, and would keep the museum open as a teaching and exhibition gallery. The
failure to resolve the university's budget difficulties through the art sell-
off led to a decision in May 2009 to suspend the university's contribution to
employees' retirement funds for one year. Brandeis University's president,
Jehuda Reinharz, announced that he would resign at the end of the academic
year, the Boston Globe reported. The announcement took many on the campus by
surprise, but Mr. Reinharz said the recent criticism over his financial
stewardship and plans to close the university's Rose Art Museum was not a
factor in his decision. At age 65, he said, he felt the time had come to move
on. A new president, Frederick M. Lawrence, took office on January 1, 2011. By
June 30, 2011, a lawsuit that had been brought against the university to
prevent the closing of the Rose was settled. The museum remains open, and no
works of art were sold to support university operations. The 50th anniversary
and reopening took place on October 25, 2011. Academics. The College of Arts
and Sciences comprises 24 departments and 22 interdepartmental programs, which,
in total, offer 43 majors and 47 minors. The Heller School for Social Policy
and Management, founded in 1959, is noteworthy for its graduate programs in
healthcare administration, social policy, social work, and international
development. Internships, research assistantships and other hands-on
experiences are available throughout the curriculum. The global and
experiential dimensions of education at Brandeis are carried out through
international centers and institutes, which sponsor lectures and colloquia and
add to the ranks of distinguished scholars on campus. The Brandeis University
Press, a member of the University Press of New England, publishes books in a
variety of scholarly and general interest fields. The Goldfarb Library at
Brandeis has more than 1.6 million volumes and 300,000 e-journals. The library
also houses a large United States Government archive. Brandeis University is a
part of the Boston Library Consortium, which allows its students, faculty, and
staff to access and borrow books and other materials from other BLC
institutions including, Brown University, Tufts University, and Williams
College. Cohen Center for Modern Jewish Studies. In 1980, Brandeis University
established the Maurice and Marilyn Cohen Center for Modern Jewish Studies, the
first academic center devoted to the study of Jewish life in the United States.
The Cohen Centerâ€™s work spans basic research on Jewish identity to applied
educational evaluation studies. The centerâ€™s recent signature studies include
research with participants in Taglit-Birthright Israel, investigations of
synagogue transformation, and analyses of Jewish summer camping. CMJS research
has altered the understanding of contemporary Jewish life and the role of
Jewish institutions in the United States. Schuster Institute for Investigative
Journalism. The Elaine and Gerald Schuster Institute for Investigative
Journalism was launched in September 2004 as the first investigative reporting
center based at a United States university. Steinhardt Social Research
Institute. The Steinhardt Social Research Institute was created in 2005 from a
gift from Michael Steinhardt as a forum to collect, analyze, and disseminate
data about the Jewish community and about religion and ethnicity in the United
States. The first mission of SSRI was to interpret the inherent problems with
the National Jewish Population Survey of 2000 (NJPS). SSRI has done a Jewish
Population Survey of the Greater Boston area, the results of which were
released on November 9, 2006. The Institute collects and organizes existing
socio-demographic data from private, communal, and government sources and will
conduct local and national studies of the character of American Jewry and
Jewish organizations. The work of the Institute is done by a multidisciplinary
staff of faculty and scholars, working with undergraduate and graduate
students, and augmented by visiting scholars and consultants. The Institute
works in close collaboration with the Maurice and Marilyn Cohen Center for
Modern Jewish Studies. Women's Studies Research Center. The Women's Studies
Research Center, founded and directed by Shulamit Reinharz, wife of former
university president Jehuda Reinharz, is located at the Epstein Building on the
Brandeis campus. Notable faculty and graduates. Brandeis, which is one of
America's smallest and youngest research universities, has produced a body of
unusually accomplished alumni, especially in academia, the professions, and
literature, and can boast a distinguished faculty. Among the better-known
graduates are screenwriters for the television show Friends David Crane and
Marta Kauffman, political activists Abbie Hoffman and Angela Davis, journalist
Thomas Friedman, Congressman Stephen J. Solarz, physicist Edward Witten,
novelist Ha Jin, political theorist Michael Walzer, actress Debra Messing,
philosopher Michael Sandel, Olympic Silver Medalist fencer Timothy Morehouse,
social and psychoanalytic theorist Nancy Chodorow, and author Mitch Albom.
Among the distinguished faculty, present and past, are composers David Rakowski
and Leonard Bernstein, social theorist Herbert Marcuse, psychologist Abraham
Maslow, human rights activist Eleanor Roosevelt, Anita Hill, historian David
Hackett Fischer, economist Thomas Sowell, diplomat Dennis Ross, children's
author Margret Rey, sociologist Morrie Schwartz, and poet Adrienne Rich.
Athletics. The Brandeis University athletic teams The Judges compete in the
University Athletic Association (UAA) conference of the NCAA Division III.
Brandeis also has 20 club sports and numerous intramural sports, including
sailing ( formerly a varsity sport), rugby union, ultimate, crew, lacrosse,
field hockey, squash, men's volleyball and martial arts. Staff and faculty are
allowed to play on intramural teams. Student life. The university has an active
student government, the Brandeis Student Union, as well as more than 270
student organizations. Fraternities and sororities are officially prohibited by
Brandeis University, as they are contrary to a central tenet of the university,
namely, that student organizations be open to all students, with membership
determined by competency or interest. According to an official handbook,
"xclusive or secret societies are inconsistent with the principles of openness
to which the University is committed.". Brandeis has eleven a cappella groups,
six undergraduate-run theater companies, one sketch comedy troupe, and four
improv-comedy groups, as well as many other cultural and arts clubs. Brandeis
is also home to what has been cited as one of the country's few undergraduate-
run law publications. Of particular note is the Brandeis Academic Debate and
Speech Society (B.A.D.A.S.S.) which consistently ranks as one of the top 10
debate teams in the United States, and participates across the globe in the
World Universities Debating Championships each year. Cholmondeley's
coffeehouse, commonly referred to as "Chums", is located in Brandeis' Usen
Castle. Chums is a popular site for student performances and concerts,
including Tracy Chapman, Joan Baez, Matt Pond PA, and Genesis (notable as their
first American performance). Early footage of Chums appears in the short
documentary film, "Coffee House Rendezvous". Cholmondley's is named after a
notoriously ill-tempered Basset hound that was the on-campus pet for Ralph
Norman, the campus photographer during the first years of Brandeis. He would
roam the campus after dark, growling at students, often nipping at their cuffs
and making a general nuisance of himself. After his death, the coffee house was
named for him, not so much in remembrance but in celebration. Brandeis
University's Campus Sustainability Initiative seeks to reduce the University's
environmental and climate change impact. The University's accomplishments in
the arena of sustainability include the creation of a student-organized on-
campus Farmers' Market, the implementation of a single-stream recycling
program, and the transition to GreenE certified wind power for 15% of the
school's electricity needs. Brandeis also offers a course called "Greening the
Campus and Community," in which students "examine the environmental impacts of
the Brandeis and Waltham community, and then design and implement projects to
address those impacts." Student projects have included greening campus offices,
running after-school environmental education programs for children in the
Waltham schools, and cleaning up local streams and ponds. Students also have
the option of taking courses with a 'Community Engaged Learning' (CEL) aspect.
Community-engaged learning is an aspect of the university's broad-based
commitment to experiential learning. Emergency medical services are provided by
the Brandeis Emergency Medical Corps, a Massachusetts-certified EMT-Basic
volunteer student organization which does not charge a fee for any of its
emergency services. Security escort services are provided around the campus and
into Waltham by the student-run "Branvan," which runs on a daily schedule from
4:00 pm to 2:30 am on weekdays and from 12:00 pm to 2:30 am on weekends. The
university is west of Boston and is accessible through Brandeis/Roberts station
on the Fitchburg Commuter Rail Line, a free shuttle that services Boston and
Cambridge (Harvard Square) Thursday through Sunday, the nearby Riverside subway
station (above ground) on the Green Line, and the 553 MBTA Bus. Wien
International Scholarship. Wien International Scholarship is a scholarship
instituted by Brandeis University for international undergraduate students. The
Wien International Scholarship was established in 1958 by Lawrence A. and Mae
Wien. The Wien family had three objectives: to further international
understanding, to provide foreign students an opportunity to study in the
United States, and to enrich the intellectual and cultural life at Brandeis.
The Wien Scholarship offers full or partial tuition awards; these awards are
need-based and require the applicants to present outstanding academic and
personal achievement. Each year, the recipients of the scholarship take a week-
long tour of a destination in the United States. In previous years, the
students have visited the United Nations in New York City, and did relief work
in New Orleans following Hurricane Katrina. In April 2008, the University
hosted a 3-day long celebration for the 50th anniversary of the program.
Institute for Informal Jewish Education. The Institute for Informal Jewish
Education aims to support Jewish educators in creating meaningful Jewish
experiences through professional development opportunities including pre-
service experiences, in-service experiences related to educatorsâ€™ practice,
practitioner research, curriculum development, and strategic organizational
support. The IJE is funded partially through grants, from The Andrea and
Charles Bronfman Philanthropies, The Legacy Heritage Fund, The Covenant
Foundation, and AVI CHAI Foundation. The IJE has close partnerships with The
North American Association of Community Hebrew High Schools and The Foundation
for Jewish Camp.
