Burmese Way to Socialism The Burmese Way to Socialism (; also known as the
"Burmese Road to Socialism") refers to the ideology of the Socialist government
in Burma, from 1962 to 1988, when the 1962 coup d'Ã©tat was led by Ne Win and
the military to remove U Nu from power. More specifically, the Burmese Way to
Socialism is an economic treatise written in April 1962 by the Revolutionary
Council, shortly after the coup, as a blueprint for economic development,
reducing foreign influence in Burma, and increasing the role of the military.
The Burmese Way to Socialism has largely been described by scholars as being
xenophobic, superstitious and an "abject failure," turning one of the most
prosperous countries in Asia into one of the world's poorest. However, it may
have served to increase domestic stability and keep Burma from being as
entangled in the Cold War struggles that affected other Southeast Asian
nations. The Burmese Way to Socialism, by far, greatly increased poverty,
isolation, and is described as "disastrous". Ne Win's later attempt to make the
currency based in denominations divisible by 9, a number he considered
auspicious, wiped out the savings of millions of Burmese. This resulted in the
pro-democracy 8888 Uprising which was brutally crushed by the military, which
established the State Law and Order Restoration Council in 1988. The Socialist
coup led by Ne Win and the Revolutionary Council (RC) in 1962 was done under
the pretext of economic, religious and political crises in the country,
particularly the issue of federalism and the right of Burmese states from
seceding from the Union. Background. Under U Nu and the AFPFL-led coalition
government, Burma had implemented socialist economic and welfare policies,
which yielded slow economic growth throughout the 1950s. On 28 October 1958, Ne
Win had staged a coup, under the auspices of U Nu, who asked Ne Win to serve as
interim prime minister, in order to restore order in the country, after the
AFPFL split into two factions and U Nu barely survived a motion of no-
confidence against his government in parliament. Ne Win restored order during
the period known as the "Ne Win caretaker government"'. Elections were held in
February 1960 and Ne Win handed back power to the victorious U Nu on 4 April
1960. By 1958, Burma was largely beginning to recover economically, but was
beginning to fall apart politically due to a split in the AFPFL into two
factions, one led by Thakins Nu and Tin, the other by Ba Swe and Kyaw Nyein.
And this despite the unexpected success of U Nu's 'Arms for Democracy' offer
taken up by U Seinda in the Arakan, the Pa-O, some Mon and Shan groups, but
more significantly by the PVO surrendering their arms. The situation however
became very unstable in the Union Parliament, with U Nu surviving a no-
confidence vote only with the support of the opposition National United Front
(NUF), believed to have 'crypto-communists' amongst them. Army hardliners now
saw the 'threat' of the CPB coming to an agreement with U Nu through the NUF,
and in the end U Nu 'invited' Army Chief of Staff General Ne Win to take over
the country. Over 400 'communist sympathisers' were arrested, of which 153 were
deported to the Coco Island in the Andaman Sea. Among them was the NUF leader
Aung Than, older brother of Aung San. Newspapers like "Botahtaung", "Kyemon"
and "Rangoon Daily" were also closed down. Ne Win's caretaker government
successfully established the situation and paved the way for new general
elections in 1960 that returned U Nu's Union Party with a large majority. The
situation did not remain stable for long, when the Shan Federal Movement,
started by Nyaung Shwe Saopha Sao Shwe Thaik (the first President of
independent Burma 1948-52) and aspiring to a 'loose' federation, was seen as a
separatist movement insisting on the government honouring the right to
secession in 10 years provided for by the 1947 Constitution. Ne Win had already
succeeded in stripping the Shan Saophas of their feudal powers in exchange for
comfortable pensions for life in 1959. Ideological features. The Burmese Way to
Socialism has been described as Marxist, anti-Western, neutralist and socialist
in nature, characterized also by an extensive dependence on the military,
emphasis on the rural populace, and Burmese (or more specifically, Burman)
nationalism. In January 1963, the Burmese Way to Socialism was further
elaborated in a political public policy called the System of Correlation of Man
and His Environment (), was published, as the philosophical and political basis
for the Burmese approach to society and socialism, influenced by Buddhist,
humanist and Marxist views. The fundamentals of the Burmese Way to Socialism,
as outlined in 1963, were as follows: The policy sought to reorient the Burmese
economy to a socialist economy, to develop the Burmese military, and to
construct a national identity among many disparate ethnic minorities and the
majority Burmans. Impact. Impacts of the Burmese Way to Socialism were multi-
fold, affecting the economy, educational standards, and living standards of the
Burmese people. Foreign aid organizations, like the American-based Ford
Foundation and Asia Foundation, as well as the World Bank, were no longer
allowed to operate in the country. Only permitted was aid from a government-to-
government basis. Also, English language instruction was reformed and
introduced in secondary schools, whereas previously it had started in
kindergarten. The government also implemented extensive visa restrictions for
Burmese citizens, especially to Western countries. Instead, the government
sponsored travel of students, scientists and technicians to the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe to receive training, to counter years of Western influence
in the country. Similarly, visas for foreigners were limited to 24 hours.
Furthermore, freedom of expression was limited extensively. Foreign language
publications were prohibited, as were newspapers that printed "false propaganda
news." The Press Scrutiny Board (now the Press Scrutiny and Registration
Division), which censors all publications to this day (including newspapers,
journals, advertisements and cartoons), was established by the RC through the
Printers' and Publishers' Registration Act in August 1962. The RC set up the
News Agency of Burma (BNA) to serve as a news distribution service in the
country, thus effectively replacing the work of foreign news agencies. In
September 1963, "The Vanguard" and "The Guardian", two Burmese newspapers, were
nationalized. In December 1965, publication of privately owned newspapers was
banned by the government. The impact on the Burmese economy was extensive. The
Enterprise Nationalization Law, passed by the Revolutionary Council in 1963,
nationalized all major industries, including import-export trade, rice,
banking, mining, teak and rubber) on 1 June 1963. In total, around 15,000
private firms were nationalized. Furthermore, industrialists were prohibited
from establishing new factories with private capital. This was particularly
detrimental to Burmese Indians and the British, who were disproportionately
represented in these industries. The oil industry, which had previously been
controlled by American and British companies such as the General Exploration
Company and East Asiatic Burma Oil, were forced to end operations. In its place
was the government-owned Burma Oil Company, which monopolized oil extraction
and production. In August 1963, the nationalization of basic industries,
including department stores, warehouses and wholesale shops, followed. Price
control boards were also introduced. The Enterprise Nationalization Law
directly impacted foreigners in Burma, particularly Burmese Indians and the
Burmese Chinese, both of whom had been influential in the economic sector as
entrepreneurs and industrialists. By mid-1963, 2,500 foreigners a week were
leaving Burma. By September 1964, approximately 100,000 Indian nationals had
left the country. The unofficial black market became a major feature in the
economy, representing about 80% of national economy during the Socialist
period. Moreover, income disparity became a major socioeconomic issue.
Throughout the 1960s, Burma's foreign exchange reserves (to $50 million by
1971, from $214 million in 1964) steadily declined, while inflation grew. Rice
exports also declined, from 1,840,000 tons in 1961-62 to 350,000 tons in 1967-
68, the result of both socialist policies and the inability of rice production
to meet the population growth rates. In the First Burmese Socialist Programme
Party (BSPP) Congress in 1971, economic reforms were made, in light of the
failures of the economic policy pursued throughout the 1960s. The Burmese
government asked to rejoin the World Bank, join the Asian Development Bank and
sought more foreign aid and assistance. The Twenty-Year Plan, an economic plan
divided into five increments of implementation, was introduced, to develop the
country's natural resources, including agriculture, forestry, oil and natural
gas, through state development. These reforms brought living standards back to
pre-World War II levels and stimulated economic growth. However, by 1988,
foreign debt had ballooned to $4.9 billion dollars, about three-fourths of the
national GDP.
