Cabotage Cabotage is the transport of goods or passengers between two points in
the same country by a vessel or an aircraft registered in another country.
Originally a shipping term, cabotage now also covers aviation, railways, and
road transport. Cabotage is "trade or navigation in coastal waters, or, the
exclusive right of a country to operate the air traffic within its territory".
Cabotage is used in the context of "cabotage rights", the right of a company
from one country to trade in another country. In aviation terms, it is the
right to operate within the domestic borders of another country. Most countries
do not permit cabotage, although this is changing within Europe for member
states of the European Union. Economically, cabotage regulations that limit
trade to domestic carriers constitute a form of protectionism. Within a nation,
cabotage rules may be politically justifiable for that very purpose, or because
of national security or public safety concerns. Example situations. In the
context of the freedoms of the air, pure cabotage is the ninth freedom. An
example of this situation would be if a service between St.Â Louis and Denver
was offered by a non-U.S. carrier without continuing service to a foreign
destination. While this situation is virtually nonexistent in scheduled
service, certain charter flights are allowed under U.S.Â rules. If service
offered between two domestic points continues to or from a foreign destination,
the practice is considered "continuing cabotage", which is the eighth freedom.
If a carrier does not have this right, then on a hypothetical service from
Paris to Kolkata via Mumbai, it could not allow passengers to board in Mumbai
and fly to Kolkata; only passengers who boarded in Paris could be carried on to
Kolkata. Cabotage situations can also occur as a consequence of hub-and-spoke
operations. Consider that Air Canada has a major hub at Toronto that offers
flights to several U.S.Â cities. While a passenger is able to buy a ticket from
Boston to Toronto, and a separate ticket from Toronto to Seattle later that
same day, both flights cannot be offered on the same itinerary because this
would effectively be a U.S.Â domestic service. Cabotage in passenger aviation.
Australia and Chile allow passenger airlines owned by foreign entities to
operate domestic flights. UntilÂ 1991 Lufthansa was prohibited from flying to
WestÂ Berlin, so PanÂ Am, British Airways, and Air France operated the routes
between the Federal Republic of Germany and WestÂ Berlin. For a short time in
the lateÂ 1980s, Trans World Airlines also flew between then-West Germany and
West Berlin. During this time, PanÂ Am flew to Tegel, in Berlin, from Munich-
Riem Airport (now closed) and Frankfurt. Air France flew from DÃ¼sseldorf.
British Airways flew from Munster, OsnabrÃ¼ck, Hannover, and some other cities.
In OctoberÂ 2007, the United Kingdom granted Singapore carriers the right to
fly domestic UKÂ routes as part of an open skies agreement, which also allows
British carriers to fly to any city from Singapore. The Closer Economic
Relations agreement allows Australian air carriers to fly domestically and
internationally from New Zealand and vice versa. Two Australian carriers,
Jetstar (a Qantas subsidiary) and Pacific Blue (a Virgin Australia subsidiary)
fly domestic routes within New Zealand, and Qantas offers flights connecting
New Zealand and North America. Air New Zealand offers one international
destination from Australia outside New Zealand, flying between Sydney,
Australia and Rarotonga of the Cook Islands. Previously, Qantas Jetconnect and
Ansett New Zealand were Australian-owned airlines based in New Zealand.
