Caging (voter suppression) Voter caging is a method of challenging the
registration status of voters to potentially prevent them from voting in an
election. It refers to the practice of sending direct mail to addressees on the
voter rolls, compiling a list of addressees from which the mail is returned
undelivered, and using that list to purge or challenge votersâ€™ registrations
on the grounds that the voters do not legally reside at registered addresses.
This typically results in the voters' having their votes discarded or submitted
through the use of provisional ballots requiring further registration
confirmation. While this practice is considered legal in many states and is in
some cases engaged in by the state's registrar of voters, it has been
challenged in the courts, and in some cases where it appeared to have a racial
component, it has been declared illegal under the Voting Rights Act. For
example in the 2008 US Election, Terri Lynn Land, the Secretary of State of
Michigan, was found to be purging thousands of voters from voting rolls based
on Voter ID cards being returned as undeliverable. The American Civil Liberties
Union (ACLU) took the Secretary of State to court over the purges. Judge
Stephen J. Murphy ruled the purge illegal under the National Voter Registration
Act (NVRA) of 1993 and directed Land to reinstate affected voters. (See full
ruling here ). The argument that vote caging should be illegal is that it could
disenfranchise qualified voters simply because of the high possibility that
data errors in the mailing list and voters' changing addresses could result in
undelivered mail, rather than any problem with their qualifications. The fact
that the mailings used to cage voters have had 'do not forward' printed on them
resulted in disproportionately disfranchising of students away at college,
citizens who move often, and soldiers overseas. In addition, targeting certain
neighborhoods with a history of voting for one political party while not
targeting areas dominated by the opposing party may lead to a racial component
in the disqualifications which raises a serious legal issue under the Voting
Rights Act. Method. Typically what will happen is a party will send out non-
forwardable, first class mail to voters or particular voters they want to
target (often assumed to be a demographic that belongs to the opposing party).
They compile a list of voters for whom mail has been returned as undeliverable.
This list is called a caging list. In some cases such mail can be returned at a
rate of 1 in every 15 letters sent out; this was shown in Ohio in 2008 when the
Board of Elections had 600,000 letters of voter confirmation returned as
undeliverable. The party uses caging lists created by themselves or by the
Board of Elections to challenge the registration status of voters and
potentially purge them from the voting rolls under state laws which allow
voters whose registrations are suspect to be challenged. When the voter turns
out to vote, he or she may be challenged and required to cast a provisional
ballot. If investigation of the provisional ballot demonstrates that the voter
has just moved or there is an error in their address and they are legally
registered then their vote should be counted. If the investigation proves that
they are not legally registered then their vote will not be counted. Legality
in the US. Pursuant to the NVRA, a voter may not be removed from the voters
list unless (1) the voter has requested removal; (2) state law requires removal
by reason of criminal conviction or mental capacity; (3) the voter has
confirmed in writing that he has moved outside the jurisdiction maintaining the
specific voter list, or (4) the voter both (a) has failed to respond to a
cancellation notice issued pursuant to the NVRA and (b) has not voted or
appeared to vote in the two federal general elections following the date of
notice. Under this clause voter caging may be legal if the primary purpose is
to identify those who are not properly registered to vote and prevent them from
voting illegally, but not if the purpose is to disenfranchise legitimately
registered voters on the basis of a technicality. Evidence of caging in the
United States. 1980s. In 1981 and 1986 the Republican National Committee (RNC)
sent out letters to predominantly African-American neighborhoods. When tens of
thousands of them were returned undeliverable, the party successfully
challenged the voters and had them deleted from voting rolls. Due to the
violation of the Voting Rights Act, the RNC was taken to court. Its officials
entered a consent decree which prohibited the party from engaging in anti-fraud
initiatives that targeted minorities or conducting mail campaigns to "compile
voter challenge lists." 2004 US Election. V. Pre Election Day Operations New
Registration Mailing At whatever point registration in the state closes, a
first class mailing should be sent to all new registrants as well as purged/
inactive voters. This mailing should welcome the recipient to the voter rolls.
It is important that a return address is clearly identifiable. Any mail
returned as undeliverable for any reason, should be used to generate a list of
problematic registrations. Poll watchers should have this list and be prepared
to challenge anyone from this list attempting to vote.
