Call For Action Call For Action is the name given to telephone "help lines"
maintained by media outlets in the United States and abroad. The mission of
Call For Action is to empower consumers by giving them a voice larger than
their own. This is accomplished by volunteers across the country, who are
trained to assist consumers through mediation and education in order to resolve
problems with businesses, government agencies and other organizations. The
services are free, confidential and available to all individuals and small
businesses. Call For Action provides broadcast partners with a highly
effective, low cost way to serve their community, while generating unique
localized content. History. Call For Action (CFA) was founded by Ellen
Sulzberger Straus in 1963 at WMCA Radio in New York City. After in-depth
research into New York City housing problems, a citywide telephone referral
system was established to handle housing complaints. Ms. Straus' efforts
resulted in revisions in the Code Enforcement procedures of the Department of
Rent and Housing Maintenance and four Federal Grand Jury indictments against
slumlords. This led to Call For Action's expansion into a central telephone
information and referral service to handle all kinds of problems. Ms. Straus'
idea was simple. Use an ombudsman approach along with the power of the media on
behalf of individual consumers to provide free and confidential mediation
services. Call For Action would be a central telephone system located at a
broadcast station. The station tells its audience about the service and
provides a telephone number. The phones are staffed by trained volunteer
professionals who act as mediators to help consumers resolve complaints. The
success of this concept led to Call For Action becoming a national organization
in 1969. Four additional radio stations became hosts to CFA that year, and the
first network of consumer hotlines was born. The network has since grown with
offices throughout the United States and abroad. Additionally, the Network
Hotline Office has the capability of handling complaints from consumers who do
not have a CFA in their area. In 1989, Call For Action undertook a second
mission of educating consumers. In partnership with the Federal Trade
Commission in 1991, CFA wrote a brochure for national distribution on advance-
fee loan scams. Two others followed focusing on phony prize offers and double
scamming frauds. In 1992, CFA produced and distributed “Scams, Schemes, and
Deceptive Offers”, a brochure aimed at educating small businesses about
frauds to which they are susceptible. Since then, Call For Action has partnered
with numerous corporate sponsors, including MasterCard International, Verizon,
Experian, IBM, VISA, MCI, American Express, and AT&T, producing education
initiatives that include identity theft, debit cards, small business scams,
telephone issues, consumer credit, and online privacy. To date, Call For
Action's extensive outreach campaigns have resulted in the distribution of over
9 million brochures to individual consumers, government agencies, consumer
protection offices, etc. Media Partnerships. Call For Action (CFA) is a
grassroots organization with over 49 years experience in providing broadcasters
with image branding by assisting viewers and listeners who turn to local media
outlets for problem solving and fair treatment in the marketplace. Each media
partner signs a CFA Subscription Agreement guaranteeing the station exclusive
rights to CFA within the station's market. The agreement also assures the local
CFA of the station's support, while making clear the non-political and non-
commercial character of Call For Action. Working with CFA allows stations to
partner community service with on-air content in a way that generates unique
local content, brand loyalty, and greater personal interaction with very little
impact on a broadcaster's budget. The success and growth of Call For Action is
due in large part to the continuous support of its broadcast partners. Radio
and television stations provide Call For Action with space, supplies and on-air
promotion of CFA services. This cooperation enables Call For Action to be an
integral part of the community and gives volunteers much needed clout when
working on a consumer’s behalf. Many of the stations air Call For Action
stories daily. Through this union, Call For Action is able to reach over 56
million people worldwide. Volunteers. Call For Action volunteers answer calls
form consumers and investigate cases. The main goal is to provide the consumers
with resources and assistance throughout the mediation process. Volunteers
remain impartial throughout the complaint resolution process and work with both
sides. CFA's volunteer force tackles some of the most current issues on the
consumer agenda today. Our volunteers come from varied backgrounds: teachers,
lawyers, former CEOs, engineers, pharmacists, secretaries, government
employees. We ask our volunteers to give one set day per week for just a few
hours. Volunteers are provided with complete training and preparation to serve
as mediators. Education Campaigns. Call For Action is a recognized leader in
consumer education campaigns. By working with corporations and agencies to
develop materials designed to arm consumers with the knowledge they need about
the most pertinent scams and schemes, CFA’s partners in consumer education
include CBM Credit Education Foundation, MCI, AT&T, VISA, MasterCard
International, Experian, and IBM. These companies and others know that CFA
works harder and smarter to communicate important messages and disseminate
consumer materials nationwide. One recent project, Identity Theft: Your Good
Name Gone Bad, produced in cooperation with CBM Credit Education Foundation,
Inc., and reprinted in partnership with VISA, discusses identity theft, how to
protect against identity theft, and what to do if it happens. We have
distributed nearly 5 million copies of the brochure. In addition, we produced
two VNRs that were broadcast in over 60 markets and had nearly 7 million
viewers. A dedicated 800 number directs victims to their local CFA office. The
second phase of the project included printing and distributing 100,000 copies
of the brochure in Spanish. Current Media Partners. WTAJ-TV - Altoona, PA.
(814) 944-9336 Monday thru Friday 1 p.m. to 3 p.m. 5000 Sixth Avenue Altoona,
PA 16602 http://www.wearecentralpa.com WAGA-TV - Atlanta, GA. (404) 879-4500
Monday thru Friday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. 1551 Briarcliff Road, N.E. Atlanta, GA
30306 http://www.myfoxatlanta.com WRDW-TV - Augusta, GA. (803) 442-4550 Tuesday
thru Thursday 11 a.m. – 1 p.m. 1301 Georgia Ave North Augusta, SC 29841 http:
//www.wrdw.com WBRC-TV - Birmingham, AL. (205) 583-4321 Monday thru Friday 11
a.m. to 1 p.m. 1720 Valley View Dr Birmingham AL 35209 http://www.myfoxal.com
WBZ Radio - Boston, MA. (617) 787-7070 Monday thru Friday 11 a.m. to 1:30 p.m.
1170 Soldiers Field Rd Boston, MA 02134 http://www.wbz.com WIVB-TV - Buffalo,
NY. (716) 879-4900 Monday thru Friday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. 2077 Elmwood Avenue
Buffalo, NY 14207 http://www.wivb.com WJW-TV - Cleveland, OH. (216) 578-0700
Monday, Wednesday & Thursday 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Monday 5:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m.
5800 South Marginal Road Cleveland, OH 44103 http://www.fox8cleveland.com KKTV-
TV - Colorado Springs, CO. (719) 457-8211 Monday and Thuesday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
3100 North Nevada Avenue Colorado Springs, CO 80907 http://www.kktv.com WSYX-TV
- Columbus, OH. (614) 821-9799 Tuesday thru Thursday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. 1261
Dublin Rd Columbus, OH 43215 http://www.abc6onyourside.com WXYZ-TV - Detroit,
MI. (248) 827-3362 Monday thru Thursday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. 20777 West 10 Mile
Road Southfield, MI 48037 http://www.wxyz.com WINK-TV - Fort Myers, FL. (239)
334-4357 Tuesday thru Thursday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. 2824 Palm Beach Boulevard Fort
Myers, FL 33916 http://www.winktv.com WHTM-TV - Harrisburg, PA. (717) 214-9187
Tuesday thru Thursday 11 a.m. – 1 p.m. 3235 Hoffman St Harrisburg, PA 17110
http://www.abc27.com KSHB-TV 41 - Kansas City, MO. (816) 932-4321 Tuesday thru
Thursday 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. 4720 Oak Street Kansas City, MO 64112 http://
www.kshb.com http://www.nbcactionnews.com KTNV-TV - Las Vegas, NV. (702) 368-
2255 Monday thru Friday 11 a.m. – 1 p.m. 3355 S. Valley View Blvd. Las Vegas,
NV 89102 http://www.ktnv.com WKOW-TV - Madison, WI. (608) 661-2727 Monday thru
Friday 11 a.m. – 1 p.m. 5272 Tokay Blvd. Madison, WI 53719 http://
www.wkowtv.com WTMJ-TV - Milwaukee, WI. (414) 967-5495 Monday thru Thursday 11
a.m. to 1 p.m. 720 East Capitol Drive Milwaukee, WI 53212 http://
www.todaystmj4.com WPVI-TV - Philadelphia, PA. (866) 978-4232 WPVI-TV Call For
Action Monday thru Friday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m 4100 City Line AvenuePhiladelphia,
PA 19131 http://abclocal.go.com/wpvi/ KPNX-TV & The Arizona Republic - Phoenix,
AZ. (602) 444-1212 1-866-260-1212 (AZ residents) Monday thru Friday 11 a.m. to
1 p.m. 200 E. Van Buren, 8th Floor, Phoenix, AZ 85004 http://www.12news.com
http://www.azcentral.com WPRI-TV 12 - Providence, RI. (401) 228-1850 Monday
thru Thursday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. 25 Catamore Boulevard East Providence, RI 02914
http://www.wpri.com KTVI-TV - St. Louis, MO. (636) 282-2222 1-800-782-2222 (IL
residents) Monday thru Thursday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. 2250 Ball Dr St. Louis, MO
63146 http://www.fox2ktvi.com WTOL-TV - Toledo, OH. (419) 255-2255 Tuesday thru
Thursday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. 730 North Summit Toledo, OH 43604 http://
www.wtol.com WTOP AM & FM - Washington, D.C.. (301) 652-4357 Tuesday thru
Friday 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. 11820 Parklawn Dr, Suite 340, Rockville, MD 20852
http://www.wtop.com (all other locations) - Network Hotline. (240) 747-0225
Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. 11820 Parklawn Dr, Suite 340,
Rockville, MD 20852 Past Partnerships. Two celebrated examples of "Call For
Action" lines were the ones maintained by WMCA in New York City, with a
telephone number of (212) PLaza 9-1717, and by WFIL in Philadelphia, whose Call
For Action number was (215) GReenwood 7-5312. The jingles used by the stations
to announce these numbers became well known in both cities, and an interesting
"side effect" was that after WMCA discontinued its Call For Action number, the
subscriber subsequently assigned that number continued to receive calls asking
for it even many years afterward. The old number belonging to WFIL (once
associated with WPVI-TV, which also once held the WFIL call letters) is held by
a west Philadelphia pizzeria as of July 2011.
