Camp for Climate Action The Camps for Climate Action are campaign gatherings
(similar to peace camps) that take place to draw attention to, and act as a
base for direct action against, major carbon emitters, as well as to develop
ways to create a zero-carbon society. Camps are run on broadly anarchist
principles - free to attend, supported by donations and with input from
everyone in the community for the day-to-day operation of the camp. Initiated
in the UK, camps have taken place in England at Drax power station, Heathrow
Airport, Kingsnorth power station in Kent, the City of London and The Royal
Bank of Scotland Headquarters, near Edinburgh. During 2009 camps also took
place in Canada, Denmark, France, Ireland, Netherlands/Belgium, Scotland, Wales
and Australia. General. Camps are organised through the preceding year with a
series of monthly meetings, previously held in Manchester, Nottingham, Oxford,
Leeds, Bristol, London, and Talamnh (near Glasgow). Anyone is welcome to attend
a planning meeting and to join one of the working groups. There were no
'leaders' and meetings used consensus decision making. Camps are run entirely
by volunteers and are funded by private donations. Much of the material used to
create structures for the camp is reclaimed waste from building sites which
would otherwise have been sent to a landfill. Compost toilets, comprehensive
recycling, grey water systems and a pedal-powered laundries. The site of the
camp is divided into loosely bounded 'neighbourhoods', most corresponding to
geographic region (one exception being the queer neighbourhood of the 2006
camp). Daily consensus-based meetings are held in each neighbourhood, with
spokes-people sent to a central meeting. It is considered to be in the nature
of the camp that organisational structures are loose and reflexive, so as to be
open to change if they are not seen to be effective or efficient. During the
camp there's a lot of training on practical skills (including consensus
decision-making) to be able to run such camps, different aspects of taking
direct action, as well as a large number of workshops on themes of
sustainability and climate-related issues. Power for lighting, radios, mobile
phones, sound equipment and laptop computers was supplied by solar panels and a
wind turbine. Biodiesel from recycled cooking oil was available for vehicles.
Cooking used conventional propane cylinders. In 2007 a satellite up-link was
installed, together with a media tent with ten laptop computers, this was also
used to send media to the press as well as Indymedia UK. In 2008, a new sound
system made its first appearance at the Camp for Climate Action. All of the
system was made from recycled materials, except its battery. During the stop
searches the battery was dropped and damaged yet the sound system still worked
throughout the camp. This sound system mainly played reggae/lovers rock and
dubstep at Gate 5 throughout the night and during the raids. The sound system
was powered by a 12-volt leisure battery, charged using solar power. A car amp
was used to power the speakers the system was mono and the amp was bridged. The
sound system was built by Onedread and Dec. 'Son of pedals' sound system was
another sound system at the Camp for Climate Action Video. There is a strong
emphasis on the use of bicycles and public transport, including a Bicycology
tour from London via Lancaster. As the United Nations has reported that
"livestock is a major threat to environment" all food is vegan, mostly organic
and locally sourced to minimise food miles, provided by communal neighbourhood
kitchens, many associated with the Social Centres Network. List of Camps for
Climate Action. Climate camps started in the UK but have now taken place in a
number of countries A camp happened in October 2009 at Helensburgh near Sydney,
which is the site of Australia's oldest coal mine. Drax 2006. The camp was on a
squatted site in the Vale of York, situated close to several large power
stations including Drax, a coal-fired power station which is the largest single
emitter of carbon dioxide in the UK. Over one hundred and sixty workshops ran
throughout the camp, sharing practical skills on living sustainably, on
subjects such as the science of climate change, environmental justice and the
effects of climate change on people in the global South, corporate 'climate
criminals', direct action, children's workshops, and many more. Music was
turned off after 11pm - 'Power Down' - to allow campaigners (with or without
families) to sleep. But on the last Monday of the camp music was allowed much
later. Day of action. On 31 August 2006, up to 600 people attended a protest
called "Reclaim Power" converging on Drax and attempting to shut it down. There
was a 'kids march' to Drax Power Station, with a giant ostrich puppet, made by
The Mischief Makers. Two protesters climbed a lighting pylon at the edge of the
Drax site and four others broke through the fence. At least 3,000 police
officers, from 12 forces from as far afield as Hampshire and London, were
reported to have been drafted in for the duration of the protest. Thirty-eight
protesters were arrested. The police reported that work at the power plant was
not disrupted, though eye witnesses reported having locked-on to various
machinery inside the power station, thus stopping work. No coal went into Drax
that day, with the railway line in being blocked off. Other protests arising
from the camp included a protest against a nuclear power station in Hartlepool,
Teesside. Media response. The Guardian reported that the Camp marked a turning
point in grass-roots campaigning against the causes of climate change. The
network forged at the Camp continues to work on campaigns to highlight and
tackle the causes of climate change, participating in actions drawing attention
to (for example) road building and the climate effects of cheap air travel.
Days of climate action on different themes have been called by this Network for
Climate Action. Heathrow 2007. The 2007 camp () ran from 14 to 21 August 2007
near London Heathrow Airport next to the village of Sipson on a disused sports
ground owned by Imperial College London. Sipson would disappear from the map if
the third runway at Heathrow was built. It was preceded by 'Our Place' arts
weekend, a community arts project run by activists for local residents on 11 &
12 August at St Mary's Church Hall in Harmondsworth, another village which
would be severely affected by the building of a third runway. During the camp
there were also protests by Plane Stupid, who were injuncted from protesting at
Heathrow. On 13 August Plane Stupid activists boarded a barge transporting an
Airbus A380 wing and on 16 August at London Biggin Hill Airport. 15 protesters
chained themselves to its main gates and caused a "long queue of luxury cars
waiting to get into the airport to build up". On 19 August, the final day of
the camp some 1000-1400 people took part in a 'Day of Action' and 200 people
blockaded British Airports Authority HQ. As protesters left on 20 August
protests took place against two carbon offset companies, Climate Care and the
Carbon Neutral Company on 20 August when campaigners dressed as "red herrings"
protested at the offices in Oxford London, five people blocked the main gate at
Sizewell B nuclear power station in Suffolk, and a group invaded the London
offices of Bridgepoint Capital, a private equity firm which is behind the
expansion of Leeds-Bradford Airport, and a dozen protesters superglued their
hands to entrance doors at BP's headquarters in central London. A total of 58
people were arrested. Injunction. BAA's proposed injunction would have
restricted the movements of 5Â million people from 15 different organisations,
including the RSPB, Greenpeace, the Campaign for the Protection of Rural
England, the Woodland Trust, Friends of the Earth, and the National Trust,
among others. As such the injunction would technically have included the Queen;
patron of the RSPB and CPRE, Prince Charles; in his position as President of
the National Trust, and even some of BAA's own staff. The ruling was sought
under the auspices of the Protection from Harassment Act 1997, originally
intended to help the victims of stalking, but now frequently used against
protesters. In the end BAA won a very much more limited injunction and the camp
went ahead amid considerable worldwide publicity. Afterward, Duncan Bonfield,
BAA director of corporate affairs, and Mark Mann, BAA head of media relations,
resigned without stating their reasons. Policing. Policing for the camp was
estimated to have cost Â£7Â million by Scotland Yard, though this included
Â£4.3m for costs such as salaries which would have been spent anyway. The
"Evening Standard" put the costs at Â£70Â million without explaining how it
reached that figure. In 2007 the police made preventive searches under Section
60 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994. The camp was heavily
attended by a force of 1,800 police, who carried out searches, including some
vehicles, under Section 44 of the Terrorism Act 2006, and took photos of
protesters entering and leaving the camp. On Sunday August 19 there were
scuffles between protesters and police officers outside the offices of BAA at
Heathrow, which were being targeted in a day of direct action by some of the
protesters. Journalistic access. In relation to the 2007 the National Union of
Journalists issued a public statement expressing "deep concern" over a proposed
draft policy toward media access during its 2007 event. The camp media team
replied to the NUJ criticism by stating: "The policy is a compromise that
attempts to provide reasonable media access whilst respecting participants'
right to privacy". On 9 August 2007 the proposed policy was amended to remove
any possibility of blacklisting some journalists or giving sympathetic
journalists longer access. Kingsnorth 2008. The 2008 camp () took place in
Kent, near E.ON UK's Kingsnorth power station, and run from 4 to 11 August to
highlight E.ON's plans to build another coal-fired power station, which would
be the first to be built in thirty years in the UK. The action was also to
highlight what is seen as an expansion to the fossil fuel economy, by
corporations and government, and what activists claim is a demand for the
opposite by scientific consensus. Furthermore, the camp attempted to challenge
the businesses which will profit from the agrofuel industry, which they see as
false solutions to the problems of climate change. The camp began with a one
day event at Heathrow, the site of the previous year's camp followed by a march
across London to Kingsnorth power station, in common with seven other camps
globally that were targeting coal. Over 200 workshops and debates were held
during the camp, including ones with George Monbiot, Caroline Lucas, Arthur
Scargill and John McDonnell MP. Arthur Scargill, former General Secretary of
the National Union of Mineworkers and Dave Douglass, attended the camp to
represent many in the mining community who disagreed with the protesters' anti-
coal position which they saw as a continuation of the state's assault against
them stemming back to the UK miners' strike (1984â1985). They addressed the
campers highlighting the oppressive conditions that miners face all over the
world put forth their arguments especially against nuclear power. They also
expressed solidarity with the camp against police repression and urged a class
perspective. On Saturday 9 August the protesters attempted to shut down the
power station. The day was organised to highlight the impact on climate change
with activists marching to Kingsnorth power station. Violent scenes developed
between the police and the protesters, with many non-threatening protesters
being hit and knocked to the ground by police with batons. The camp provided
facilities that many of the people needed such as showers, cheap food, internet
access, entertainment, a TV studio and medical services. Complaints were made
about the excessive policing of the event which are now being investigated
officially. On August 11, 2008, several protesters from Oxford and Thames
Valley Climate Action glued their hands to the doors of BHP Billiton's
headquarters in protest of the use of coal as a fuel. BHP Billiton is the
world's largest coal producer. Policing. 1,500 officers were involved at an
estimated cost of Â£5.9m, there were over 100 arrests and some 2000
'potentially harmful' items were confiscated At the time ministers at the time
claimed that 70 officers had been injured in the course of their duties.
However data obtained under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 in March 2009
showed that no injuries were sustained by the police in clashes with
demonstrators and the claim was retracted by Vernon Coaker, the Home Office
minister stating that "there were no recorded injuries sustained as a result of
direct contact with the protesters". It was also revealed later that amongst
the confiscated items were balloons, crayons, and a clown outfit, cycle
helmets, plastic buckets, books, life-jackets, inflatable dinghies, paddles and
foot pumps. At the time local MP Bob Marshall-Andrews said that some policing
was "provocative and heavy-handed" and Caroline Lucas MEP condemned police
tactics, which included riot police, pepper spray and routine stop and search
of everyone entering and leaving the camp. In March 2009 the Independent Police
Complaints Commission said there was significant public concern at the policing
of the camp which should be addressed. These included issues about misconduct,
but also in regard to operational tactics including claims that officers used
loud music at night to disrupt protesters who were trying to sleep. Before the
camp started police had found weapons hidden in nearby woods which included
knives, a replica throwing star and a large chain and padlock. Assistant Chief
Constable Gary Beautridge stated that while he believed the majority of the
Climate Camp protesters to be peaceful, he was concerned that some had "more
sinister intentions". Protesters said the find had nothing to do with the camp
and the police agreed that there was no firm evidence linking the them to the
camp. In June, 2009, the "Guardian" released video evidence of alleged
brutality by police officers at the camp against two women. They belonged to
the campaign group, Fitwatch, who campaign against the use of forward
intelligence teams. They spotted several officers who did not have visible
epaulettes and when they asked the officers to reveal their identities they
were arrested. Camp in the City 2009. The Camp in the City () took place on 1
April 2009 was one of a number of protests associated with the G20 London
Summit. The aim was to draw attention to carbon trading, claiming that far from
being a way of reducing release of climate change gasses in the atmosphere it
is used as an excuse to continue doing just that. The camp took place outside
the European Climate Exchange in Bishopsgate and was distinct from the G-20
Meltdown protest that took place outside the Bank of England. Prior to the
actual camp a group of participants had played a game called 'capture the flag'
in the area on 27 March which was used by the protesters to familiarise
themselves with the locale. Camp for Climate Action organisers agreed to meet
with police and exchange contact details shortly before the protest. The
meeting was arranged by Liberal Democrat MP David Howarth, who was to mediate
at the meeting which was to take place at the House of Commons. Scotland Yard
confirmed that a meeting was to take place with Bob Broadhurst (police
commander) and Ian Thomas (chief superintendent). The camp, which was intended
to last for 24 hours, started at 12:30pm when a camp was established in a
section of Bishopsgate between Threadneedle Street and London Wall with tents
set up and bunting across the road reading 'Nature doesn't do bailouts'. There
were solar-powered sound systems, musicians and a food stall and some 1,000-
plus relaxed people. The atmosphere was still relaxed at about 5pm when police
with helmets, shields and batons began to surround areas of the camp using
section 14 of the Public Order Act 1986. At about 7pm the police stopped
allowing people to enter or leave the protest. The police advanced on
protesters who put their hands in the air and passively resisted while chanting
"This is not a riot" which is a tactic that emerged over the course of a number
of Camp for Climate Action gatherings. There were scuffles with the police in
which several protesters were hit and kicked by the police and one policewoman
needed medical attention. Within the cordon people carried on playing music and
preparing food and until the police began letting people leave at about 11:30pm
and cleared the area of the last protesters at about 2am. Jean Lambert MEP of
the London Green Party wrote an open letter to the Metropolitan Police
Commissioner after the event asking for an explanation of the police tactics.
Blackheath 2009. A number of protests at locations around London took place
during the camp. Shops and local pubs reported good business and police
presence was keep very low profile and unobtrusive. The Telegraph described it
as "the cheapest â and chic-est â date in the summer festival calendar".
Climate Camp TV provided a view of the camp and the associated actions.
Ratcliffe-on-Soar 2009. Between 17 and 18 October 2009, protesters from Camp
for Climate Action, Climate Rush and Plane Stupid, took part in 'The Great
Climate Swoop' at Ratcliffe-on-Soar Power Station. The police arrested 10
people before the protest began on suspicion of conspiracy to cause criminal
damage. Some 1,000 people took part, and during the first day groups of up to
several hundred people pulled down security fencing at a number of points
around the plant. Fifty six arrests were made during the protest and there were
a number of injuries, including one policeman who was airlifted to hospital but
later discharged. After the event Julian Baggini, writing in The Times,
criticised the protest arguing that climate change did not constitute a
justifiable reason for civil disobedience. In response activists said that the
urgency of responding to potential extreme climate change did indeed provide
sufficient justification. Edinburgh 2010. A number of protests at locations
around Edinburgh took place during the camp. Climate Camp TV provided a view of
the camp and the associated actions.
