Economy of Canada Canada has the eleventh-largest economy in the world
(measured in US dollars at market exchange rates), is one of the world's
wealthiest nations, and is a member of the Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) and Group of Eight (G8). As with other
developed nations, the Canadian economy is dominated by the service industry,
which employs about three quarters of Canadians. Canada is unusual among
developed countries in the importance of the primary sector, with the logging
and oil industries being two of Canada's most important. Canada also has a
sizable manufacturing sector, centered in Central Canada, with the automobile
industry and aircraft industry especially important. Basic information. Canada
has one of the highest levels of economic freedom in the world. Today Canada
closely resembles the U.S. in its market-oriented economic system, and pattern
of production. As of October 2011, Canada's national unemployment rate stood at
7.4%, as the economy continues its recovery from the effects of the 2007-2010
global financial crisis. In May 2010, provincial unemployment rates varied from
a low of 5.0% in Saskatchewan to a high of 13.8% in Newfoundland and Labrador.
According to the Forbes Global 2000 list of the world's largest companies in
2008, Canada had 69 companies in the list, ranking 5th next to France. As of
2008, Canadaâ€™s total government debt burden is the lowest in the G8.
International trade makes up a large part of the Canadian economy, particularly
of its natural resources. In 2009, agricultural, energy, forestry and mining
exports accounted for about 58% of Canada's total exports. Machinery,
equipment, automotive products and other manufactures accounted for a further
38% of exports in 2009. In 2009, exports accounted for approximately 30% of
Canada's GDP. The United States is by far its largest trading partner,
accounting for about 73% of exports and 63% of imports as of 2009. Canada's
combined exports and imports ranked 8th among all nations in 2006. Canada has
considerable natural resources spread across its varied regions. As an example,
in British Columbia the forestry industry is of great importance, while the oil
and gas industry is important in Alberta, Saskatchewan and Newfoundland and
Labrador. Northern Ontario is home to a wide array of mines, while the fishing
industry has long been central to the character of the Atlantic provinces,
though it has recently been in steep decline. Canada has mineral resources of
coal, copper, iron ore, and gold. These primary industries are increasingly
becoming less important to the overall economy. Only some 4% of Canadians are
employed in these fields, and they account for 6.2% of GDP. They are still
paramount in many parts of the country. Many, if not most, towns in northern
Canada, where agriculture is difficult, exist because of a nearby mine or
source of timber. Canada is a world leader in the production of many natural
resources such as gold, nickel, uranium, diamonds and lead. Several of Canada's
largest companies are based in natural resource industries, such as EnCana,
Cameco, Goldcorp, and Barrick Gold. The vast majority of these products are
exported, mainly to the United States. There are also many secondary and
service industries that are directly linked to primary ones. For instance one
of Canada's largest manufacturing industries is the pulp and paper sector,
which is directly linked to the logging industry. The large reliance on natural
resources has several effects on the Canadian economy and Canadian society.
While manufacturing and service industries are easy to standardize, natural
resources vary greatly by region. This ensures that differing economic
structures developed in each region of Canada, contributing to Canada's strong
regionalism. At the same time the vast majority of these resources are
exported, integrating Canada closely into the international economy. Howlett
and Ramesh argue that the inherent instability of such industries also
contributes to greater government intervention in the economy, to reduce the
social impact of market changes. Such industries also raise important questions
of sustainability. Despite many decades as a leading producer, there is little
risk of depletion. Large discoveries continue to be made, such as the massive
nickel find at Voisey's Bay. Moreover the far north remains largely undeveloped
as producers await higher prices or new technologies as many operations in this
region are not yet cost effective. In recent decades Canadians have become less
willing to accept the environmental destruction associated with exploiting
natural resources. High wages and Aboriginal land claims have also curbed
expansion. Instead many Canadian companies have focused their exploration and
expansion activities overseas where prices are lower and governments more
accommodating. Canadian companies are increasingly playing important roles in
Latin America, Southeast Asia, and Africa. The exploitation of renewable
resources have raised concerns in recent years. After decades of escalating
overexploitation the cod fishery all but collapsed in the 1990s, and the
Pacific salmon industry also suffered greatly. The logging industry, after many
years of activism, has in recent years moved to a more sustainable model. Key
industries. Service sector. The service sector in Canada is vast and
multifaceted, employing about three quarters of Canadians and accounting for
78% of GDP. The largest employer is the retail sector, employing almost 12% of
Canadians. The retail industry is mainly concentrated in a small number of
chain stores clustered together in shopping malls. In recent years, there has
been an increase in the number of big-box stores, such as Wal-Mart (of the
United States) and Future Shop (a subsidiary of the US based Best Buy) and
Zellers (since most of their leases have been purchased by Target). This has
led to fewer workers in this sector and a migration of retail jobs to the
suburbs. The second largest portion of the service sector is the business
services, employing only a slightly smaller percentage of the population. This
includes the financial services, real estate, and communications industries.
This portion of the economy has been rapidly growing in recent years. It is
largely concentrated in the major urban centres, especially Toronto, Montreal
and Vancouver (see Banking in Canada). The education and health sectors are two
of Canada's largest, but both are largely under the purview of the government.
The health care industry has been quickly growing, and is the third largest in
Canada. Its rapid growth has led to problems for governments who must find
money to fund it. Canada has an important high tech industry, and also an
entertainment industry creating content both for local and international
consumption . Tourism is of ever increasing importance, with the vast majority
of international visitors coming from the United States. Though the recent
strength of the Canadian Dollar has hurt this sector, other nations such as
China have increased tourism to Canada. Manufacturing. The general pattern of
development for wealthy nations was a transition from a primary industry based
economy to a manufacturing based one, and then to a service based economy.
Canada did not escape this pattern - at its (abnormally high World War 2) peak
in 1944, manufacturing accounted for 29% of GDP, declining to 15.6% in 2005.
Canada has not suffered as greatly as most other rich, industrialized nations
from the pains of the relative decline in the importance of manufacturing since
the 1960s. A 2009 study by Statistics Canada also found that, while
manufacturing declined as a relative percentage of GDP from 24.3% in the 1960s
to 15.6% in 2005, manufacturing volumes between 1961 and 2005 kept pace with
the overall growth in the volume index of GDP. Manufacturing in Canada was
especially hard hit by the 2007-2010 global financial crisis. As of 2010,
manufacturing accounts for 13% of Canada's GDP, a relative decline of more than
2% of GDP since 2005. Central Canada is home to branch plants to all the major
American and Japanese automobile makers and many parts factories owned by
Canadian firms such as Magna International and Linamar Corporation. Central
Canada today produces more vehicles each year than the neighbouring U.S. state
of Michigan, the heart of the American automobile industry. Manufacturers have
been attracted to Canada due to the highly educated population with lower
labour costs than the United States. Canada's publicly funded health care
system is also an important attraction, as it exempts companies from the high
health insurance costs they must pay in the United States. Much of the Canadian
manufacturing industry consists of branch plants of United States firms, though
there are some important domestic manufacturers, such as Bombardier Inc.. This
has raised several concerns for Canadians. Branch plants provide mainly blue
collar jobs, with research and executive positions confined to the United
States. Energy. Canada is one of the few developed nations that is a net
exporter of energy - in 2009 net exports of energy products amounted to 2.9% of
GDP. Most important are the large oil and gas resources centred in Alberta and
the Northern Territories, but also present in neighbouring British Columbia and
Saskatchewan. The vast Athabasca Oil Sands give Canada the world's third
largest reserves of oil after Saudi Arabia and Venezuela according to USGS. In
British Columbia and Quebec, as well as Ontario, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and the
Labrador region, hydroelectric power is an inexpensive and relatively
environmentally friendly source of abundant energy. In part because of this,
Canada is also one of the world's highest per capita consumers of energy. Cheap
energy has enabled the creation of several important industries, such as the
large aluminium industries in British Columbia and Quebec Historically, an
important issue in Canadian politics is the interplay between the oil and
energy industry in Western Canada and the industrial heartland of Southern
Ontario. Foreign investment in Western oil projects has fueled Canada's rising
dollar. This has raised the price of Ontario's manufacturing exports and made
them less competitive, a problem similar to the decline of the manufacturing
sector in Holland. Also, Ontario has relatively fewer native sources of power.
However, it is cheaper for Alberta to ship its oil to the western United States
than to eastern Canada. The eastern Canadian ports thus import significant
quantities of oil from overseas, and Ontario makes significant use of nuclear
power. The National Energy Policy of the early 1980s attempted to force Alberta
to sell low priced oil to eastern Canada. This policy proved deeply divisive,
and quickly lost its importance as oil prices collapsed in the mid-1980s. One
of the most controversial sections of the Canada-United States Free Trade
Agreement of 1988 was a promise that Canada would never charge the United
States more for energy than fellow Canadians. Agriculture. Canada is also one
of the world's largest suppliers of agricultural products, particularly of
wheat and other grains. Canada is a major exporter of agricultural products, to
the United States and Asia. As with all other developed nations the proportion
of the population and GDP devoted to agriculture fell dramatically over the
20th century. As with other developed nations, the Canadian agriculture
industry receives significant government subsidies and supports. However,
Canada has been a strong supporter of reducing market influencing subsidies
through the World Trade Organization. In 2000, Canada spent approximately
CDN$4.6 billion on supports for the industry. Of this, $2.32 billion was
classified under the WTO designation of "green box" support, meaning it did not
directly influence the market, such as money for research or disaster relief.
All but $848.2 million were subsidies worth less than 5% of the value of the
crops they were provided for, which is the WTO threshold. Consequently, Canada
used only $848.2 million of its $4.3 billion subsidy allowance granted by the
WTO. Political issues. Relations with the U.S.. Canada and the United States
share a common trading relationship. Canada's job market continues to perform
well along with the US, reaching a 30 year low in the unemployment rate in
December 2006, following 14 consecutive years of employment growth. The United
States is by far Canada's largest trading partner, with more than $1.7 billion
CAD in trade per day in 2005. In 2009 73% of Canada's exports went to the
United States, and 63% of Canada's imports were from the United States. Trade
with Canada makes up 23% of the United States' exports and 17% of its imports.
By comparison, in 2005 this was more than U.S. trade with all countries in the
European Union combined, and well over twice U.S. trade with all the countries
of Latin America combined. Just the two-way trade that crosses the Ambassador
Bridge between Michigan and Ontario equals all U.S. exports to Japan. Canada's
importance to the United States is not just a border-state phenomenon: Canada
is the leading export market for 35 of 50 U.S. states, and is the United
States' largest foreign supplier of energy. Bilateral trade increased by 52%
between 1989, when the U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement (FTA) went into effect,
and 1994, when the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) superseded it.
Trade has since increased by 40%. NAFTA continues the FTA's moves toward
reducing trade barriers and establishing agreed-upon trade rules. It also
resolves some long-standing bilateral irritants and liberalizes rules in
several areas, including agriculture, services, energy, financial services,
investment, and government procurement. NAFTA forms the largest trading area in
the world, embracing the 405 million people of the three North American
countries. The largest component of U.S.-Canada trade is in the commodity
sector. The U.S. is Canada's largest agricultural export market, taking well
over half of all Canadian food exports. Similarly, Canada is the largest market
for U.S. agricultural goods, with nearly 20% of American food exports going to
its northern neighbour. Nearly two-thirds of Canada's forest products,
including pulp and paper, are exported to the United States; 72% of Canada's
total newsprint production also is exported to the U.S. At $73.6 billion in
2004, U.S.-Canada trade in energy is the largest U.S. energy trading
relationship, with the overwhelming majority ($66.7 billion) being exports from
Canada. The primary components of U.S. energy trade with Canada are petroleum,
natural gas, and electricity. Canada is the United States' largest oil supplier
and the fifth-largest energy producing country in the world. Canada provides
about 16% of U.S. oil imports and 14% of total U.S. consumption of natural gas.
The United States and Canada's national electricity grids are linked, and both
countries share hydropower facilities on the western borders. While most of
U.S.-Canada trade flows smoothly, there are occasionally bilateral trade
disputes, particularly in the agricultural and cultural fields. Usually these
issues are resolved through bilateral consultative forums or referral to World
Trade Organization (WTO) or NAFTA dispute resolution. In May 1999, the U.S. and
Canadian governments negotiated an agreement on magazines that provides
increased access for the U.S. publishing industry to the Canadian market. The
United States and Canada also have resolved several major issues involving
fisheries. By common agreement, the two countries submitted a Gulf of Maine
boundary dispute to the International Court of Justice in 1981; both accepted
the court's 12 October 1984 ruling which demarcated the territorial sea
boundary. A current issue between the United States and Canada is the ongoing
softwood lumber dispute, as the U.S. alleges that Canada unfairly subsidizes
its forestry industry. In 1990, the United States and Canada signed a bilateral
Fisheries Enforcement Agreement, which has served to deter illegal fishing
activity and reduce the risk of injury during fisheries enforcement incidents.
The U.S. and Canada signed a Pacific Salmon Agreement in June 1999 that settled
differences over implementation of the 1985 Pacific Salmon Treaty for the next
decade. Canada and the United States signed an aviation agreement during Bill
Clinton's visit to Canada in February 1995, and air traffic between the two
countries has increased dramatically as a result. The two countries also share
in operation of the St. Lawrence Seaway, connecting the Great Lakes to the
Atlantic Ocean. The U.S. is Canada's largest foreign investor and the most
popular destination for Canadian foreign investments; at the end of 2007, the
stock of U.S. direct investment in Canada was estimated at $293 billion, while
Canadian direct investment (stock) in the United States was valued at $213
billion. U.S. FDI accounts for 59.5% of total foreign direct investment in
Canada while Canadian FDI in the U.S. accounts for 10% (5th largest foreign
investor). US investments are primarily directed at Canada's mining and
smelting industries, petroleum, chemicals, the manufacture of machinery and
transportation equipment, and finance, while Canadian investment in the United
States is concentrated in manufacturing, wholesale trade, real estate,
petroleum, finance, and insurance and other services.
