Carinthian Plebiscite The Carinthian Plebiscite (, ) was held on 10 October
1920 in the area predominantly settled by Carinthian Slovenes. It determined
the final southern border between the Republic of Austria and the newly formed
Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (later Yugoslavia) after World War I.
Background. After the defeat of the multi-ethnic Austro-Hungarian Monarchy and
the ruling Habsburg dynasty in World War I, new states arose in its former
territory. Among these there was an internationally unrecognized State of
Slovenes, Croats and Serbs, which was created in the final days of the war
according to the 1917 Corfu Declaration, and merged with the Kingdom of Serbia
to form the new South Slavic Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes on December
1, 1918. Determination of borders between the new countries was complex and
difficult, and not always peaceful: While the northeastern border with the
Kingdom of Italy along the "Julian March" was already determined by the 1915
Treaty of London, the demarcation line between Yugoslavia and the rump state of
German-Austria was a difficult and highly disputed matter. The principle of
self-determination, championed by U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, was taken up
by both Slovenes and German–Austrians in the Carinthian, Styrian and
Carniolan lands of the defunct Habsburg empire. The rising tensions culminated
in clashes of arms, as on Marburg's Bloody Sunday in Lower Styria and the
continued fighting of paramilitary groups in southeastern Carinthia. In
particular the "Carinthian question" had become an issue in the closing days of
World War I, when events developed rapidly, beginning with territorial claims
by the Slovenian National Assembly on October 17, 1918. These claims were
rejected by the Carinthian provisional "Landtag" assembly on 25 October 1918,
declaring the state's accession to German-Austria. From November 5, Yugoslav
forces moved into the settlement area of the Carinthian Slovenes from the
Karavanke mountain range down to the Drava River and beyond. The "Landtag"
assembly fled from Klagenfurt to the northwestern town of Spittal an der Drau
and on 11 November officially demanded self-determination, which in this case
amounted to demanding a plebiscite for a region with a mixed population. With
the occupation of southeastern Carinthia by Yugoslav troops, the confrontation
evolved into armed clashes. The provisional Carinthian government under
Governor Arthur Lemisch decided to lead off the armed struggle in order to
preserve the southern Carinthian border on the Karavanke range. Bitter fighting
of paramilitary groups around Arnoldstein and Ferlach alarmed the Entente
powers. They arbitrated a ceasefire, whereafter a nine-day U.S. Army commission
under Lt.Col. Sherman Miles scouted the disputed region between river and
mountains in January and February 1919 and made the crucial recommendation that
the Karavanke frontier should be retained, thus opening the possibility of a
plebiscite. Yugoslav representatives urged for a border on the Drava; American
delegates however spoke in favor of preserving the unity of the Klagenfurt
Basin and convinced the British and French delegations. Until May 7, all
occupied Carinthian territories were vacated. When Yugoslav forces under
General Rudolf Maister made an attempt to re-enter the region on 28 May 1919,
they were forced to withdraw by the Entente authorities. The question was
whether the considerable Slovene-speaking majority in the state's southeastern
region, adjoining the Karavanke range, would carry the vote for union with
Austria or whether that majority wished to join a newly created South Slavic
state. This was to a large extent a consequence of rising romantic nationalism
under the Austrian-Hungarian Monarchy and the idea of an autonomy of the
"Slovene lands", referring to the early medieval Slavic principality of
Carantania, which had perished in the ninth century. A common state with other
southern Slavic peoples seemed the most acceptable compromise toward
fulfillment of nationalist strivings. Plebiscite. The Treaty of Saint-Germain
with the Republic of Austria, signed on 10 September 1919, should have
determined the Austrian-Yugoslav border. It ascertained that some small parts
of Carinthia—i.e. the Meža Valley () with the town of Dravograd
("Unterdrauburg") and the Jezersko ("Seeland") municipal area—should be
incorporated into the new Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, while the fate
of wider southeastern Carinthia area down to the Klagenfurt basin was to be
determined by a plebiscite. Wanting to resolve the conflict peacefully, the
Allied victors in World War I divided southeastern Carinthia into two zones,
"A" in the south and "B" in the north. A two-stage referendum was to be held to
determine annexation by either Austria or the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes, in the smaller Zone B only if a majority of the people in Zone A
would have voted for Yugoslavia. The population of Zone A was predominantly
Slovene-speaking: according to the pre-war Austrian census of 1910, people in
these municipalities who used Slovene as their primary language represented
nearly 70% of the population; while the number of ethnic Slovenes was probably
higher. German speakers were concentrated in the town of Völkermarkt and
certain smaller localities, especially around Bleiburg () and Ferlach
("Borovlje"). Before the plebiscite, both sides waged intensive propaganda
campaigns. Austrian propaganda emphasized the economic benefits of maintaining
the unity of the Klagenfurt Basin and appealed to feelings of Carinthian unity
and brotherhood between the Slovene- and German-speaking peoples of Carinthia.
Conducted in the Slovene Carinthian dialect, Austrian propaganda promised that
the Slovene language and national identity would be treated as equal to the
German in Austria, officially confirmed by the Carinthia "Landtag" assembly two
weeks before the plebisicite was held. It nevertheless also had an anti-
Yugoslav tendency, picturing the conditions in the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats,
and Slovenes as chaotic. Yugoslav propaganda almost exclusively used arguments
emphasizing Slovene national awareness. It took an aggressive anti-German view
from the beginning and turned to economic issues only in the last few weeks
before the plebiscite. The campaigners were not capable of using the political
instability of the young Austrian republic and its then unenviable position in
the international community for advantage. Despite the six-months term
determined by the Treaty of Saint-Germain, the referendum was not held in Zone
A until October 10, 1920. In addition to changing the date of the plebiscite,
other terms of the Treaty of Saint-Germain allegedly were ignored or changed:
an Austrian representative was accepted into the commission, and the plebiscite
commission changed rules by not allowing the Yugoslav military to control the
border between Zones A and B on 8 June 1920. Instead the Yugoslav army had to
withdraw from Zone A in accord with the decision of the plebiscite commission
on 18 September 1920. Changes may also have been made in electoral registers
which allowed people from northern Zone B voting in Zone A, backing the
Austrian side. In the following decades both sides would continue to interprete
and instrumentalize the plebiscite's circumstances in their own way. Results.
The outcome of the plebiscite held on 10 October, was 22,025 votes (59.1% of
the total cast) in favor of adhesion to Austria and 15,279 (40.9%) in favor of
annexation by the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes. Assumed that the
whole German-speaking minority had voted for Austria, also every second
Carinthian Slovene had decided to remain with the Republic. While a majority in
the remote Alpine villages on the slopes of the Karavanke range voted for
Yugoslavia, the inhabitants of the densely settled Klagenfurt Basin were
motivated by their evolved social and cultural, not least economic ties to the
central Carinthian region. After the Austrian option had gained a majority of
votes in predominantly Slovene Zone A, the second stage of the referendum in
northern Zone B, populated chiefly by German speakers, was not carried out.
Another Yugoslav foray was fiercely rejected by the Entente powers. The
Carinthian Plebiscite region was placed under Austrian administration on 18
November 1920 and declared part of the sovereign Austrian Republic on November
22. Up to today, October 10 is a public holiday in the State of Carinthia. The
plebiscite ultimatively determined the border between Austria and the Kingdom
of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes. The border remained unchanged after World War
II, even as the Kingdom of Yugoslavia gave way to Josip Broz Tito's Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, though at the end of the war Yugoslav Partisans
again briefly occupied the area, including the capital city of Klagenfurt.
Since the disintegration of Yugoslavia, the border has separated Austria and
Slovenia. External links.
