Carthaginian peace Carthaginian Peace can refer to two things: either (1) the
peace imposed on Carthage by Rome in 146 BC, whereby the Romans systematically
burned Carthage to the ground, or (2) the imposition of a very brutal 'peace'
in general. Origin. The term refers to the outcome of a series of wars between
Rome and the Phoenician city of Carthage, known as the Punic Wars. The two
empires fought three separate wars against each other, beginning in 264 BC and
ending in 146 BC. At the end of the Third Punic War, the Romans laid siege to
Carthage. When they took the city, they killed most of the inhabitants, sold
the rest into slavery, and destroyed the entire city. As Tacitus wrote in a
different context, quoting or paraphrasing the Caledonian chieftain Calgacus,
"they make a desert and call it peace". Some modern accounts say they plowed
over the city and sowed the ground with salt, but this is not supported by
ancient sources. By extension, the term "Carthaginian Peace" can refer to any
brutal peace treaty demanding total subjugation of the defeated side. Modern
Use. Modern use of the term is often extended to any peace settlement in which
the peace terms are overly harsh and designed to perpetuate the inferiority of
the loser. Thus many (the economist John Maynard Keynes among them) deemed the
Treaty of Versailles to be a "Carthaginian Peace." The Morgenthau Plan, which
was dropped in favor of the Marshall Plan (1948â€“1952), might be described as
a Carthaginian Peace, as it advocated the 'pastoralization' (de-
industrialization) of Germany following her 1945 defeat in World War II.
General Lucius D. Clay, deputy to general Dwight D. Eisenhower who in 1945 was
military governor of the U.S. occupation Zone in Germany, and who would go on
to replace Eisenhower as governor and as commander in chief, U.S. Forces in
Europe, would later remark regarding the occupation directive guiding his and
General Eisenhower's actions in occupied Germany: "there was no doubt that JCS
1067 contemplated the Carthaginian peace which dominated our operations in
Germany during the early months of occupation."
