Cash crop A cash crop is an agricultural crop which is grown for sale for
profit. It is typically purchased by parties separate from a farm. The term
cash crop is applied exclusively to the agricultural production of plants;
animal agriculture is not a part of the terminology. The term is used to
differentiate marketed crops from subsistence crops, which are those fed to the
producer's own livestock or grown as food for the producer's family. In earlier
times cash crops were usually only a small (but vital) part of a farm's total
yield, while today, especially in the developed countries, almost all crops are
mainly grown for revenue. In least developed countries, cash crops are usually
crops which attract demand in more developed nations, and hence have some
export value. Prices for major cash crops are set in commodity markets with
global scope, with some local variation (termed as "basis") based on freight
costs and local supply and demand balance. A consequence of this is that a
nation, region, or individual producer relying on such a crop may suffer low
prices should a bumper crop elsewhere lead to excess supply on the global
markets. This system has been criticized by traditional farmers. Coffee is an
example of a product that has been susceptible to significant commodity futures
price variations. __TOC__ Globalization. Issues involving subsidies and trade
barriers on such crops have become controversial in discussions of
globalization. Many developing countries take the position that the current
international trade system is unfair because it has caused tariffs to be
lowered in industrial goods while allowing for low tariffs and agricultural
subsidies for agricultural goods. This makes it difficult for a developing
nation to export its goods overseas, and forces developing nations to compete
with imported goods which are exported from developed nations at artificially
low prices. The practice of exporting at artificially low prices is known as
dumping, and is illegal in most nations. Controversy over this issue led to the
collapse of the CancÃºn trade talks in 2003, when the Group of 22 refused to
consider agenda items proposed by the European Union unless the issue of
agricultural subsidies was addressed. Per climate zones. Arctic. The Arctic
climate is generally not conducive for the cultivation of cash crops. However,
one potential cash crop for the Arctic is "Rhodiola rosea", a hardy plant used
as a medicinal herb that grows in the Arctic. There is currently consumer
demand for the plant, but the available supply is less than the demand (as of
2011). Temperate. Cash crops grown in regions with a temperate climate include
many cereals (wheat, rye, corn, barley, oats), oil-yielding crops (e.g. oilseed
rape), vegetables (e.g. potatoes), tree fruit or top fruit (e.g. apples,
cherries) and soft fruit (e.g. strawberries, raspberries). Subtropical. In
regions with a subtropical climate, grain crops (e.g. rice, millet), oil-
yielding crops (e.g. soybeans) and some vegetables and herbs are the
predominant cash crops. Tropical. In regions with a tropical climate, coffee,
cocoa, sugar cane, bananas, oranges, cotton and jute (a soft, shiny vegetable
fiber that can be spun into coarse, strong threads), are common cash crops. The
oil palm is a tropical palm tree, and the fruit from it is used to make palm
oil. By country. Africa. Around 60 percent of African workers are employed in
the agricultural sector, with about three-fifths of African farmers being
subsistence farmers. For example, in Burkina Faso 85% of its residents (over
two million people) are reliant upon cotton production for income, and over
half of the country's population lives in poverty. Larger farms tend to grow
cash crops such as coffee, tea, cotton, cocoa, fruit and rubber. These farms,
typically operated by large corporations, cover tens of square kilometres and
employ large numbers of laborers. Subsistence farms provide a source of food
and a relatively small income for families, but generally fail to produce
enough to make re-investment possible. The situation in which African nations
export crops while a significant amount of people on the continent struggle
with hunger has been blamed on developed countries, including the United
States, Japan and the European Union. These countries protect their own
agricultural sectors with high import tariffs and offer subsidies to their
farmers, which some have contended as leading to the overproduction of
commodities such as cotton, grain and milk. The result of this is that the
global price of such products is continually reduced until Africans are unable
to compete in world markets, except in cash crops that do not grow easily in
temperate climates. Africa has realized significant growth in biofuel
plantations, many of which are on lands which were purchased by British
companies. "Jatropha curcas" is a cash crop grown for biofuel production in
Africa. Some have criticized the practice of raising non-food plants for export
while Africa has problems with hunger and food shortages, and some studies have
correlated the proliferation of land acquisitions, often for use to grow non-
food cash crops with increasing hunger rates in Africa. Australia. Australia
produces significant amounts of lentils. It was estimated in 2010 that
Australia would produce approximately 143,000 tons of lentils. Most of
Australia's lentil harvest is exported to the Indian subcontinent and the
Middle East. New Zealand. Kiwifruit is a significant cash crop in New Zealand.
United States. Cash cropping in the United States rose to prominence after the
baby boomer generation and the end of World War II. It was seen as a way to
feed the large population boom and continues to be the main factor in having an
affordable food supply in the United States. According to the 1997 U.S. Census
of Agriculture, 90% of the farms in the United States are still owned by
families, with an additional 6% owned by a partnership. Cash crop farmers have
utilized precision agricultural technologies combined with time-tested
practices to produce affordable food. Based upon United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) statistics for 2010, states with the highest fruit
production quantities are California, Florida and Washington. Vietnam. Coconut
is a cash crop of Vietnam. Global cash crops. Coconut palms are cultivated in
more than 80 countries of the world, with a total production of 61Â million
tonnes per year. The oil and milk derived from it are commonly used in cooking
and frying; coconut oil is also widely used in soaps and cosmetics. Black
market cash crops. Coca, opium poppies and cannabis are significant black
market cash crops, the prevalence of which varies. In the United States,
cannabis is considered by some to be the most valuable cash crop. In 2006, it
was reported in a study by Jon Gettman, a marijuana policy researcher, that in
contrast to government figures for legal crops such as corn and wheat and using
the study's projections for U.S. cannabis production at that time, cannabis was
cited as "the top cash crop in 12 states and among the top three cash crops in
30." The study also estimated cannabis production at the time (in 2006) to be
valued at $35.8 billion USD, which exceeded the combined value of corn at $23.3
billion and wheat at $7.5 billion.
