Chambers of parliament Many parliaments or other legislatures consist of two
chambers (or houses): an elected lower house, and an upper house or Senate
which may be appointed or elected by a different mechanism from the lower
house. This style of two houses is called bicameral. Legislatures with only one
house are known as unicameral. The lower house is almost always the originator
of legislation, and the upper house is the body that offers the "second look"
and decides whether to veto or approve the bills. In the United Kingdom
legislation can be originated in either house, but the lower house can
ultimately prevail if the two houses repeatedly disagree. In most countries the
lower house, regarded as more particularly the representatives of the people,
has sole or predominant control over matters to do with finance and taxation. A
parliament's lower house is usually composed of at least 100 members, in
countries with populations of over 3 million. The number of seats rarely
exceeds 400, even in very large countries. In the United Kingdom however, the
lower house (the House of Commons) has 650 members. The upper house customarily
has anywhere from 20, 50, or 100 seats, but almost always significantly fewer
than the lower house. In the United Kingdom however, the upper house (the House
of Lords) currently has slightly more members than the lower house, and at one
time (before the exclusion of most of the hereditary peers) had considerably
more. Merging of chambers. Until 1971, the Riksdag in Sweden was similarly
divided into the "Första kammaren" and "Andra kammaren", but has since been a
unicameral legislature. The Norwegian parliament ("Storting") was officially
divided in two chambers 1814–2009, but functioned as a single chamber in
practice, a situation called Qualified unicameralism. Floor and committee. The
"floor" is the name for the full assembly, and a "committee" is a small
deliberative assembly that is usually subordinate to the floor.
