Chappaquiddick incident The Chappaquiddick incident took place on July 18, 1969
and refers to the death of Mary Jo Kopechne, a female passenger of U.S. Senator
Edward M. "Ted" Kennedy when he accidentally drove his car off a bridge and
into a tidal channel on Chappaquiddick Island, Massachusetts. Kennedy swam free
and left the scene, not reporting within nine hours, but Kopechne died in the
vehicle. In the early hours of July 19, Kopechne's body and the car were
recovered. Kennedy pleaded guilty to a charge of leaving the scene of an
accident after causing injury and received a two-month suspended jail sentence.
The incident became a national scandal, and may have influenced Kennedy's
decision not to campaign for President of the United States in 1972 and 1976.
The party. On July 18, 1969, U.S. Senator Edward M. "Ted" Kennedy hosted a
party on Chappaquiddick, a small island connected via ferry to the town of
Edgartown, Massachusetts on the nearby larger island of Martha's Vineyard. The
party was a reunion for a group of six women, including Kopechne, known as the
"boiler-room girls", who had served in his brother Robert's 1968 presidential
campaign. Also present were Joseph Gargan, Ted Kennedy's cousin; Paul F.
Markham, a school friend of Gargan's who previously served as the United States
Attorney for Massachusetts; Charles Tretter, an attorney; Raymond La Rosa; and
John Crimmins, Ted Kennedy's part-time driver. Kennedy was also competing in
the Edgartown Yacht Club Regatta, a sailing competition which was taking place
over several days. According to his own testimony at the inquest into
Kopechne's death, Kennedy left the party at "approximately 11:15 p.m." He said
that when he announced that he was about to leave, Kopechne told him "that she
was desirous of leaving, if I would be kind enough to drop her back at her
hotel." Kennedy then requested the keys to his mother's car from his chauffeur,
Crimmins. Asked why he did not have his chauffeur drive them both, Kennedy
explained that Crimmins along with some other guests "were concluding their
meal, enjoying the fellowship and it didn't appear to me necessary to require
him to bring me back to Edgartown". Kopechne told no one that she was leaving
with Kennedy, and left her purse and hotel key at the party. After the party.
Christopher "Huck" Look was a deputy sheriff working as a special police
officer at the Edgartown regatta dance that night. At 12:30 a.m. he left the
dance, crossed over to Chappaquiddick in the yacht club's launch boat, got into
his parked car and drove toward his home, which was south of the Dike Bridge.
He testified that between 12:30 and 12:45 a.m. he had seen a dark car
containing a man driving and a woman in the front seat approaching the
intersection with Dike Road. The car had gone first onto the private Cemetery
Road and stopped there. Thinking that the occupants of the car might be lost,
Look had gotten out of his car and walked toward it. When he was 25 to 30 feet
away, the car started backing towards him. When Look called out to offer his
help, the car moved quickly eastward, towards the ocean, along Dike Road in a
cloud of dust. Look recalled that the car's license plate began with an "L" and
contained two "7"'s, both details true of Kennedy's 1967 Oldsmobile Delmont 88.
According to his inquest testimony, Kennedy made a wrong turn onto Dike Road,
an unlit dirt road that led to Dike Bridge (also spelled Dyke Bridge). Dike
Road was unpaved, but Kennedy, driving at "approximately twenty miles an hour",
took "no particular notice" of this fact, and did not realize that he was no
longer headed toward the ferry landing. Dike Bridge was a wooden bridge angled
obliquely to the road, with no guardrail. A fraction of a second before he
reached the bridge, Kennedy applied his brakes; he then drove over the side of
the bridge. The car plunged into tide-swept Poucha Pond (at that location a
channel) and came to rest upside-down underwater. Kennedy recalled later that
he was able to swim free of the vehicle, but Kopechne was not. Kennedy claimed
at the inquest that he called Kopechne's name several times from the shore,
then tried to swim down to reach her seven or eight times, then rested on the
bank for around fifteen minutes before returning on foot to Lawrence Cottage,
where the party attended by Kopechne and the other "Boiler Room Girls" had
occurred. Kennedy denied seeing any house with a light on during his journey
back to Lawrence Cottage. addition to the working telephone at the Lawrence
Cottage, according to one commentator, his route back to the cottage would have
taken him past four houses from which he could have telephoned and summoned
help; however, he did not do so. The first of those houses, referred to as
"Dike House", was 150 yards away from the bridge, and was occupied by Sylvia
Malm and her family at the time of the incident. Malm stated later that she had
left a light on at the residence when she retired for that evening. According
to Kennedy's testimony, Gargan and party co-host Paul Markham then returned to
the waterway with Kennedy to try to rescue Kopechne. Both of the other men also
tried to dive into the water and rescue Kopechne multiple times. When their
efforts to rescue Kopechne failed, Kennedy testified, Gargan and Markham drove
with Kennedy to the ferry landing, both insisting multiple times that the
accident had to be reported to the authorities. According to Markham's
testimony Kennedy was sobbing and on the verge of becoming crazed. Kennedy went
on to testify that "had full intention of reporting it. And I mentioned to
Gargan and Markham something like, 'You take care of the other girls; I will
take care of the accident!'â€”that is what I said and I dove into the water".
Kennedy had already told Gargan and Markham not to tell the other women
anything about the incident "[because I felt strongly that if these girls were
notified that an accident had taken place and Mary Jo had, in fact, drowned,
that it would only be a matter of seconds before all of those girls, who were
long and dear friends of Mary Jo's, would go to the scene of the accident and
enter the water with, I felt, a good chance that some serious mishap might have
occurred to any one of them". Gargan and Markam would testify that they assumed
that Kennedy was going to inform the authorities once he got back to Edgartown,
and thus did not do so themselves. According to his own testimony, Kennedy swam
across the 500-foot channel, back to Edgartown and returned to his hotel room,
where he removed his clothes and collapsed on his bed. Hearing noises, he later
put on dry clothes and asked someone what the time was: it was something like
2:30 a.m., the senator recalled. He testified that, as the night went on, "I
almost tossed and turned and walked around that room ... I had not given up
hope all night long that, by some miracle, Mary Jo would have escaped from the
car." Back at his hotel, Kennedy complained at 2:55 a.m. to the hotel owner
that he had been awoken by a noisy party. By 7:30 a.m. the next morning he was
talking "casually" to the winner of the previous day's sailing race, with no
indication that anything was amiss. At 8 a.m., Gargan and Markham joined
Kennedy at his hotel where they had a "heated conversation." According to
Kennedy's testimony, the two men asked why he had not reported the accident.
Kennedy responded by telling them "about my own thoughts and feelings as I swam
across that channel ... that somehow when they arrived in the morning that they
were going to say that Mary Jo was still alive". The three men subsequently
crossed back to Chappaquiddick Island on the ferry, where Kennedy made a series
of telephone calls from a pay telephone near the crossing. The telephone calls
were to his friends for advice and again, he did not report the accident to
authorities. Recovery of Kopechne's body and Kennedy's statement. Earlier that
morning, two amateur fishermen had seen the submerged car in the water and
notified the inhabitants of the cottage nearest to the scene, who called the
authorities at about 8:20 a.m. Edgartown Police Chief James Arena arrived at
the scene about 10 or 15 minutes later. After attempting unsuccessfully to
examine the interior of the submerged vehicle, Arena summoned a professional
diver, along with equipment capable of towing or winching the vehicle out of
the water. The diver, John Farrar, arrived at 8:45 fully suited in scuba gear,
discovered Kopechne's body and extricated it from the vehicle within ten
minutes. Police checked the car's license plate and saw that it was registered
to Kennedy. When Kennedy, still at the payphone by the ferry crossing, heard
that the body had been discovered, he crossed back to Edgartown and went to the
police station; Gargan simultaneously went to the hotel where the "boiler room
girls" were staying to inform them about the incident. Legal proceedings. On
July 25, seven days after the incident, Kennedy pleaded guilty to a charge of
leaving the scene of an accident after causing injury. Kennedy's attorneys
suggested that any jail sentence should be suspended, and the prosecutors
agreed to this, citing Kennedy's age, character and prior reputation. Judge
James Boyle sentenced Kennedy to two months' incarceration, the statutory
minimum for the offense, which he suspended. In announcing the sentence, Boyle
referred to Kennedy's "unblemished record" and said that he "has already been,
and will continue to be punished far beyond anything this court can impose".
Kennedy's televised statement. He concluded by quoting a passage from his
brother John's book "Profiles in Courage". Testimony and cause of death. Farrar
testified later at the inquest that Kopechne's body was pressed up in the car
in the spot where an air bubble would have formed. He interpreted this to mean
that Kopechne had survived in the air bubble after the accident, and concluded
that Farrar believed that Kopechne "lived for at least two hours down there."
The deceased wore a blouse, bra, and slacks, but no panties. The medical
examiner, Dr. Donald Mills, was satisfied that the cause of death was
accidental drowning. He signed a death certificate to that effect and released
Kopechne's body to her family without ordering an autopsy. Later, on September
18, District Attorney Edmund Dinis attempted to secure an exhumation of
Kopechne's body in order to perform a belated autopsy, citing blood found on
Kopechne's long-sleeved blouse and in her mouth and nose "which may or may not
be consistent with death by drowning". The reported discovery of the blood was
made when her clothes were given to authorities by the funeral director. Judge
Bernard Brominski, of the Court of Common Pleas of Luzerne County,
Pennsylvania, had a hearing on the request on October 20â€“21. The request was
opposed by Kopechne's parents. Eventually Judge Brominski ruled against the
exhumation on December 10, saying that there was "no evidence" that "anything
other than drowning had caused the death of Mary Jo Kopechne". Inquest. Under
Massachusetts law Boyle, having found "probable cause" that Kennedy had
committed a crime, could have issued a warrant for his arrest, but he did not
do so. District Attorney Dinis chose not to prosecute Kennedy for manslaughter,
despite Judge Boyle's conclusions. The Kopechne family did not bring any legal
action against Senator Kennedy, but they did receive a payment of $90,904 from
the Senator personally and $50,000 from his insurance company. The Kopechnes
later explained their decision to not take legal action by saying that "We
figured that people would think we were looking for blood money." Grand jury.
On April 6, 1970, Dukes County grand jury assembled in special session to
consider Kopechne's death. Judge Wilfred Paquet instructed the members of the
grand jury that they could consider only those matters brought to their
attention by the superior court, the district attorney or their own personal
knowledge. Citing the orders of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court,
Paquet told the grand jury that it could not see the evidence or Judge Boyle's
report from the inquest (which at that time were still impounded). District
Attorney Dinis, who had attended the inquest and seen Judge Boyle's report,
told the grand jury that there was not enough evidence to indict Senator
Kennedy on potential charges of manslaughter, perjury or driving to endanger.
The grand jury called four witnesses who had not testified at the inquest: they
testified for a total of 20 minutes, but no indictments were issued. Fatal
accident hearing. On July 23, 1969, the Registrar of the Massachusetts Registry
of Motor Vehicles informed Senator Kennedy that his license would be suspended
until a statutory hearing could be held concerning the accident. This
suspension was required by Massachusetts law for any fatal motor accident where
there were no witnesses. The "in camera" hearing was held May 18, 1970. It
found that "operation was too fast for existing conditions". On May 27 the
Registrar informed Sen. Kennedy in a letter that "I am unable to find that the
fatal accident in which a motor vehicle operated by you was involved, was
without serious fault on your part", and that as a result, his driver's license
was suspended for a further six months. Miscarriage. Sen. Kennedy's wife Joan
Bennett Kennedy was pregnant at the time of the incident. Though confined to
bed due to two previous miscarriages, she attended the funeral of Kopechne and
stood beside her husband in court three days later. She suffered a third
miscarriage soon thereafter which she blamed on the Chappaquiddick incident.
Revisionist interpretations of the evidence. 1) Kennedy was set up and framed
by his political enemies for a crime he did not commit.Knight, 2003, p. 162 A
BBC 'Inside Story' programme, 'Chappaquiddick', broadcast on the 25th
anniversary of the death of Mary Jo Kopechne advanced a theory that Kennedy and
Kopechne had gone out from the party in Kennedy's car, but that when Kennedy
saw an off-duty policeman in his patrol car, he got out of the car, fearing the
political consequences of being discovered by the police late at night with an
attractive woman. According to the theory, Kennedy then returned to the party
while Kopechne, unfamiliar both with the large car and the local area, drove
the wrong way and crashed off the bridge. The programme argued this explanation
would account for Kennedy's lack of concern the next morning (because he was
unaware of the crash) and for forensic evidence of the injuries to Kopechne
being inconsistent with her sitting in the passenger seat. A similar theory was
advanced by Australian writer Bob Ellis. Best-selling investigative writer Jack
Olsen had earlier advanced a similar theory in his book "The Bridge at
Chappaquiddick", published early in 1970. Olsen's book was the first full-
length examination of the case. Olsen wrote that Kopechne's shorter height (she
was 5'2", a foot shorter than Kennedy) could have accounted for her possibly
not even seeing the bridge as she drove Kennedy's car over unfamiliar roads, at
night, with no external lighting, after having had several alcoholic drinks at
the party both had attended. Olsen wrote that Kopechne normally drove a smaller
Volkswagen model car, which was much lighter and easier to handle than
Kennedy's larger Oldsmobile. Legacy. The case resulted in much satire of
Kennedy, including a mock advertisement in "National Lampoon" magazine showing
a floating Volkswagen Beetle with the remark that Kennedy would have been
elected president had he been driving a Beetle that night; this satire resulted
in legal action by Volkswagen, claiming unauthorized use of its trademark.
"National Lampoon" also printed a fake quote from Kennedy, as a "response" to a
question on whether he planned to campaign for President in the next election:
"I'll drive off that bridge when I come to it." After Kennedy's televised
speech on July 25, 1969, regarding the incident, telephone calls and telegrams
to newspapers and to the Kennedy family were heavily in favor of his remaining
in office, and he won reelection the next year with 62% of the vote.
Nonetheless, the incident severely damaged his national reputation. Before
Chappaquiddick, public polls showed that a large majority expected Kennedy to
run for the presidency in 1972. After the incident, he pledged not to run in
1972 and declined to serve as George McGovern's running mate that year. In
1974, he pledged not to run in 1976, in part because of the renewed media
interest in Chappaquiddick. Kennedy finally announced his candidacy for the
American presidency in late 1979, challenging incumbent President Jimmy Carter
for the Democratic nomination for the 1980 election. On November 4, 1979, CBS
broadcast a one-hour television special presented by Roger Mudd titled "Teddy".
The program consisted of an interview with Kennedy, interspersed with visual
materials. Much of the show was devoted to the Chappaquiddick incident. During
the interview, Mudd questioned Kennedy repeatedly about the incident and at one
point accused him directly of lying. During the interview, Kennedy also gave
what one author described as an "incoherent and repetitive" answer to the
question, "Why do you want to be President?", and called the American-supported
Shah of Iran "one of the most violent regimes in the history of mankind". The
program inflicted serious political damage on Kennedy. Carter alluded to the
Chappaquiddick incident twice in five days, once declaring that he had not
"panicked in the crisis." Kennedy lost the Democratic nomination to Carter, but
remained a Senator until his death in 2009. After Kennedy's death, Ed Klein, an
editor for "New York Times Magazine" and an author of several books about the
Kennedy family, stated that Kennedy asked people he met, "Have you heard any
new jokes about Chappaquiddick?" Klein also said, "Itâ€™s not that he didnâ€™t
feel remorse about the death of Mary Jo Kopechne, but that he still always saw
the other side of everything and the ridiculous side of things, too."
