Cherokee freedmen controversy The Cherokee Freedmen Controversy is an ongoing
political and tribal dispute between the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma and
descendants of the Cherokee Freedmen regarding tribal citizenship. During the
American Civil War, the Cherokee who supported the Union abolished the practice
of African slavery by act of the Cherokee National Council in 1863. The
Cherokee Freedmen became citizens of the Cherokee Nation in accordance with a
treaty made with the United States government a year after the Civil War ended.
In the early 1980s, the Cherokee Nation administration amended citizenship
rules to require direct descent from an ancestor listed as "Cherokee By Blood"
on the Dawes Rolls. The change stripped descendants of the Cherokee Freedmen of
citizenship and voting rights unless they satisfied this new criterion. On
March 7, 2006, the Cherokee Supreme Court ruled that the descendants of the
Cherokee Freedmen were unconstitutionally kept from enrolling as citizens and
were allowed to enroll in the Cherokee Nation. Chad "Corntassel" Smith, then-
Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, called for an emergency election to
amend the constitution in response to the ruling. After a petition was
circulated, a special election held on March 3, 2007 resulted in a
constitutional amendment that disenrolled the Cherokee Freedmen descendants.
This led to several legal proceedings in United States and Cherokee Nation
courts in which the Freedmen descendants continued to press for their treaty
rights and recognition as Cherokee Nation members. The 2007 constitutional
amendment was voided in Cherokee Nation district court on January 14, 2011, but
was overturned by a 4-1 ruling in Cherokee Nation Supreme Court on August 22,
2011 before the special run-off election for Principal Chief. The ruling
excluded the Cherokee Freedmen descendants from voting in the special election.
After the freezing of $33 million dollars in funds by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development and a letter from the Assistant Secretary of the Bureau
of Indian Affairs in response to the ruling, an agreement in federal court
between the Cherokee Nation, the Freedmen descendants and the US government
allowed the Freedmen to vote in the special election. Bill John Baker was
elected Principal Chief in the special election and inaugurated in October
2011. The Cherokee Supreme Court dismissed an appeal of the election results by
former chief Chad Smith. The Cherokee Freedmen. Freedmen is one of the terms
given to emancipated slaves and their descendants after slavery was abolished
in the United States following the American Civil War. In this context,
"Cherokee Freedmen" refers to the African-American men and women who were
formerly slaves of the Cherokee before and after removal to Indian Territory.
It includes the descendants of the former slaves, as well as those born in
unions between formerly enslaved or enslaved African Americans and Cherokee
tribal members. After their emancipation and subsequent citizenship, the
Cherokee Freedmen and their descendants had to struggle to be accepted as a
legitimate part of the Cherokee Nation. Some Freedmen have been active in the
tribe, voted in elections, ran businesses, attended Cherokee stomp dances, knew
Cherokee traditions and folklore, knew the Cherokee language, and served on the
tribal council, with several holding district seats. Joseph Brown was elected
as the first Cherokee Freedman councilman in 1875, followed by Frank Vann in
1887, and Jerry Alberty in 1889. Joseph "Stick" Ross was elected to the council
in 1893. Born into slavery and owned by Principal Chief John Ross before his
family's emancipation, Stick Ross became a civic leader. Several companies and
landmarks were named after him, including Stick Ross Mountain in Tahlequah,
Oklahoma. Leslie Ross, Stick's great-grandson, says, Koerner, Brendan I. "Blood
Feud", "Wired Magazine", Issue 13.09, September 2005 (Accessed 13 July 2007
here) The civic position for Freedmen increased by the time of the Dawes
Commission in 1906, which broke up tribal land into allotments and created the
Dawes Rolls to list Cherokee citizens. With the extinction of tribal government
by the Curtis Act of 1898, the Freedmen as well as other Cherokee citizens were
counted as US citizens. After the Cherokee Nation reorganized and re-
established its government via passage of the Principal Chiefs Act, the
Freedmen participated in the 1971 tribal elections held for the office of
principal chief, the first election held since the passage of the Curtis Act
and before Oklahoma statehood in 1907. Several Cherokee Freedmen descendants
have continued to embrace this historical connection. Others, after having been
excluded from the tribe for two decades in the twentieth century and given the
continuing citizenship struggle, have become ambivalent about their ties and no
longer consider identifying as Cherokee as necessary to their personal
identity. History. Slavery among the Cherokee. Slavery was a component of
Cherokee society prior to European contact. By their oral tradition, the
Cherokee viewed slavery as the result of an individual's failure in warfare and
as a temporary status, pending release or the slave's adoption into the tribe.
In colonial times, the English and later the British purchased or impressed
Cherokee as slaves during the Indian Slave Trade. From the late 1700s to the
1860s, the Five Civilized Tribes were involved in the institution of African
slavery as planters and several tribal members began acquiring African-American
slaves for field work, domestic work, and various trades. The 1809 census taken
by Cherokee agent Colonel Return J. Meigs, Sr. counted 583 "Negro slaves" held
by Cherokee slaveowners. By 1835, that number increased to 1,592 slaves, with
more than seven percent (7.4%) of Cherokee families owning slaves, a greater
percentage than across the South, where about 5% of families owned slaves.
Slaves marched with Cherokee slaveowners and other citizens on the Trail of
Tears, the forced relocation of Native Americans from their original lands to
Indian Territory. Of the Five Civilized Tribes in Indian Territory, the
Cherokee held the most enslaved African Americans. Prominent Cherokee
slaveowners included the families of Joseph Lynch, Joseph Vann, Major Ridge,
Stand Watie, Elias Boudinot, and Principal Chief John Ross. While slavery was
less common among full-blood Cherokee, there were both full-blood and mixed-
blood Cherokee slaveowners. An example of the former is Tarsekayahke, also
known by the name "Shoe Boots". A full-blood Cherokee slaveowner, farmer, and
veteran war hero who fought for the Cherokee in the Battle of Horseshoe Bend
during the Creek War, Shoe Boots fathered three children with a woman named
Doll, a slave that he acquired in the late 1700s. Since the children were born
to a slave, they inherited Dollâ€™s slave status. On October 20th, 1824, Shoe
Boots petitioned the Cherokee National Council to grant emancipation for his
children and have them recognized as free Cherokee citizens. Shoe Boots stated
in his petition, "These is the only children I have as Citizens of this Nation,
and as the time I may be called to die is uncertain, My desire is to have them
as free citizens of this nation. Knowing what property I may have, is to be
divided amongst the Best of my friends, how can I think of them having bone of
my bone and flesh of my flesh to be called their property, and this by my
imprudent conduct, and for them and their offspring to suffer for generations
yet unborn, is a thought too great a magnitude for me to remain silent any
longer"After consideration, his request was granted by the Cherokee National
Council on November 6, 1824. While Shoe Boots was ordered by the council to
cease fathering children with Doll, he fathered two twin sons before his death
in 1829. The children of Shoe Boots were later forced into slavery with his
twin sons inherited as property to his sisters, who unsuccessfully attempted to
petition the council to grant emancipation and citizenship for the twins. The
nature of enslavement in Cherokee society often mirrored that of European-
American slave society, with little difference between the two. The Cherokee
instituted their own slave code and laws that were lenient towards Cherokee and
whites, but discriminated against slaves and free blacks. Cherokee law barred
intermarriage of Cherokee and blacks, whether the latter were enslaved or free.
African Americans who aided slaves were to be punished with 100 lashes on the
back. Cherokee society barred those of African descent from holding public
office, bearing arms, voting, and owning property. It was illegal for anyone
within the limits of the Cherokee Nation to teach blacks to read or write. This
law was amended so that the punishment for non-Cherokee citizens teaching
blacks was a request for removal from the Cherokee Nation by authorities.
Several revolts and escape attempts in Indian Territory attested to the
enslaved Africans' desire for freedom. In the Cherokee Slave Revolt of 1842,
several African slaves in Indian Territory, including 25 held by Cherokee
planter Joseph Vann, left their respective plantations near Webbers Falls,
Oklahoma to escape to Mexico. The slaves were captured by a Cherokee militia
under the command of Captain John Drew of the Cherokee Lighthorse near Fort
Gibson. On December 2, 1842, the Cherokee National Council passed "An Act in
regard to Free Negroes" banning all free blacks from the limits of the Cherokee
Nation by January 1843, except those freed by Cherokee slaveowners. In 1846, an
estimated number of 130-150 African slaves escaped from several plantations in
Cherokee territory. Most of the slaves were captured in Seminole territory by a
joint group of Cherokee, Creek, and Seminole slaveowners. Civil War and
abolition of slavery. During the American Civil War, the Cherokee Nation was
divided between support for the Union and support for the Confederate States of
America. Principal Chief John Ross originally adopted a policy of neutrality in
regard to the Civil War and relations with the two opposing forces. The
Cherokee officially joined the other Five Civilized Tribes in a Pro-Confederate
alliance when Ross signed a treaty with General Albert Pike of the Confederacy
on October 7, 1861. After Ross' capture on July 15, 1862 and his parole, he
sided with the Union and repudiated the Confederate treaty. He remained in
Union territory for his safety until the end of the war. Stand Watie, a
longtime rival of Ross and a leader of the majority Pro-Confederate Cherokee,
became Principal Chief of the Southern Cherokee on August 21, 1862. A wealthy
planter and slaveholder, Watie served as an officer in the Confederate Army and
was the last Brigadier General to surrender to the Union. Cherokee loyal to
Ross pledged support to the Union and acknowledged Ross as Principal Chief of
the Cherokee Nation, while pro-Confederate Cherokee sided with the Southern
Cherokee faction. In the absence of Ross, Thomas Pegg became acting Principal
Chief of the Cherokee Nation. Following the US Emancipation Proclamation, on
February 18, 1863, the Cherokee National Council, then consisting of Pro-Union
Cherokee, passed "An Act Providing for the Abolition of Slavery in the Cherokee
Nation" to emancipate all enslaved African Americans within the limits of the
Cherokee Nation. The act became effective on June 25, 1863 and any Cherokee
citizen who held slaves was to be fined. While the Cherokee became the only
nation of the Five Civilized Tribes to abolish slavery during the war, in fact
few slaves were freed. They were held mostly by those Cherokee loyal to the
Confederacy, who ignored the act. Despite agreeing to end slavery, pro-Union
Cherokee did not provide for civil and social equality for Freedmen in the
Cherokee Nation. Treaty of 1866. After the Civil War ended in 1865, the
factions of Cherokee who supported the Union and those who supported the
Confederacy continued to be at odds. On September 1865, each side was
represented along with delegations from the other Five Civilized Nations to
negotiate with the Southern Treaty Commission headed by the US Commissioner of
Indian Affairs Dennis N. Cooley at Fort Smith, Arkansas. Stand Watie and Elias
Cornelius Boudinot of the Southern Cherokee delegation hoped to achieve
separate status for a Southern Cherokee Nation and wanted the US government to
pay for the relocation of Freedmen out of the Cherokee Nation. The Pro-Union
Cherokee delegation led by John Ross wanted to adopt Freedmen into the tribe as
members and allocate land for their use. The US officials ignored the factional
divisions, addressed the Cherokee as one entity, and insisted on further
conditions for an agreement. One of the terms insisted by the commission was
that the Cherokee, as well as the other Five Civilized Tribes, abolish slavery
and grant the Cherokee Freedmen full citizenship, with rights to annuities and
land. The two factions prolonged negotiations for a period of time with
additional meetings held in Washington DC between the two and the US
government. While negotiations took place, the US Department of the Interior
tasked the newly established Freedmen's Bureau, headed by Brevet Major General
John Sanborn, to observe the treatment of Freedmen in Indian Territory and
regulate relations. The two Cherokee factions offered a series of treaty drafts
to the US government with Cooley giving each side twelve stipulations for the
treaties. The Pro-Union Cherokee rejected four of those stipulations while
agreeing with the rest. While the Southern Cherokee treaty had some support,
the treaty offered by Ross' faction was ultimately selected. The Pro-Union
faction was the sole Cherokee group that the US government settled treaty terms
with. Issues such as the status of Cherokee Freedmen and the voiding of the
Confederate treaty were previously agreed upon and both sides compromised on
issues such as amnesty for Cherokee that fought for the Confederacy. On July
19, 1866, six delegates representing the Cherokee Nation signed a
reconstruction treaty with the United States in Washington DC. The treaty
granted Cherokee citizenship to the Freedmen and their descendants (article 9).
The treaty also set aside a large tract of land for Freedmen to settle with 160
acres for each person (article 4) and granted them voting rights and self-
determination within the constraints of the greater Cherokee Nation (article 5
and article 10). "Cherokee Treaty of 1866", Oklahoma State University Digital
Library, accessed 11 July 2011. See Sturm (1998) and in Ray (2007) Other
nations of the Five Civilized Tribes also signed treaties with the U.S.
government in 1866 with articles concerning their respective Freedmen and the
abolishing of slavery. While the Chickasaw Nation was the sole tribe that
refused to include Freedmen as citizens, the Choctaw Nation granted citizenship
to Choctaw and Chickasaw Freedmen in 1885 after considerable tribal debate. The
Cherokee Nation Constitution was amended in a special convention on November
26, 1866. The constitutional amendments removed all language excluding people
of African descent and reiterated the treaty's language concerning the
Freedmen. The constitution also reiterated the treaty's six-month deadline for
Freedmen to return to the Cherokee Nation in order to be counted as citizens.
Essentially, Cherokee and other tribal freedmen were allowed the choice to
reside as citizens with the tribes, or to have United States citizenship
outside the tribal nations.Text of the convention can be accessed here as of
July 11, 2007. See Sturm (1998) and Ray (2007) Tribal rolls. Efforts were made
to incorporate the Cherokee Freedmen into the Cherokee Nation such as the
creation of several segregated Freedmen schools and the inclusion of Freedmen
in political office. Despite the progress, the 1866 treaty did not lead to
immediate acceptance of Freedmen in the tribe. In addition to factionalism from
the war, resistance to their full inclusion was based on economic factors
related to the allotment of lands and distribution of monies related to land
sales. In 1880, the Cherokee compiled a census to distribute per capita funds
related to recent land sales. The 1880 census did not include those Freedmen
who had never left. In the same year, the Cherokee senate voted to deny
citizenship to Freedmen who had failed to comply with the 1866 treaty by
returning to the Cherokee Nation within six months. The Cherokee claimed that
the 1866 treaty with the US granted civil and political rights to Cherokee
Freedmen, but not the right to share in tribal assets. Principal Chief Dennis
Wolf Bushyhead (1877â€“1887) opposed the exclusion of Cherokee Freedmen from
distribution of assets, but was overridden by the Cherokee National Council.
The federal government became involved on behalf of the Freedmen; in 1888 the
US Congress passed "An Act to secure to the Cherokee Freedmen and others their
proportion of certain proceeds of lands", Oct. 19, 1888, 25 Stat. 608. Special
Agent John W. Wallace was commissioned to create a roll, now known as the
Wallace Roll, to aid in the per-capita distribution of federal money. The
Wallace Roll included 3,524 Freedmen. The Cherokee Nation continued to
challenge the rights of the Freedmen. In 1890, by passing "An act to refer to
the U.S. Court of Claims certain claims of the Shawnee and Delaware Indians and
the freedmen of the Cherokee Nation", Oct. 1, 1890, 26 Stat. 636, the US
Congress authorized the U.S. Court of Claims to hear suits by the Freedmen
against the Cherokee Nation for recovery of proceeds denied them. The freedmen
won the claims court case that followed, "Whitmire v. Cherokee Nation and The
United States" (1912) (30 Ct. Clms. 138(1895)), which was appealed to the US
Supreme Court. It related to treaty obligations of the Cherokee Nation to the
United States. The Claims Court ruled that payments could not be restricted to
"particular class of Cherokee citizens, such as those by blood", which was
upheld by the Supreme Court. As the Cherokee Nation had already distributed the
funds they had received for sale of the Cherokee Outlet, the US government as
co-defendant was to pay the award to the Cherokee Freedmen. It commissioned the
Kern-Clifton roll, completed in 1896, as a record of 5,600 freedmen to receive
a portion of the land sale funds in the following decade as settlement. During
this distribution of proceeds, Congress passed the Dawes Act of 1887. It was a
measure to promote assimilation of Native Americans by requiring the
extinguishing of tribal government and the allotment of communal lands to
individual households of citizens registered as tribal members. The US
government would declare remaining lands "surplus" to communal Indian needs and
allow it to be acquired and developed European Americans. As a part of the act
and subsequent bills, the Dawes Commission required registration of the
American Indians of each tribe in the Indian Territory. Individuals were
identified by tribe on the Dawes Roll under the categories: Indians by blood
(they could identify only one tribe, even if descended from more than one),
intermarried whites, and Freedmen. Although many Indians were of more than one
tribal ancestry, they had to choose only one. In addition, although freedmen
frequently had Cherokee ancestry and sometimes living Cherokee parents, the
Dawes commissioners generally listed all freedmen exclusively on the Freedmen
Roll rather than recognizing individual's percentage of Cherokee ancestry. The
Dawes Rolls of 1902 listed 41,798 citizens of the Cherokee Nation, and 4,924
persons separately listed as Freedmen. The genealogist Angela Y. Walton-Raji
said that together, the Five Civilized Tribes had nearly 20,000 freedmen listed
on the Dawes Rolls, which were completed from 1902-1906. The 1908 Curtis Act
authorized the Dawes Commission to allot funds without the consent of tribal
governments, and allowed the federal government to extract taxes from white
citizens living in the Indian territories. (American Indians have considered
both the Dawes and Curtis acts as restrictions on tribal sovereignty.) The
government distributed allotments of land, although there have been many claims
of unfair treatment and errors in the registration process. As the Cherokee
Nation's government was officially dissolved, and Oklahoma became a state
(1907), the freedmen and other Cherokee had self-determination as US citizens.
Some 1,659 freedmen listed on the Kern-Clifton roll were not included in the
Dawes Roll, and therefore lost their Cherokee citizenship rights. Some
activists have criticized inconsistencies in the information collected in the
Dawes Rolls. In previous censuses, persons of mixed African-Native American
ancestry were classified as Native American. The Dawes Commission set up three
classifications: Cherokee by blood, intermarried white, and Freedmen. In
testimony as a member of the Cherokee Freedmen's Association, before the Indian
Claims Commission on November 14, 1960, Gladys Lannagan reported, "I was born
in 1896 and my father died August 5, 1897. But he didn't get my name on the
roll. I have two brothers on the rollâ€”one on the roll by blood and one other
by Cherokee Freedman children's allottees." She stated that one of her
grandparents was Cherokee and the other black. There have been cases of mixed-
race Cherokee, of partial African ancestry, with as much as 1/4 Cherokee blood
(equivalent to one grandparent being full-blood) not having been listed as
"Cherokee by blood" in the Dawes Roll because of having been classified under
only the Cherokee Freedmen category. Thus such individuals lost their "blood"
claim to Cherokee citizenship despite having satisfied the criterion of having
a Cherokee Indian ancestor. In 1924, Congress passed a jurisdictional act that
allowed the Cherokee to file suit against the United States to recover the
funds paid to Freedmen in 1894 under the Kern-Clifton Roll. It held that the
Kern-Clifton Roll was valid for only that distribution, and was superseded by
the Dawes Rolls in terms of establishing the Cherokee tribal list of
membership. The passing of the Indian Claims Commission Act of 1946 sparked
interest in the status of the 1,659 Freedmen included in the Kern-Clifton Roll
but not the Dawes roll and stirred activity among people claiming descent from
the Kern-Clifton Freedmen. Loss of membership. On October 22, 1970, the former
Five Civilized Tribes had the right to vote for their tribal leaders restored
by Congress via the Principal Chiefs Act. In 1971, the Department of the
Interior stated that one of the fundamental conditions for election procedures
was that the voter qualifications of the Cherokee, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole
must be broad enough to include the enrolled Freedmen citizens of their
respective nations. The Cherokee Nation, headed by Principal Chief W. W.
Keeler, issued voter cards to citizens and the Freedmen participated in the
first Cherokee elections since the 1900s. A new Cherokee Nation constitution
was drafted in 1975 and defined citizens as those proven by reference to the
final Dawes Commission Rolls, including the adopted Delaware and Shawnee. In
the 1970s, the Bureau of Indian Affairs began to provide several federal
services and benefits, such as free health care, to members of federally
recognized tribes. Numerous descendants of Cherokee listed as "Cherokee by
Blood" on the Dawes Commission Rolls enrolled as new members of the Cherokee
Nation. As members of the Cherokee Nation, certain federal benefits and
services were also provided to the Cherokee Freedmen. Efforts to block the
Freedmen descendants from the tribe began in 1983. Ross O. Swimmer, then-
Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, issued an executive order stating that
all Cherokee Nation citizens must have a "Certificate Of Degree Of Indian
Blood" (CDIB) card in order to vote instead of the previous Cherokee Nation
voter cards that were used since 1971. The CDIB cards were issued by the Bureau
of Indian Affairs based on those listed on the Dawes Commission Rolls as
Indians by blood. Since the Dawes Commission never recorded Indian blood
quantum on the Cherokee Freedmen Roll or the Freedmen Minors Roll, the Freedmen
could not obtain CDIB cards. Although they were Dawes enrollees, received funds
resulting from tribal land sales via the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in "Whitmire
v. Cherokee Nation and United States" (1912), and voted in previous Cherokee
Nation elections, the Cherokee Freedmen descendants were turned away from the
polls and told that they did not have the right to vote. Swimmer's executive
order was analyzed by some observers as one way Swimmer excluded people who
were supporting a rival candidate, Perry Wheeler, for Principal Chief. After
the 1983 Cherokee Nation elections and the re-election of Swimmer, Wheeler and
his running mate, Agnes Cowen, initiated a series of legal proceedings such as
filing cases with the Cherokee Judicial Appeals Tribunal, petitioning the
Bureau of Indian Affairs to conduct an investigation of the election, and
filing a case with the US District Court. Wheeler and Cowan alleged that the
election was a violation of federal and tribal law and that the Cherokee
Freedmen were unjustly removed from voting because they were allies of Wheeler.
All cases and subsequent appeals were defeated. Swimmerâ€™s successor,
Principal Chief Wilma P. Mankiller, elected in 1985, issued an Executive Order
requiring all enrolled members of the Cherokee Nation to have a CDIB card. From
that point on, Cherokee Nation citizenship was granted only to individuals with
Cherokee blood ancestry from a direct ancestor on the Dawes Commission Rolls.
This completed the disfranchisement of the Cherokee Freedmen descendants.
Activism of the 1940sâ€“2000s. In the 1940s, more than 100 descendants of
freedmen from the Wallace Roll, Kern-Clifton Roll, and the Dawes Rolls formed
the Cherokee Freedmen's Association. The organization filed a petition with the
Indian Claims Commission in 1951 over their exclusion from citizenship, but the
petition was denied in 1961. The Indian Claims Commission stated that their
claims to tribal citizenship were individual in nature and outside the US
governmentâ€™s jurisdiction. The Cherokee Freedmen's Association was faced with
two issues regarding their case. On one hand, the Dawes Rolls, a federally
mandated tally, was accepted as defining who were legally and politically
Cherokee and most of the CFA members were not of Dawes Rolls descent. On the
other, the courts saw their claims as a tribal matter and outside of their
jurisdiction. Appeals stretched to 1971, but all were denied with only few
legal victories to show for their twenty year effort. On July 7, 1983, the
Reverend Roger H. Nero and four other Cherokee Freedmen were turned away from
the Cherokee polls as a result of the newly instituted Cherokee voting policy.
A Freedman who voted in the 1979 Cherokee election, Nero and colleagues sent a
complaint to the Civil Rights Division of the Department of Justice, claiming
discrimination on the basis of race. On June 18, 1984, Nero and 16 Freedmen
descendants filed a class action suit against the Cherokee Nation. Principal
Chief Ross Swimmer, tribal officials, the tribal election committee, the United
States, the office of the President, the Department of the Interior, the
Secretary of the Interior, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and three Muskogee,
Oklahoma BIA officials were named as defendants. The suit sought nearly $750
million in damages and asked for the 1983 tribal election to be declared null
and void. The court ruled against the plaintiff Freedmen because of
jurisdictional issues, with the same ruling made by the Court of Appeals on
December 12, 1989. The courts held that the case should have been filed in
claims court instead of district court due to the amount asked in the lawsuit.
No judgment was made as to the merits of the case itself. Bernice Riggs, a
Freedmen descendant, sued the Cherokee Nation's tribal registrar Lela
Ummerteskee in 1998 over the latter denying the former's October 16, 1996
citizenship application. On August 15, 2001, the Judicial Appeals Tribunal (now
the Cherokee Nation Supreme Court) ruled in the case of "Riggs v. Ummerteskee"
that while Riggs adequately documented her Cherokee blood ancestry, she was
denied citizenship because her ancestors on the Dawes Commission Rolls were
listed only on the Freedmen Roll. Current issues. Reinstatement and loss of
citizenship. On September 26, 2004, Lucy Allen, a Freedmen descendant, filed a
lawsuit with the Cherokee Nation Supreme Court, asserting that the acts barring
Freedmen descendants from tribal membership were unconstitutional, in the case
of "Allen v. Cherokee Nation Tribal Council". On March 7, 2006, the Cherokee
Nation Judicial Appeals Tribunal ruled in Allenâ€™s favor in a 2â€“1 decision
that the descendants of the Cherokee Freedmen were Cherokee citizens and were
allowed to enroll in the Cherokee Nation. This ruling overturned the previous
ruling in "Riggs v. Ummerteskee". More than 800 Freedmen descendants have
enrolled in the Cherokee Nation since the ruling was made â€“ out of up to
45,000 potentially eligible people. Chad "Corntassel" Smith, Principal Chief of
the Cherokee Nation, stated his opposition to the ruling after the decision was
made. Smith called for a constitutional convention or referendum petition to
amend its constitution to deny citizenship to the Cherokee Freedmen
descendants. During a meeting on June 12, 2006, the Cherokee Nation Tribal
Council voted in a 13â€“2 decision to amend the constitution to restrict
Cherokee citizenship to descendants of Cherokee on the Dawes Rolls, but denied
a resolution calling for a special election on the issue. Supporters of the
special election, including former Cherokee Nation deputy chief John Ketcher
and Cherokee citizens siding with Smith, circulated a referendum petition for a
vote to remove the Freedmen descendants as members. Chief Smith announced that
the issue of the membership for Cherokee Freedmen was being considered for a
vote related to proposed amendments to the Cherokee Nation Constitution.
Freedmen descendants opposed the election. Vicki Baker filed a protest in the
Cherokee Nation Supreme Court over the legality of the petition and allegations
of foul play involved in the petition drive. Though the Cherokee Supreme Court
ruled against Baker, two justices in the Cherokee Supreme Court, Darrell Dowty
and Stacy Leeds, filed separate dissenting opinions against the ruling. Justice
Leeds wrote an 18-page dissent concerning falsified information in the petition
drive and fraud by Darren Buzzard and Dwayne Barrett, two of the petitionâ€™s
circulators. Leeds wrote, Chavez, Will. "Leeds dissent points to initiative
petition irregularities". "Cherokee Phoenix", January 2007 (Accessible as of
July 13, 2007 here) Despite the dissent and the removal of 800 signatures from
the petition, the goal of 2,100 signatures was met. Jon Velie, attorney for the
Freedman descendants, filed a motion for a preliminary injunction in the Vann
action in US District Court. Judge Henry H. Kennedy ruled against the Freedmen
descendantsâ€™ motion to halt the upcoming election because the election may
not have voted out the Freedmen. After a few delays, the tribe voted on March
3, 2007 on whether to amend the constitution to exclude the Cherokee Freedmen
descendants from citizenship. Registered Cherokee Freedmen voters were able to
participate in the election. The referendum results removed the Freedmen
descendants from the Cherokee Nation by a 76% (6,702) to 24% (2,041) margin out
of a total of 8,743 votes cast by registered voters. By comparison, the
previous Cherokee general election turnout had totaled 13,914 registered
voters. The Freedmen descendants protested their ouster from the tribe with
demonstrations at the BIA office in Oklahoma and at the Oklahoma state capital.
Due to the issues of citizenship in the election and the resulting exclusion of
freedmen descendants, the Cherokee Nation has been criticized by United States
groups such as the Congressional Black Caucus and the National Congress Of
Black Women. On March 14, 2007, twenty-six members of the Congressional Black
Caucus sent a letter to Carl J. Artman, Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs,
urging the Bureau of Indian Affairs to investigate the legality of the March
3rd election. BIA controversy and temporary reinstatement. The 2007 election
was criticized for having been conducted under a constitution that was not
approved by the Secretary of the Interior. On May 22, 2007, the Cherokee Nation
received notice from the BIA that the Cherokee Nationâ€™s amendments to the
1975 Cherokee Nation Constitution were rejected because they required BIA
approval, which had not been obtained. The BIA also stated concerns that the
Cherokee Nation had excluded the Cherokee Freedmen from voting for the
constitutional amendments, since they had been improperly shorn of their rights
of citizenship years earlier and were not allowed to participate in the
constitutional referendum. This is considered a violation of the 1970 Principal
Chiefs Act, which requires that all tribal members must vote. Former Chief
Smith, disbanded the Judicial Appeals Tribunal and created a new Cherokee
Supreme Court under the new Constitution. A question remains regarding the
legitimacy of the Court as the United States has not approved the Constitution
as required under the previous Cherokee Constitution. According to Chief Smith,
the 1975 Indian Self Determination Act overrode the 1970 Principal Chiefs Act
and the Cherokee Nation had the sovereign right to determine its citizenship
requirements. Smith stated that the Cherokee Nation Supreme Court ruled that
the Cherokee Nation could take away the approval authority it had granted the
federal government and that the Nation will abide by the court's decision.
Despite the ruling, the issue of amending the process of federal approval was
placed on the ballot for the June 23, 2007 general election. Cherokee voters
approved the amendment to remove federal oversight by a 2â€“1 margin, but the
BIA still has to approve. Jeanette Hanna, director of the BIA's Eastern
Oklahoma Regional Office, said that the regional office has recommended
approval of the vote on removal of Secretarial oversight. Heading into the 2007
election, the Cherokee Nation was not permitting the Freedmen to vote and
attorney Jon Velie again filed a motion for preliminary injunction. On May 15,
2007, Cherokee District Court Judge John Cripps signed an order for the
Cherokee Freedmen descendants to be temporarily reinstated as citizens of the
Cherokee Nation while appeals are pending in the Cherokee Nation court system.
This was due to an injunction filed by the Freedmen descendants' court-
appointed attorney for their case in tribal court. The Cherokee Nationâ€™s
Attorney General Diane Hammons complied with the court order. Velie, on behalf
of Marilyn Vann and six Freedmen descendants, argued the late actions that
protected 2,800 Freedmen but not all that were entitled to citizenship was
insufficient, but Judge Henry Kennedy denied the motion. On June 23, 2007 Chad
Smith was reelected for a four-year term as Principal Chief with 58.8% of the
vote Federal court proceedings. Marilyn Vann, president of the Descendants Of
Freedmen Of the Five Civilized Tribes organization, and four Freedmen
descendants filed a case with the United States Federal Court over the Cherokee
Nationâ€™s disfranchisement of the Freedmen descendants. Efforts have been made
by the Cherokee Nation to dismiss the federal case. On December 19, 2006,
Federal Judge Henry Kennedy ruled that the Freedmen descendants could sue the
Cherokee Nation for disfranchisement. The Cherokee Nation's administration
appealed the decision on the grounds that as a sovereign nation, the tribe is
protected by sovereign immunity and cannot be sued in US court. On July 29,
2008, the Washington D.C. Circuit Court Of Appeals unanimously ruled that the
Cherokee Nation was protected by sovereign immunity and could not be listed as
a defendant in the lawsuit. But, it stated that the Cherokee Nation's officials
were not protected by the tribe's sovereign immunity, and Freedmen descendants
could proceed with a lawsuit against the tribe's officers. The ruling also
stated the 13th Amendment and the Treaty of 1866 whittled away the Cherokees
right to discriminate against the Freedmen descendants. The ruling means that
the case will go back to district court. Velie stated this was a great victory
for the Freedmen and Indian people who can bring actions against the elected
officials of their Native Nations and the United States. In February 2009, the
Cherokee Nation filed a separate Federal lawsuit against individual Freedmen in
an attempt at what some called "venue shopping". The case was sent back to
Washington to join the Vann case. "On July 2, the Honorable Judge Terrance Kern
of the Oklahoma Northern District Court transferred the "Cherokee Nation v.
Raymond Nash et al" case that was filed in his court in February 2009 to D.C.
Already awaiting judgment in D.C. is the case of "Marilyn Vann et al v. Ken
Salazar" filed in August 2003." Kern would not hear the Nash case, filed by the
Cherokee Nation, due to the cases resembling each other in parties and the
subject matter of Freedmen citizenship; in addition, the first-to-file rule
meant that the Vann case needed to be heard and settled before any court heard
the Nash case. As the Cherokee Nation waived its sovereign immunity to file the
"Cherokee Nation v. Nash" case, it is now subject to the possibility of Judge
Kennedy's enjoining the Cherokee Nation to the original case, after they had
won immunity. "Finally, the Court is not, as argued by the Cherokee Nation,
depriving the Cherokee Nation of 'the incidents of its sovereign immunity' by
transferring this action pursuant to the first to file rule. The Cherokee
Nation voluntarily filed this action and waived its immunity from suit. It did
so while the D.C. Action was still pending." In October 2011, Judge Kennedy
dismissed the Vann case for technical reasons and transferred the Nash cash
back to Federal District Court in Tulsa, OK. Velie informed the Court in a
status Conference report that the Freedmen descendants will appeal the Vann
dismissal. The date for the appeal is November 29, 2011. 2011. On January 14,
2011, Cherokee District Court Judge John Cripps ruled in favor of the
plaintiffs in the "Raymond Nash et al v. Cherokee Nation Registrar" case,
reinstating Cherokee Nation citizenship and enrollment to the Freedmen
descendants. Cripps ruled that the 2007 constitutional amendment that
disenrolled the Freeedmen descendants was void by law because it conflicted
with the Treaty of 1866 that guaranteed their rights as citizens. The Cherokee
Nation held general elections for Principal Chief between challenger Bill John
Baker, a longtime Cherokee Nation councilman, and Chad Smith, the incumbent
Principal Chief, on June 24, 2011. Baker was declared the winner by 11 votes,
but the Election Committee determined that Smith had won by 7 votes on the next
day. In a recount, Baker was declared the winner by 266 votes but Smith
appealed to the Cherokee Supreme Court that ruled that a winner could not be
determined with mathematical certainty. A special election was scheduled for
September 24, 2011. On August 21, 2011, prior to the scheduling of the Cherokee
special election, the Cherokee Nation Supreme Court reversed the January 14th
decision of the Cherokee District Court resulting in the disenrollment of the
Freedmen descendants. Justice Darell Matlock Jr. ruled that the Cherokee people
had the sovereign right to amend the Cherokee Nation constitution and to set
citizenship requirements. The decision was 4 to 1 with Justice Darrell Dowty
dissenting. Many observers questioned the timing of the decision as the
Cherokee Freedmen voters, who voted in the June general election, were
disenfranchised going into the election. The decision removed the injunction of
the District Court which kept the Freedmen descendants in the Nation. On
September 11, 2011, the Cherokee Nation sent letters to 2800 Freedmen
descendants informing them of their disenrollment. In response, Jon Velie and
the Freedmen descendants filed another motion for preliminary injunction in
federal district court asking to reinstate their rights for the election. As a
result of the Cherokee Supreme Court ruling, the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development suspended $33 million in Cherokee Nation funds while it
studied the issue of the Freedmen descendants' disenrollment. Larry Echo Hawk,
Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, sent a
letter to acting Principal Chief Joe Crittenden stating that the Department of
the Interior never approved the Cherokee constitutional amendments that
excluded the Freedmen descendents from tribal membership. Echo Hawk stated said
that the September 24, 2011 election would be considered unconstitutional if
the Freedmen descendants were excluded from voting, as guaranteed by the Treaty
of 1866. On September 14, Cherokee Attorney General Diane Hammons recommended
reopening the case with the previous reinstatement to be applied while oral
arguments would be scheduled. In a preliminary federal court hearing on
September 20, 2011, Judge Henry Kennedy heard arguments from Jon Velie
representing the Freedmen descendants, Amber Blaha representing the US
government, and Graydon Dean Luthey, Jr. representing the Cherokee Nation.
Following arguments, the parties announced that the Cherokee Nation, Freedmen
plaintiffs and US government had come to an agreement to allow the Freedmen
descendants to be reinstated as citizens with the right to vote, with voting to
continue two additional days. The Cherokee Nation was to inform the Freedmen of
their citizenship rights no later than September 22. On September 23, 2011,
Velie returned to the Court with the other parties as virtually none of the
Freedmen descendants had received notification with the election happening the
next day. Judge Kennedy signed an additional agreed upon Order between the
parties requiring additional time for absentee ballots for Freedmen descendants
and five days of walk-in voting for all Cherokees. In October 2011, Bill John
Baker was inaugurated as Principal Chief after the Cherokee Supreme Court
rejected an appeal of the election results by former chief Chad Smith. 2012. On
July 2, 2012, the US Department of the Interior filed a counter lawsuit against
the Cherokee Nation in U.S. District Court in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Congressional
issues. On June 21, 2007, US Rep. Diane Watson (D-California), one of the 25
Congressional Black Caucus members who signed a letter asking the BIA to
investigate the Freedmen situation, introduced H.R. 2824. This bill seeks to
sever the Cherokee Nationâ€™s federal recognition, strip the Cherokee Nation of
their federal funding (estimated $300 million annually), and stop the Cherokee
Nationâ€™s gaming operations if the tribe does not honor the Treaty of 1866.
H.R. 2824 was co-signed by eleven Congress members and was referred to the
Committee Of Natural Resources and the Committee Of The Judiciary. Chief Smith
issued a statement saying that the introduction of this bill is "really a
misguided attempt to deliberately harm the Cherokee Nation in retaliation for
this fundamental principle that is shared by more than 500 other Indian
tribes." The National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) expressed their
disapproval of the bill. On September 26, 2008, Congress cleared the housing
bill H.R. 2786. The reauthorization of the Native American Housing and Self-
Determination Act included a provision stating that the Cherokee Nation can
receive federal housing benefits as long as a tribal court order allowing the
citizenship for Cherokee Freedmen descendants is intact or some settlement is
reached in the citizenship issue and litigation involving the Cherokee Freedmen
descendants. The House Of Representatives version of the bill would have denied
funds unless the Freedmen descendants were restored to citizenship. The Senate
version of the bill had no mention of the Cherokee Nation or the Cherokee
Freedmen descendants. Paul Lumley, executive director of the National American
Indian Housing Council (NAIHC), said that the NAIHC worked with members of the
Congressional Black Caucus to create a compromise, resulting in the addition of
the Cherokee Freedmen stipulation in the bill. Reactions to the controversy. A
number of Cherokee Freedmen descendants feel that they have been gradually
pushed out of the Cherokee Nation, and that the process has left each
generation less aware of its rights and its history. As Freedman activist
Reverend Roger H. Nero said in 1984, "Over the years they Nation officials have
been eliminating us gradually. When the older ones die out, and the young ones
come on, they won't know their rights. If we can't get this suit, they will not
be able to get anything". Individual Cherokee and Freedmen have in the past
been ignorant about the issue all together. Circe Sturm (1998) wrote in her
book on the Freedmen descendants that many had little sense of the historic
connection with the Cherokee, and are ambivalent about getting recognized.
Cherokee members have also been ignorant of the historic issues. Cara Cowan
Watts, a tribal council member who opposed membership for Freedmen descendants,
admitted in 2007 that she didnâ€™t know anything about the Freedmen or their
history before the court case. Chief Smith said, "A lot of Cherokee don't know
who the Freedmen are," and that he was not familiar with them when growing up.
Some Cherokee who oppose membership for Freedmen descendants support Chief
Smith's position: that the Freedmen are not Cherokee citizens because their
ancestors were listed on the Freedmen Roll of the Dawes Rolls and not on the
"Cherokee By-Blood" Roll (although some were of Cherokee blood). Smith and
supporters claim that the Freedmen and their descendants have not been active
in the tribe for 100 years, the Freedmen were compensated for slavery with
their Dawes land allotments and not tribal membership, they were forced on the
tribe by the US under the Treaty of 1866, and they want to share in the tribe's
resources and Cherokee Nation's federally funded programs. Those supporting
membership of Freedmen descendants believe they have a rightful place in
Cherokee society based on their long history in the tribe before and after
forced removal, with a history of intermarriage and active members. In
addition, they cite as precedent the legal history, such as the Treaty Of 1866,
the 1894 Supreme Court case of "Cherokee Nation vs. Journeycake" [http://
www.oscn.net/applications/oscn/DeliverDocument.asp?CiteID=413863], and the 1975
Cherokee Constitution. Ruth Adair Nash, a Freedmen from Bartlesville, Oklahoma,
carries her Cherokee citizenship card she was issued in 1975. Some Cherokee by
blood have pushed to garner full citizenship for Freedmen. David Allen
Cornsilk, editor of the independent newspaper "The Cherokee Observer" and
founder of the Cherokee National Party, was the lay advocate for the Lucy Allen
case. He sees the issue of honoring the 1866 treaty as an issue of sovereignty.
Other non-White Cherokee have expressed solidarity with freedmen due to their
similarities of religion (Southern Baptist) and the sense of community (albeit
African American) found among freedmen. In a June 2007 message to members of
United Keetoowah Band Of Cherokees, Principal Chief George Wickliffe expressed
his concern about threats to sovereignty by this case. He said that the
Cherokee Nation's refusal to abide by the Treaty of 1866 threatened the
government-to-government relationships of other Native American nations, which
had struggled to make the US live up to its treaty obligations. Supporters of
the Freedmen descendants note that the Cherokee have historically included as
members other non-Cherokee or people of partial Cherokee ancestry, adopting
captives into the tribe. The Delaware and Shawnee tribes, two non-Cherokee
tribes, are members of the Cherokee Nation via the Delaware Agreement of 1867
and the Shawnee Agreement of 1869. Another issue is that of a tribe's breaking
a treaty protected by Article Six of the United States Constitution. Daniel F.
Littlefield Jr., director of the Sequoyah Research Center at the University of
Arkansas-Little Rock, stated that the Treaty of 1866 granted freedmen their
rights as citizens, and the case should not be made into a racial issue. Race
is another issue. Taylor Keen, a Cherokee Nation tribal council member, said,
"Historically, citizenship in the Cherokee Nation has been an inclusive
process; it was only at the time of the Dawes Commission there was ever a
racial definition of what Cherokee meant. The fact that it was brought back up
today certainly tells me that there is a statute of racism." Cherokee Nation
citizen Darren Buzzard, one of the circulators of the 2006 petition, wrote a
letter to Cherokee Councilwoman Linda Oâ€™Leary, with passages which many
observers deemed to be racist and bigoted. Circulated widely on the Internet,
the letter was quoted in numerous articles related to the Freedmen case. Chuck
Trimble, former executive director of the National Congress of American
Indians, criticized the Cherokee Supreme Court's 2011 ruling for what he called
"the Cherokee Dred Scott decision," for depriving people of citizenship.
