The Chronicle of Higher Education The Chronicle of Higher Education is a
newspaper and website that presents news, information, and jobs for college and
university faculty and Student Affairs professionals (staff members and
administrators). "The Chronicle", based in Washington, D.C., is the major news
service in the United States academic world. It is published every weekday
online and appears weekly in print except for every other week in June, July,
and August and the last three weeks in December (a total of 42 issues a year).
In print, "The Chronicle" is published in two sections: section A with news and
job listings, and section B, "The Chronicle Review," a magazine of arts and
ideas. It also publishes "The Chronicle of Philanthropy", a newspaper for the
nonprofit world; "The Chronicle Guide to Grants", an electronic database of
corporate and foundation grants; and the Web portal Arts & Letters Daily.
"Chronicle" grossed $33 million in advertising revenues and $7 million in
circulation revenues in 2003. History. Corbin Gwaltney was the founder and had
been the editor of the alumni magazine of the Johns Hopkins University since
1949. In 1957, he joined in with editors from magazines of several other
colleges and universities for an editorial project to investigate issues in
higher education in perspective. The meeting occurred on the day the first
Sputnik circled the Earth, October 4, 1957, so the "Moonshooter" project was
formed as a supplement on higher education for the college magazines. The
college magazine editors promised 60 percent of one issue of their magazine to
finance the supplement. The first "Moonshooter Report" was 32 pages long and
titled "American Higher Education, 1958". They sold 1.35 million copies to 15
colleges and universities. By the project's third year, circulation was over 3
million for the supplement. In 1959, Gwaltney left Johns Hopkins Magazine to
become the first full-time employee of the newly created "Editorial Projects
for Education" (EPE, later renamed "Editorial Projects in Education") starting
in an office in his apartment in Baltimore and later moving to an office near
the Johns Hopkins campus. He realized that higher education would benefit from
a news publication. He and other board members of EPE met to plan a new
publication which would be called "The Chronicle of Higher Education". "The
Chronicle of Higher Education" was officially founded in 1966 by Corbin
Gwaltney. and its first issue was launched in November 1966. Although it was
meant for those involved in higher education, one of the founding ideas was
that the general public had very little knowledge about what was going on in
higher education and the real issues involved. Originally, it didn't accept any
advertising and didn't have any staff-written editorial opinions. It was
supported by grants from the Carnegie Foundation and the Ford Foundation. Later
on in its history, advertising would be accepted, especially for jobs in higher
education, and this would allow the newspaper to be financially independent. By
the 1970s, Chronicle was attracting enough advertising to become self-
sufficient, and in 1978 the board of EPE agreed to sell the newspaper to its
editors. EPE sold Chronicle to the editors for $2,000,000 in cash and $500,000
in services that Chronicle would provide to EPE. Chronicle went from a legal
non-profit status to a for-profit company. This sale shifted the focus of non-
profit EPE to K-12 education. Inspired by the model established by Chronicle
and with the support of the Carnegie Corporation and other philanthropies, EPE
founded "Education Week" in September 1981. In 1993, Chronicle was one of the
first newspapers to appear on the Internet, as a Gopher service. It released an
iPad version in 2011. Awards. Over the years, the paper has been a finalist and
winner of many journalism awards. In 2005, two special reports — on diploma
mills and plagiarism — were selected as finalists in the reporting category
for a National Magazine Award. It has been a finalist for the award in general
excellence every year from 2001 to 2005. In 2007, "The Chronicle" won an "Utne
Reader" Independent Press Award for political coverage. In its award citation,
"Utne" called "The Chronicle Review" "a fearless, free-thinking section where
academia's best and brightest can take their gloves off and swing with abandon
at both sides of the increasingly predictable political divide." "The New
Republic", "The Nation", "Reason", and "The American Prospect" were among the
finalists in the category.
