Citizens' jury The term "citizens' jury" was coined in the late 1980s by the
Jefferson Center in Minneapolis, Minnesota. They had developed the process in
1974 as a "citizens' committee", but decided to create and trademark the new
name in order to protect the process from commercialization. The practice of
citizens' juries has thus been tightly regulated in the US. Virtually the same
process was created in Germany in the early 1970s; American inventor Ned Crosby
and German inventor Peter Dienel did not learn of each other's work until 1985.
In Britain, the process spread rapidly because of a publication by IPPR in
1994. Outside the US and Germany, citizens' juries have been conducted in many
different ways, with many different objectives, and with varying degrees of
success. As with much PAR, there is a great deal of controversy over what
constitutes good practice or professionalism in the area of public
consultation. Lacking the methodological self-regulation that exists in some
areas of PAR, or the legal sanctions available to the owners of the citizens'
jury brand in the US, consultation practitioners elsewhere are free to use
almost whatever label they wish, without being limited to the approach taken by
those who invented the particular tool. Conversely, many people have used all
three elements above, yet called their processes by another name: community x-
change, consensus conferences, citizen's councils, deliberative focus groups
or, most commonly, citizens' panels. The participants' roles once a jury has
taken place vary from nothing to being asked to help bring about the
recommendations they have made. A citizens' jury in Mali on the future of food
was recently endorsed briefing by the United Nations Special Rapporteur Olivier
De Schutter.
