Civil society campaign A civil society campaign is one that is intended to
mobilize public support and use democratic tools such as lobbying in order to
instigate social change. Civil society campaigns can seek local, national or
international objectives. They can be run by dedicated single-issue groups such
as Baby Milk Action, or by professional non-governmental organisations (NGOs),
such as the World Development Movement, who may have several campaigns running
at any one time. Larger coalition campaigns such as 2005's Make Poverty History
may involve a combination of NGOs. Effective campaigning can sometimes achieve
much more than good works or giving to charity. For example, the Jubilee 2000
debt campaign persuaded G7 governments to cancel $100 billion of debt owned by
poor countries, releasing more money for development than 1,000 years of
Christian Aid weeks. In the UK, ASH (Action on Smoking and Health)’s campaign
for a ban on smoking in public places in 2006 saved over 2,000 lives and
billions of pounds a year. The Empty Homes Agency is working with UK local
authorities to bring thousands of properties into use as a result of a
successful amendment to the UK Housing Act 2004. Campaigning is increasingly
recognised as an important way for NGOs to achieve their objectives. Many
charities employ campaigners, produce campaigning materials and train their
supporters to campaign. The Charity Commission for England and Wales says that
“charities may undertake campaigning and political activity as a positive way
of furthering or supporting their purposes.” Some organisations, such as the
Centre for Policy Studies, want to keep charities and community groups out of
politics. Many NGOs and community groups are wary of campaigning. They worry
about being political or offending their funders. The problems voluntary
organisations deal with often need political action, as well as good works.
Over 200 years ago there were charities for the welfare of slaves, but
abolishing the institution of slavery was also necessary. There is still a lot
wrong with the world about which to campaign. Not all problems can be solved by
campaigning. Sometimes it is better to provide a service, as a private
business, a social enterprise or a charity. But many problems are best solved
by influencing the policies and actions of an industry, firm, public service or
government rather than trying to fix them yourself. Most campaigns are small,
such as improving play space in a park, creating access for people with
disabilities or changing work practices. Some tackle very big issues, like
climate change, world poverty and injustice. Many campaigns don’t get
anywhere or make very slow progress. Some even undermine their own cause,
because they turn people off or make mistakes. Influencing others takes skill
and knowledge as well as commitment. Lobbying. A key element of campaigning is
researching and offering policy suggestions. A campaigning organisation will
usually attempt to keep track of legislative processes, and mobilise its
supporter base to provide mass lobbies at critical junctures. Stunts and
actions. While civil society campaigners may come from a range of political
backgrounds, modern campaigning owes its largest debt to the ideas of the
Situationists, such as Guy Debord, who recognised that as society falls
increasingly under the thrall of the spectacle, it is impossible to generate
political momentum without existing in the visual plane. A frequent tactic of
civil society campaigns is thus the deployment of high profile stunts and
actions to draw attention to their cause. An example of a stunt is the group
Fathers4Justice dressing as popular superheroes and scaling tall buildings to
draw attention to their cause. The occupation of the Brent Spar platform by
Greenpeace to prevent Shell dumping it at sea was an action rather than a stunt
as it had intrinsic influence as well as generating publicity. Direct Action.
Direct action is politically motivated activity undertaken by individuals,
groups, or governments to achieve political goals outside of normal social/
political channels. Human Rights. Human rights refer to the "basic rights and
freedoms to which all humans are entitled." Campaigners use the Human Rights
Act, such as the right to life and liberty, freedom of expression, to further
their cause. Using the Arts. Some campaigners use the arts to get their message
across. For example, radical cheerleading is used at demonstrations to promote
a radical message in a media-friendly, people-friendly way. Demonstrations. A
demonstration is a form of nonviolent action by groups of people in favor of a
political or other cause, normally consisting of walking in a march and a
meeting (rally) to hear speakers Petitions. A petition is a request to change
something, most commonly made to a government official or public entity Social
Media. The use of social media is helping campaigners to recruit members and
communicate. Social media can take many different forms, including Internet
forums, weblogs, social blogs, wikis, podcasts, pictures and video. Influencing
Parliament. In the UK, Parliamentary Outreach works with NGOs to help them to
understand Parliamentary processes Freedom of Information Legislation.
Campaigners can now use Freedom of Information legislation to request
Government held information and receive it freely or at minimum cost.
