Civilization Civilization (or civilisation) is a sometimes controversial term
that has been used in several related ways. Primarily, the term has been used
to refer to the material and instrumental side of human cultures that are
complex in terms of technology, science, and division of labor. Such
civilizations are generally hierarchical and urbanized. In a classical context,
people were called "civilized" to set them apart from barbarians, savages, and
primitive peoples while in a modern-day context, "civilized peoples" have been
contrasted with indigenous peoples or tribal societies. There is a tendency to
use the term in a less strict way, to mean approximately the same thing as
"culture" and therefore, the term can more broadly refer to any important and
clearly defined human society. Still, even when used in this second sense, the
word is often restricted to apply only to societies that have attained a
particular level of advancementâ€”especially the founding of cities. The level
of advancement of a civilization is often measured by its progress in
agriculture, long-distance trade, occupational specialization, a special
governing class, and urbanism. Aside from these core elements, a civilization
is often marked by any combination of a number of secondary elements, including
a developed transportation system, writing, standardized measurement, currency,
contractual and tort-based legal systems, characteristic art and architecture,
mathematics, enhanced scientific understanding, metallurgy, political
structures, and organized religion. Etymology. The word "civilization" comes
from the Latin "civilis", meaning "civil", related to the Latin "civis",
meaning "citizen", and "civitas", meaning "city" or "city-state". In the sixth
century, the Byzantine Emperor Justinian oversaw the consolidation of Roman
civil law. The resulting collection is called the "Corpus Juris Civilis". In
the 11th century, professors at the University of Bologna, Western Europe's
first university, rediscovered the "Corpus Juris Civilis", and its influence
began to be felt across Europe. In 1388, the word "civil" appeared in English
meaning "of or related to citizens." In 1704, "civilization" was used to mean
"a law which makes a criminal process into a civil case." "Civilization" was
not used in its modern sense to mean "the opposite of barbarism"â€”as
contrasted to "civility", meaning politeness or civil virtueâ€”until the second
half of the 18th century. According to Emile Benveniste (1954), the earliest
written occurrence in English of "civilisation" in its modern sense may be
found in Adam Ferguson's "An Essay on the History of Civil Society" (Edinburgh,
1767 â€“ p.Â 2): "Not only the individual advances from infancy to manhood, but
the species itself from rudeness to civilisation." It should be noted that this
usage incorporates the concept of superiority and maturity of "civilized"
existence, as contrasted to "rudeness", which is used to denote coarseness, as
in a lack of refinement or "civility." Benveniste demonstrated that previous
occurrences could be found, which explained the quick adoption of Johnson's
definition. In 1775 the dictionary of Ast defined "civilization" as "the state
of being civilized; the act of civilizing", and the term was frequently used by
Adam Smith in "An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations"
(1776). Beside Smith and Ferguson, John Millar also used it in 1771 in his
"Observations concerning the distinction of ranks in society". The history of
the word in English appears to be connected with the parallel development in
French, which may be the original source. As the first occurrence of
"civilization" in French was found by Benveniste in the Marquis de Mirabeau's
"L'Ami des hommes ou traitÃ© de la population" (written in 1756 but published
in 1757), Benveniste's query was to know if the English word derived from the
French, or if both evolved independently â€” a question which needed more
research. According to him, the word "civilization" may in fact have been used
by Ferguson as soon as 1759. In the late 1700s and early 1800s, both during the
French revolution, and in English, "civilization" was referred to in the
singular, never the plural, because it referred to the progress of humanity as
a whole. This is still the case in French. More recently "civilizations" is
sometimes used as a synonym for the broader term "cultures" in both popular and
academic circles. However, the concepts of civilization and culture are not
always considered interchangeable. For example, a small nomadic tribe may be
judged not to have a civilization, but it would surely be judged to have a
culture (defined as "the arts, customs, habits... beliefs, values, behavior and
material habits that constitute a people's way of life"). Civilization is not
always seen as an improvement. One historically important distinction between
culture and civilization stems from the writings of Rousseau, and particularly
his work concerning education, "". In this perspective, civilization, being
more rational and socially driven, is not fully in accordance with human
nature, and "human wholeness is achievable only through the recovery of or
approximation to an original prediscursive or prerational natural unity". (See
noble savage.) From this notion, a new approach was developed especially in
Germany, first by Johann Gottfried Herder, and later by philosophers such as
Kierkegaard and Nietzsche. This sees cultures (plural) as natural organisms
which are not defined by "conscious, rational, deliberative acts" but rather a
kind of pre-rational "folk spirit". Civilization, in contrast, though more
rational and more successful concerning material progress, is seen as un-
natural, and leads to "vices of social life" such as guile, hypocrisy, envy,
and avarice. During World War II, Leo Strauss, having fled Germany, argued in
New York that this approach to civilization was behind Nazism and German
militarism and nihilism. In his book "The Philosophy of Civilization", Albert
Schweitzer outlined the idea that there are dual opinions within society: one
regarding civilization as purely material and another regarding civilization as
both ethical and material. He stated that the current world crisis was, then in
1923, due to a humanity having lost the ethical conception of civilization. In
this same work, he defined civilization, saying that it "is the sum total of
all progress made by man in every sphere of action and from every point of view
in so far as the progress helps towards the spiritual perfecting of individuals
as the progress of all progress." Characteristics. Social scientists such as V.
Gordon Childe have named a number of traits that distinguish a civilization
from other kinds of society. Civilizations have been distinguished by their
means of subsistence, types of livelihood, settlement patterns, forms of
government, social stratification, economic systems, literacy, and other
cultural traits. All civilizations have depended on agriculture for
subsistence. Growing food on farms results in a surplus of food, particularly
when people use intensive agricultural techniques such as irrigation and crop
rotation. Grain surpluses have been especially important because they can be
stored for a long time. A surplus of food permits some people to do things
besides produce food for a living: early civilizations included artisans,
priests and priestesses, and other people with specialized careers. A surplus
of food results in a division of labor and a more diverse range of human
activity, a defining trait of civilizations. However, in some places hunter-
gatherers have had access to food surpluses, such as among some of the
indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest and perhaps during the Mesolithic
Natufian culture. It is possible that food surpluses and relatively large scale
social organization and division of labor predates plant and animal
domestication. Civilizations have distinctly different settlement patterns from
other societies. The word "civilization" is sometimes simply defined as
"'living in cities'". Non-farmers tend to gather in cities to work and to
trade. Economically, civilizations display more complex patterns of ownership
and exchange than less organized societies. Living in one place allows people
to accumulate more personal possessions than nomadic people. Some people also
acquire landed property, or private ownership of the land. Because a percentage
of people in civilizations do not grow their own food, they must trade their
goods and services for food in a market system, or receive food through the
levy of tribute, redistributive taxation, tariffs or tithes from the food
producing segment of the population. Early civilizations developed money as a
medium of exchange for these increasingly complex transactions. To
oversimplify, in a village the potter makes a pot for the brewer and the brewer
compensates the potter by giving him a certain amount of beer. In a city, the
potter may need a new roof, the roofer may need new shoes, the cobbler may need
new horseshoes, the blacksmith may need a new coat, and the tanner may need a
new pot. These people may not be personally acquainted with one another and
their needs may not occur all at the same time. A monetary system is a way of
organizing these obligations to ensure that they are fulfilled fairly. Writing,
developed first by people in Sumer, is considered a hallmark of civilization
and "appears to accompany the rise of complex administrative bureaucracies or
the conquest state." Traders and bureaucrats relied on writing to keep accurate
records. Like money, writing was necessitated by the size of the population of
a city and the complexity of its commerce among people who are not all
personally acquainted with each other. However, writing is not always necessary
for civilization. The Inca civilization of the Andes did not use writing at
all, yet it still functioned as a society. Aided by their division of labor and
central government planning, civilizations have developed many other diverse
cultural traits. These include organized religion, development in the arts, and
countless new advances in science and technology. Through history, successful
civilizations have spread, taking over more and more territory, and
assimilating more and more previously-uncivilized people. Nevertheless, some
tribes or people remain uncivilized even to this day. These cultures are called
by some "primitive," a term that is regarded by others as pejorative.
"Primitive" implies in some way that a culture is "first" (Latin = primus),
that it has not changed since the dawn of humanity, though this has been
demonstrated not to be true. Specifically, as all of today's cultures are
contemporaries, today's so-called primitive cultures are in no way antecedent
to those we consider civilized. Many anthropologists use the term "non-
literate" to describe these peoples. Civilization has been spread by
colonization, invasion, religious conversion, the extension of bureaucratic
control and trade, and by introducing agriculture and writing to non-literate
peoples. Some non-civilized people may willingly adapt to civilized behaviour.
But civilization is also spread by the technical, material and social dominance
that civilization engenders. Cultural identity. "Civilization" can also refer
to the culture of a complex society, not just the society itself. Every
society, civilization or not, has a specific set of ideas and customs, and a
certain set of manufactures and arts that make it unique. Civilizations tend to
develop intricate cultures, including literature, professional art,
architecture, organized religion, and complex customs associated with the
elite. The intricate culture associated with civilization has a tendency to
spread to and influence other cultures, sometimes assimilating them into the
civilization (a classic example being Chinese civilization and its influence on
nearby civilizations such as Korea, Japan and Vietnam). Many civilizations are
actually large cultural spheres containing many nations and regions. The
civilization in which someone lives is that person's broadest cultural
identity. Many historians have focused on these broad cultural spheres and have
treated civilizations as discrete units. Early twentieth-century philosopher
Oswald Spengler, uses the German word "Kultur," "culture," for what many call a
"civilization". Spengler believes a civilization's coherence is based on a
single primary cultural symbol. Cultures experience cycles of birth, life,
decline, and death, often supplanted by a potent new culture, formed around a
compelling new cultural symbol. Spengler states civilization is the beginning
of the decline of a culture as, "...the most external and artificial states of
which a species of developed humanity is capable." This "unified culture"
concept of civilization also influenced the theories of historian Arnold J.
Toynbee in the mid-twentieth century. Toynbee explored civilization processes
in his multi-volume "A Study of History," which traced the rise and, in most
cases, the decline of 21 civilizations and five "arrested civilizations."
Civilizations generally declined and fell, according to Toynbee, because of the
failure of a "creative minority", through moral or religious decline, to meet
some important challenge, rather than mere economic or environmental causes.
Samuel P. Huntington defines civilization as "the highest cultural grouping of
people and the broadest level of cultural identity people have short of that
which distinguishes humans from other species." Huntington's theories about
civilizations are discussed below. Complex systems. Another group of theorists,
making use of systems theory, looks at a civilization as a complex system,
i.e., a framework by which a group of objects can be analyzed that work in
concert to produce some result. Civilizations can be seen as networks of cities
that emerge from pre-urban cultures, and are defined by the economic,
political, military, diplomatic, social, and cultural interactions among them.
Any organization is a complex social system, and a civilization is a large
organization. Systems theory helps guard against superficial but misleading
analogies in the study and description of civilizations. Systems theorists look
at many types of relations between cities, including economic relations,
cultural exchanges, and political/diplomatic/military relations. These spheres
often occur on different scales. For example, trade networks were, until the
nineteenth century, much larger than either cultural spheres or political
spheres. Extensive trade routes, including the Silk Road through Central Asia
and Indian Ocean sea routes linking the Roman Empire, Persian Empire, India,
and China, were well established 2000 years ago, when these civilizations
scarcely shared any political, diplomatic, military, or cultural relations. The
first evidence of such long distance trade is in the ancient world. During the
Uruk period Guillermo Algaze has argued that trade relations connected Egypt,
Mesopotamia, Iran and Afghanistan. Resin found later in the Royal Tombs of Ur
it is suggested was traded northwards from Mozambique. Many theorists argue
that the entire world has already become integrated into a single "world
system", a process known as globalization. Different civilizations and
societies all over the globe are economically, politically, and even culturally
interdependent in many ways. There is debate over when this integration began,
and what sort of integration â€“ cultural, technological, economic, political,
or military-diplomatic â€“ is the key indicator in determining the extent of a
civilization. David Wilkinson has proposed that economic and military-
diplomatic integration of the Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilizations resulted
in the creation of what he calls the "Central Civilization" around 1500 BCE.
Central Civilization later expanded to include the entire Middle East and
Europe, and then expanded to a global scale with European colonization,
integrating the Americas, Australia, China and Japan by the nineteenth century.
According to Wilkinson, civilizations can be culturally heterogeneous, like the
Central Civilization, or homogeneous, like the Japanese civilization. What
Huntington calls the "clash of civilizations" might be characterized by
Wilkinson as a clash of cultural spheres within a single global civilization.
Others point to the Crusades as the first step in globalization. The more
conventional viewpoint is that networks of societies have expanded and shrunk
since ancient times, and that the current globalized economy and culture is a
product of recent European colonialism. Future. Political scientist Samuel
Huntington has argued that the defining characteristic of the 21st century will
be a clash of civilizations. According to Huntington, conflicts between
civilizations will supplant the conflicts between nation-states and ideologies
that characterized the 19th and 20th centuries. These views have been strongly
challenged by others like Edward Said, Muhammed Asadi and Amartya Sen. Ronald
Inglehart and Pippa Norris have argued that the "true clash of civilizations"
between the Muslim world and the West is caused by the Muslim rejection of the
West's more liberal sexual values, rather than a difference in political
ideology, although they note that this lack of tolerance is likely to lead to
an eventual rejection of (true) democracy. In "Identity and Violence" Sen
questions if people should be divided along the lines of a supposed
'civilization', defined by religion and culture only. He argues that this
ignores the many others identities that make up people and leads to a focus on
differences. Some environmental scientists see the world entering a Planetary
Phase of Civilization, characterized by a shift away from independent,
disconnected nation-states to a world of increased global connectivity with
worldwide institutions, environmental challenges, economic systems, and
consciousness. In an attempt to better understand what a Planetary Phase of
Civilization might look like in the current context of declining natural
resources and increasing consumption, the Global scenario group used scenario
analysis to arrive at three archetypal futures: Barbarization, in which
increasing conflicts result in either a fortress world or complete societal
breakdown; Conventional Worlds, in which market forces or Policy reform slowly
precipitate more sustainable practices; and a Great Transition, in which either
the sum of fragmented Eco-Communalism movements add up to a sustainable world
or globally coordinated efforts and initiatives result in a new sustainability
paradigm. Author Derrick Jensen argues that modern civilization is
intrinsically directed towards the domination of the environment and humanity
itself in a harmful and destructive fashion. The Kardashev scale classifies
civilizations based on their level of technological advancement, specifically
measured by the amount of energy a civilization is able to harness. The
Kardashev scale makes provisions for civilizations far more technologically
advanced than any currently known to exist "(see also: Civilizations and the
Future, Space civilization)". Fall of civilizations. There have been many
explanations put forward for the collapse of civilization. Some focus on
historical examples, and others on general theory. History. Early
civilizations. The process of sedentarization is first thought to have occurred
around 12,000 BCE in the Levant region of southwest Asia though other regions
around the world soon followed. The emergence of civilization is generally
associated with the Neolithic, or Agricultural Revolution, which occurred in
various locations between 8,000 and 5,000 BCE, specifically in southwestern/
southern Asia, northern/central Africa and Central America. This revolution
marked the beginning of stable agriculture and animal domestication which
enabled economies and cities to develop. The following articles discuss the
development of major early civilizations. Antiquity (Axial Age). Karl Jaspers,
the German historical philosopher, proposed that the ancient civilizations were
affected greatly by an Axial Age in the period between 800 BCEâ€“200 BCE during
which a series of male sages, prophets, religious reformers and philosophers,
from China, India, Iran, Israel and Greece, changed the direction of
civilizations. William H. McNeill proposed that this period of history was one
in which culture contact between previously separate civilizations saw the
"closure of the oecumene", and led to accelerated social change from China to
the Mediterranean, associated with the spread of coinage, larger empires and
new religions. This view has recently been championed by Christopher Chase-Dunn
and other world systems theorists. External links. Civilization as Paradox
[http://paradoxofintensity.wordpress.com/about/]
