Civil libertarianism Civil libertarianism is a strain of political thought that
supports civil liberties, or who emphasizes the supremacy of individual rights
and personal freedoms over and against any kind of authority (such as a state,
a corporation, social norms imposed through peer pressure, etc). Civil
libertarianism is not a complete ideology; rather, it is a collection of views
on the specific issues of civil liberties and civil rights. Because of this, a
civil libertarian outlook is compatible with many other political philosophies,
and civil libertarianism is found on both the right and left of modern
politics, although it is often associated with liberals in the United States.
The primary concern of the civil libertarian is the relationship of the
government to the individual. The civil libertarian seeks, in theory, to
restrict this relationship to an absolute minimum in which the state can
function and provide basic services and securities without excessively
interfering in the lives of its citizens. One key cause of civil libertarianism
is upholding free speech. Specifically, civil libertarians oppose bans on hate
speech and obscenity. Although they may or may not personally condone behaviors
associated with these issues, civil libertarians hold that the advantages of
unfettered public discourse outweigh all disadvantages. In the light of the 9/
11 terrorist attacks, civil libertarians are also concerned over the state of
personal liberties and freedoms in the face of increased national security.
Other civil libertarian positions include support for at least partial
legalization of illicit substances (marijuana, etc.), a strong demarcation
between religion and politics, and, more recently, support for gay marriage.
The most prominent civil libertarian organization in the United States today is
the American Civil Liberties Union. In the past 20 years, with the advent of
personal computers, the Internet, email, cell phones, and other information
technology advances, a subset of civil libertarianism has arisen that focuses
on protecting individualsâ€™ digital rights and privacy. The organization most
closely affiliated with this sort of civil libertarianism is the Electronic
Frontier Foundation.
