Civil authority Civil authority (also known as civil government) is that
apparatus of the state other than its military units that enforces law and
order. It is also used to distinguish between religious authority (for example
Canon law) and secular authority. In a religious context it may be defined "as
synonymous with human government, in contradistinction to a government by God,
or the divine government." History. Among the first modern experiments in civil
government took place in 1636 when Roger Williams, a Christian minister,
founded the colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations. He sought to
create a "wall of separation" between church and state to prevent corruption of
the church and maintain civil order as expounded upon in his 1644 book, "Bloudy
Tenent of Persecution". Types of authority. It can also mean the moral power of
command, supported (when need be) by physical coercion, which the State
exercises over its members. In this view, because man can not live in isolation
without being deprived of what makes him fully human, and because authority is
necessary for a society to hold together, the authority has not only the power
but the right to command. It is natural to man to live in society, to submit to
authority, and to be governed by that custom of society which crystallizes into
law, and the obedience that is required is paid to the powers that be, to the
authority actually in possession. The extent of its authority is bound by the
ends it has in view, and the extent to which it actually provides for the
government of society. In modern states enforcement of law and order is
typically a role of the police although the line between military and civil
units may be hard to distinguish; especially when militias and volunteers, such
as yeomanry, act in pursuance of non-military, domestic objectives.
