Classless society Classless society refers to a society in which no one is born
into a social class. Such distinctions of wealth, income, education, culture,
or social network might arise and would only be determined by individual
experience and achievement in such a society. Since these distinctions are
difficult to avoid, advocates, such as Anarchists, communists, etc. of a
classless society propose various means to achieve and maintain it and attach
varying degrees of importance to it as an end in their overall programs/
philosophy. Classlessness. The term classlessness has been used to describe
different social phenomena. In societies where classes have been abolished it
is usually the result of a voluntary decision by the membership to form such a
society, to abolish a pre-existing class structure in an existing society or to
form a new one without any. This would include communes, of the modern period,
such as various Utopian communities, the kibbutzim, etc. as well as
revolutionary and political acts at the nation-state level such as the Paris
Commune, Russian Revolution, etc. The abolition of social classes and the
establishment of a classless society is the primary goal of communism,
libertarian socialism and most forms of anarchism. Classlessness also refers to
the state of mind required in order to operate effectively as a social
anthropologist. Anthropological training includes making assessments of and
therefore becoming aware of one's own class assumptions, so that these can be
set aside from conclusions reached about other societies. This may be compared
to ethnocentric biases or the "neutral axiology" required by Max Weber.
Otherwise conclusions reached about studied societies will likely be coloured
by the anthropologist's own class values. Classlessness can also refer to a
society that has acquired pervasive and substantial social justice; where the
economic upper class wields no special political power and poverty as
experienced historically is virtually nonexistent. Some Scandinavian countries
are held to have reached this state. Marxist definition. In Marxist theory,
tribal hunter-gatherer society, primitive communism, was classless. Everyone
was equal in a basic sense as a member of the tribe and the different
functional assignments of the primitive mode of production, howsoever rigid and
stratified they might be, did not and could not, simply because of the numbers,
produce a class society as such. With the transition to agriculture, the
possibility to make a surplus product, i.e. to produce more than what is
necessary to satisfy one's immediate needs, developed in the course of
development of the productive forces. According to Marxism, this also made it
possible for a class society to develop, because the surplus product could be
used to nourish a ruling class, which did not participate in production. The
surplus product was stored for a time of distress in special repositories,
which then also had to be guarded. Especially during these times the stored
products had to be defended against the immediate fears of the population, so
that they were not all consumed right away. The people who did this, could,
therefore, also decide if someone was not to be fed. They had to be more
powerful than the masses of the population. The ruling class was born â€“ hence
the negation of the classless society, or the first negation. There are three
societies that followed the classless tribal society. First, there was ancient
society, in which the major class distinction was between master and slave.
Then, there was feudal society, in which lord and serf played the roles of
class war. The last stage of class society is bourgeois society, or capitalism,
in which it has been simplified to owner and worker. According to Marx, there
should be a classless society once again at the end of the development of
productive forces, specifically through the development of infrastructure and
production technology. Class society, would be "sublated", the Hegelian circuit
completed, as the productive forces burst their confinement in bourgeois
society as they did those of feudal- and orientalism, and the contradiction of
class society is finally resolved into a version of the prior classless state
but at the much higher level of human development that would be in effect then.
Similar to primitive communism, where everyone must do useful work to have
access to the things they need, in communism, everyone can use the means of
production to fulfill their needs, to the extent that a ruling class is no
longer controlling access to these; this final stage of production is the
negation of the negation of classless society, in Hegelian terms. This society
would be a co-operative union of free producers, who are both owners of the
means of production and self-employed, i.e. with no intermediary between
themselves and the society that consumes their labor. There is no private
ownership of the means of production. These are the property of the whole
society. Because all decisions are made in a grassroots democratic system,
there is no longer a need for a state as an instrument of class rule and it
would die off, when it has in fact become superfluous. Because after the
proletarian revolution the economic system would no longer be plagued by
rivalry and crises, and rationalized production is assumed to increase greatly.
Agriculture would also be rationalized, because it would be practiced on larger
farms. It would be possible to get rid of all shortages, so that the reasonable
needs of all people could be satisfied. Socially necessary work is no longer
alienated, and individuals become free to pursue their individual personal
interests with time freed from the life-or-death struggle that bourgeois
thought poses as a false need for workers to compete for capitalist
remuneration (in money which represents that which they, the worker/producers,
as a class, created in the first place) in order to secure the necessities of
life.
