Clergy Letter Project The Clergy Letter Project is a project that maintains
statements in support of the teaching of evolution and in opposition to the
teaching of creationism in public schools and collects signatures in support of
the letter from American Christian, Jewish, and Unitarian Universalist clergy.
The letters make reference to points raised by intelligent design proponents.
There are three separate letters: A Christian Clergy Letter, a Rabbi Letter,
and a Unitarian Universalist Clergy Letter. there were 12,813 signatures from
Christian clergy, 494 signatures from Jewish rabbis, and 257 signatures from
Unitarian Universalist clergy. This effort was initiated in 2004 by biologist
Michael Zimmerman, now vice president for academic affairs and provost at The
Evergreen State College in Olympia, Washington. and the letter was written by
the Rev. John McFadden, pastor of the First Congregational United Church of
Christ in Appleton, Wisconsin. The Project also encourages congregations to
participate Evolution Weekend by sponsoring events in which clergy and
congregations are encouraged to learn about and discuss evolution. The weekend
chosen is the closest Sunday to Charles Darwin's birthday, February 12.
Evolution Sunday events first took place in 2006 and the Project renamed it in
2008 to be more inclusive. The Clergy Letter Project states that Evolution
Weekend activities are "an opportunity for serious discussion and reflection on
the relationship between religion and science" and in an effort "to elevate the
quality of the discussion on this critical topic, and to show that religion and
science are not adversaries." The Project states that events are specifically
intended to emphasize that "Religious people from many diverse faith traditions
and locations around the world understand that evolution is quite simply sound
science; and for them, it does not in any way threaten, demean, or diminish
their faith in God. In fact, for many, the wonders of science often enhance and
deepen their awe and gratitude towards God." Statement. The letters are
entitled "An Open Letter Concerning Religion and Science". The three letters
have somewhat distinct texts. In addition to English, the Christian version of
the project has also been translated to Spanish, Portuguese, and French. Rabbi
Letter Unitarian Universalist Letter History of the project. The project was
organized in 2004 by Michael Zimmerman, then a biology professor and dean of
the College of Science and Letters at University of Wisconsinâ€“Oshkosh . He
was motivated to create a petition by the actions of the school board in
Grantsburg, Wisconsin, which had passed some anti-evolution policies in the
summer of 2004. Zimmerman was a veteran of similar disputes in Ohio, when he
was a professor at Oberlin College. After Zimmerman watched Christian
fundamentalist clergy from Dover, Pennsylvania on the television program
"Nightline" insisting that decisions about teaching evolution in schools was
equivalent to a choice between heaven and hell, he recruited the husband of the
head of the university Psychology Department, the Rev. John McFadden, pastor of
the First Congregational United Church of Christ in Appleton, Wisconsin, to
write a letter describing how science and religion can co-exist. Zimmerman
worked with local clergy in Wisconsin to get clergy to sign this letter, and
within a few weeks he had collected almost 200 clergy signatures. The signed
letter was delivered to the Grantsburg School Board on December 16, 2004. This
effort, together with those of other concerned groups of educators, citizens
and scientists, lead the Grantsburg School Board to rescind its policies. After
this success, Zimmerman was encouraged to organize a nationwide campaign and
gather more signatures. By September 12, 2005, the Clergy Letter Project had
collected more than 7500 signatures. By the beginning of December 2005, the
Project had amassed more than 10,000 signatures. Most of the clergy who signed
are Protestant, an artifact of the way that people were originally invited to
sign the letter. Email invitations were sent, and it was easier to get email
addresses for some churches and denominations than others. The clergy letter
was at first limited to Christian clergy, and Zimmerman declined offers from
Jewish and Muslim clergy. Zimmerman stated that "Since it is fundamentalist
Christian ministers who have been shouting to the American people that they
must choose between religion and science, it seemed reasonable to have
thousands upon thousands of Christian clergy assert otherwise. It simply
wouldn't be very persuasive to have leaders of other religions saying to
Christians that Christian fundamentalist ministers are not speaking for all
Christians...the Clergy Letter Project and Evolution Sunday are not designed to
change the minds of fundamentalists. Rather, our goal is to educate the vast
majority of Christians who, if told they have to choose between religion and
modern science, are likely to opt for religion."" Later, however, two
additional statements, were added to the project, a Jewish rabbi letter and a
Unitarian Universalist clergy letter. Evolution Weekend and related activities.
Zimmerman and the Clergy Letter Project also organize "Evolution Weekend," an
annual movement to encourages churches to discuss the role of science and
religion in sermons, discussion groups, seminars, and other activities on the
weekend nearest to February 12, the birthday of Charles Darwin (Darwin Day).
The day began in 2006 as "Evolution Sunday," gaining attention from the "New
York Times". In 2008 was renamed "Evolution Weekend" to incorporate more faith
traditions. In 2011, 652 congregations from all 50 states and the District of
Columbia as well as 13 countries participated in Evolution Weekend activities.
Zimmerman and the Clergy Letter Project maintain a list of 1,012 scientists
from all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and 31 countries,
who have agreed to serve as "technical consultants to clergy members who have
questions about the science associated with all aspects of evolution." The
project states that "The very existence of this list clearly demonstrates the
willingness of scientists to work collaboratively with clergy members.
Together, scientists and clergy members demonstrate that religion and science
can have a complementary and positive relationship with one another." Evolution
Weekend often gained attention from several news outlets, with participating
clergy being interviewed in local publications. Reaction from creationists. The
creationist Discovery Institute, which arranged its own anti-evolution petition
called "A Scientific Dissent from Darwinism" in 2001 criticized the project.
Discovery Institute communications director Rob Crowther asserted that the
disputes about evolution was "purely a scientific debate" and that clergy
petitions are irrelevant, stating that clergy "don't make any difference,"
since "We don't think there is anything religious at all to the theory of
intelligent design." Zimmerman described this argument as part of the problem,
as intelligent design tried to undermine science by changing it from a study of
the natural world to include supernatural explanations, and it was important
for clergy to defend science against these attacks. Ken Ham and Mark Looy of
the creationist organization Answers in Genesis have repeatedly condemned
Evolution Sunday/Evolution Weekend activities as a "Darwin praise service" and
expressing dismay that "over 10,200 clergy had signed this awful letter." Ham
and Looy also criticized Zimmerman's fundraising efforts through the Christian
Alliance for Progress Answers in Genesis published a list of "modern scientists
who have accepted the biblical account of creation." The majority are not
biologists. The group has also organized "Creation Sunday" in response to
Evolution Weekend, and has promoted the Creation Letter Project in response to
Clergy Letter Project. Jonathan Dudley, a divinity student at Yale University
and author book "Broken Words: The Abuse of Science and Faith in American
Politics," (New York: Doubleday, 2011) wrote approvingly of "Evolution Sunday"
in the Yale Daily News on January 24, 2007, while still worrying that
congregations were not being taught to think for themselves with this current
campaign, any more than subscribing to fundamentalist Christian biblical
literalist doctrines. This caused Discovery Institute fellow Jonathon Wells to
write a scathing article in the Yale Daily News on January 29, 2007 about
"Evolution Sunday", "Darwinism", and even Zimmerman. Wells repeated creationist
objections to evolution by claiming incorrectly that there is no evidence of
evolution and condemning evolution for not being in agreement with the views of
40% of the American public. Zimmerman responded to Wells' attack with a column
in the Yale Daily News on February 5, 2007, pointing out the copious errors of
fact in Wells' article. Wells followed this with a letter to the editor in the
Yale Daily News dated February 6, 2007, and published on February 7, 2007.
Wells brushed over the points Zimmerman had raised, and focused on whether the
word "Darwinism" is appropriate or not. Wells also responded with vigor to two
others who had written letters to the editor critical of his original article.
Finally, Wells claimed that the only reason to stage "Evolution Sunday" is
because evolution is not "scientifically sound or religiously neutral", and
that it is "promoting an anti-religious philosophy disguised as empirical
science." University of Iowa faculty member Tara C. Smith noted several other
responses to this episode in her blog, Aetiology.
