Co-option A co-option (also cooptation, co-optation, cooption) is an election
in which members of a committee (or similar group) vote in order to fill a
vacancy on that committee or group. Where a small committee is originally
elected using a method of proportional representation, a co-option may be
thought unsuitable as the newly elected member will then not necessarily
represent the interests of the group represented by the vacating member. A
group may co-opt either an individual or a weaker or smaller group in order to
assimilate it. Studies of Philip Selznick. In his landmark study of the
Tennessee Valley Authority, Philip Selznick defined cooptation as “absorbing
new elements into the leadership or policy-determining structure of an
organization as a means of averting threats to its stability or existence”
and he defined two ideal types: formal and informal. Formal cooptation is
publicly acknowledged, and done for two reasons: when legitimacy of
organization or leadership is questioned by the governed or to create reliable
channels for managerial communication and direction. Formal cooptation
generally does not share actual power with co-opted, but instead shares the
responsibility for power. Selznick defined informal cooptation as a response to
specific individuals or groups who command necessary resources which therefore
resulted in the co-opted party receiving real influence. Public acknowledgment
would undermine legitimacy of authority, so the organization may refrain from
explicitly recognizing this informal relationship.
