Commune (socialism) The commune is a model of government that is generally
advocated by communists, revolutionary socialists, and anarchists. The model is
often characterized as being a local and transparent organization composed of
delegates bound by mandates. These delegates would be recallable at any time
from their positions. Proponents view the right of recall as a particularly
important safeguard against corruption and unresponsiveness among the
representatives. Introduction. Almost universally, communists, left-wing
socialists, and anarchists have seen the Commune as a model for the liberated
society that will come after the masses are liberated from capitalism, a
society based on participatory democracy from the grass roots up. Marx and
Engels, Bakunin, and later Lenin and Trotsky gained major theoretical lessons
(in particular as regards the "dictatorship of the proletariat" and the
"withering away of the state") from the limited experience of the Paris
Commune. Nonetheless, these very advocates provided critiques of the commune.
Marx found it aggravating that the Communards pooled all their resources into
first organizing democratic elections rather than gathering their forces and
attacking Versailles in a timely fashion. Many Marxists based on their
interpretation of the historical evidence and Marx's on writings on the
subject, believe that the Communards were too "soft" on the non-proletarian
elements in their midst. Within Marxism. Karl Marx, in his important pamphlet
"The Civil War in France" (1871), written during the Commune, advocated the
Commune's achievements, and described it as the prototype for a revolutionary
government of the future, 'the form at last discovered' for the emancipation of
the proletariat.
