Communalism Communalism is a term with three distinct meanings according to the
"Random House Unabridged Dictionary". These include (1) "a theory of government
or a system of government in which independent communes participate in a
federation". (2) "the principles and practice of communal ownership". There is
no indication whether communalism (sense 2) would apply in the "independent"
communes described in the definition of communalism (sense 1). However, in
practice, many experiments in utopian socialism did implement internal rules of
communalist property ownership in the context of federated communalism. It is
at least theoretically possible for a federation of communes to include
communes which do not practice communalist rules of property, which is to say,
that the overall national government may be a federation of communes, but that
private property rather than communalist property is the order within each such
commune. Karl Marx, often viewed as the founder of communism, criticized other
socialists of his era, and made particularly blistering criticisms of
utopianism which was generally conceived along communalist principles, both
federational communalism and local property communalism. Communalism in
history. Communalist experiments throughout history have often developed bitter
animosities as the parties disputed about the exact issues underlying the
confusion over definitions discussed above. The Paris Commune was one such
case. is "strong allegiance to one's own ethnic group rather than to society."
For reasons which have not been explicated, the term is associated with events
in South Asia, but it is unclear what distinguishes the ethnic conflict there
from ethnic conflicts in other parts of the world. India is largely English-
speaking, but there does not appear to be any published research establishing
that or any other fact as a basis for the pattern by which the term is applied
to South Asian inter-ethnic strife rather than to events elsewhere. Indian
subcontinent. In the Indian subcontinent, the term "communalism" has taken on a
very different meaning, namely that of a religionâ€”and, more specifically,
ethnicity-based sectarianism promoting communal violence, espoused by many
political movements. Political theory. Communalism as a political philosophy
was first coined by the well-known libertarian socialist author and activist
Murray Bookchin as a political system to complement his environmental
philosophy of social ecology. While originally conceived as a form of social
anarchism, he later developed Communalism into a separate ideology which
incorporates what he saw as the most beneficial elements of left anarchism,
Marxism, syndicalism, and radical ecology. Politically, Communalists advocate a
stateless, classless, decentralized society consisting of a network of directly
democratic citizens' assemblies in individual communities/cities organized in a
confederal fashion. This primary method used to achieve this is called
libertarian municipalism which involves the establishment of face-to-face
democratic institutions which are to grow and expand confederally with the goal
of eventually replacing the nation-state. Unlike anarchists, Communalists are
not opposed in principle to taking part in parliamentary politics -especially
municipal elections- as long as candidates are libertarian socialist and anti-
statist in policy.
