Community organizing Community organizing is a process where people who live in
proximity to each other come together into an organization that acts in their
shared self-interest. Unlike those who promote more-consensual community
building, community organizers generally assume that social change necessarily
involves conflict and social struggle in order to generate collective power for
the powerless. A core goal of community organizing is to generate "durable"
power for an organization representing the community, allowing it to influence
key decision-makers on a range of issues over time. In the ideal, for example,
this can get community organizing groups a place at the table "before"
important decisions are made. Community organizers work with and develop new
local leaders, facilitating coalitions and assisting in the development of
campaigns. Characteristics. Organized community groups attempt to influence
government, corporations and institutions, seek to increase direct
representation within decision-making bodies, and foster social reform more
generally. Where negotiations fail, these organizations seek to inform others
outside of the organization of the issues being addressed and expose or
pressure the decision-makers through a variety of means, including picketing,
boycotting, sit-ins, petitioning, and electoral politics. Organizing groups
often seek out issues they know will generate controversy and conflict. This
allows them to draw in and educate participants, build commitment, and
establish a reputation for winning. Thus, community organizing is usually
focused on more than just resolving specific issues. In fact, specific issues
are often vehicles for other organizational goals as much as they are ends in
themselves. Community organizers generally seek to build groups that are
democratic in governance, open and accessible to community members, and
concerned with the general health of the community rather than a specific
interest group. Organizing seeks to broadly empower community members, with the
end goal of distributing power more equally throughout the community. The three
basic types of community organizing are grassroots or "door-knocking"
organizing, faith-based community organizing (FBCO), and coalition building.
Political campaigns often claim that their door-to-door operations are in fact
an effort to organize the community, though often these operations are focused
exclusively on voter identification and turnout. FBCOs and many grassroots
organizing models are built on the work of Saul Alinsky, discussed below, from
the 1930s into the 1970s. Grassroots action. Grassroots organizing builds
community groups from scratch, developing new leadership where none existed and
organizing the unorganized. It is a values based process where people are
brought together to act in the interest of their communities and the common
good. Networks of community organizations that employ this method and support
local organizing groups include National People's Action and ACORN. "Door
knocking" grassroots organizations like ACORN organize poor and working-class
members recruiting members one by one in the community. Because they go door-
to-door, they are able to reach beyond established organizations and the
"churched" to bring together a wide range of less privileged people. ACORN
tended to stress the importance of constant action in order to maintain the
commitment of a less rooted group of participants. ACORN had a reputation of
being more forceful than faith-based (FBCO) groups, and there are indications
that their local groups were more staff (organizer) directed than leader (local
volunteer) directed. (However, the same can be said for many forms of
organizing, including FBCOs.) The "door-knocking" approach is more time-
intensive than the "organization of organizations" approach of FBCOs and
requires more organizers who, partly as a result, can be lower paid with more
turnover. Unlike existing FBCO national "umbrella" and other grassroots
organizations, ACORN maintained a centralized national agenda, and exerted some
centralized control over local organizations. Because ACORN was a 501(c)4
organization under the tax code, it was able to participate directly in
election activities, but contributions to it were not tax exempt. Faith-based.
Faith-based community organizing (FBCO), also known as Congregation-based
Community Organizing, is a methodology for developing power and relationships
throughout a community of institutions: today mostly congregations, but these
can also include unions, neighborhood associations, and other groups.
Progressive and centrist FBCO organizations join together around basic values
derived from common aspects of their faith instead of around strict dogmas.
There are now at least 180 FBCOs in the US as well as in South Africa, England,
Germany, and other nations. Local FBCO organizations are often linked through
organizing networks such as the Industrial Areas Foundation, Gamaliel
Foundation, PICO National Network, and Direct Action and Research Training
Center (DART). In the United States starting in 2001, the Bush Administration
launched a department to promote community organizing that included faith-based
organizing as well other community groups. FBCOs tend to have mostly middle-
class participants because the congregations involved are generally mainline
Protestant and Catholic (although "middle-class" can mean different things in
white communities and communities of color, which can lead to class tensions
within these organizations). Holiness, Pentecostal, and other related
denominations (often "storefront") churches with mostly poor and working-class
members tend not to join FBCOs because of their focus on "faith" over "works,"
among other issues. FBCOs have increasingly expanded outside impoverished areas
into churches where middle-class professionals predominate in an effort to
expand their power to contest inequality. Because of their "organization of
organizations" approach, FBCOs can organize large numbers of members with a
relatively small number of organizers that generally are better paid and more
professionalized than those in "door-knocking" groups like ACORN. FBCOs focus
on the long-term development of a culture and common language of organizing and
on the development of relational ties between members. They are more stable
during fallow periods than grassroots groups because of the continuing
existence of member churches. FBCOs are 501(c)3 organizations. Contributions to
them are tax exempt. As a result, while they can conduct campaigns over
"issues" they cannot promote the election of specific individuals. Power versus
protest. While community organizing groups often engage in protest actions
designed to force powerful groups to respond to their demands, protest is only
one aspect of the activity of organizing groups. To the extent that groups'
actions generate a sense in the larger community that they have "power," they
are often able to engage with and influence powerful groups through dialogue,
backed up by a history of successful protest-based campaigns. Similar to the
way unions gain recognition as the representatives of workers for a particular
business, community organizing groups can gain recognition as key
representatives of particular communities. In this way, representatives of
community organizing groups are often able to bring key government officials or
corporate leaders to the table without engaging in "actions" because of their
reputation. As Alinsky said, "the first rule of power tactics" is that "power
is not only what you have but what the enemy thinks you have." The development
of durable "power" and influence is a key aim of community organizing.
“Rights-based” community organizing, in which municipal governments are
used to exercise community power, was first experimented with by the Community
Environmental Legal Defense Fund (CELDF.org) in Pennsylvania, beginning in
2002. Community groups are organized to influence municipal governments to
enact local ordinances. These ordinances challenge preemptive state and federal
laws that forbid local governments from prohibiting corporate activities deemed
harmful by community residents. The ordinances are drafted specifically to
assert the rights of “human and natural communities,” and include
provisions that deny the legal concepts of “corporate personhood,” and
“corporate rights.” Since 2006 they have been drafted to include the
recognition of legally enforceable rights for “natural communities and
ecosystems.” Although this type of community organizing focuses on the
adoption of local laws, the intent is to demonstrate the use of governing
authority to protect community rights and expose the misuse of governing
authority to benefit corporations. As such, the adoption of rights-based
municipal ordinances is not a legal strategy, but an organizing strategy.
Courts predictably deny the legal authority of municipalities to legislate in
defiance of state and federal law. Corporations and government agencies that
initiate legal actions to overturn these ordinances have been forced to argue
in opposition to the community’s right to make governing decisions on issues
with harmful and direct local impact. The first rights-based municipal laws
prohibited corporations from monopolizing agriculture (factory farming), and
banned corporate waste dumping within municipal jurisdictions. More recent
rights-based organizing, in Pennsylvania, New Hampshire, Maine, Virginia and
California has prohibited corporate mining, large-scale water withdrawals and
chemical trespass. Political orientations. Community organizing is not solely
the domain of progressive politics, as dozens of fundamentalist organizations
are in operation, such as the Christian Coalition. However, the term "community
organizing" generally refers to more progressive organizations, as evidenced,
for example, by the reaction against community organizing in the 2008 US
presidential election by Republicans and conservatives on the web and
elsewhere. Fundraising. Organizing groups often struggle to find resources.
They rarely receive funding from government since their activities often seek
to contest government policies. Foundations and others who usually fund service
activities generally don't understand what organizing groups do or how they do
it, or shy away from their contentious approaches. The constituency of
progressive and centrist organizing groups is largely low- or middle- income,
so they are generally unable to support themselves through dues. In search of
resources, some organizing groups have accepted funding for direct service
activities in the past. As noted below, this has frequently led these groups to
drop their conflictual organizing activities, in part because these threatened
funding for their "service" arms. Recent studies have shown, however, that
funding for community organizing can produce large returns on investment ($512
in community benefits to $1 of Needmor funding, according to the Needmor Fund
Study, $157 to 1 in New Mexico and $89 to 1 in North Carolina according to
National Committee for Responsive Philanthropy studies) through legislation and
agreements with corporations, among other sources, not including non-fiscal
accomplishments. History in the United States. 1880 to 1900. People sought to
meet the pressures of rapid immigration and industrialization by organizing
immigrant neighborhoods in urban centers. Since the emphasis of the reformers
was mostly on building community through settlement houses and other service
mechanisms, the dominant approach was what Fisher calls social work. During
this period the Newsboys Strike of 1899 provided an early model of youth-led
organizing. 1900 to 1940. Community organizing was established distinct from
social work, with much energy coming from those critical of capitalist
doctrines. Studs Terkel documented community organizing in the depression era,
perhaps most notably that of Dorothy Day. Most organizations had a national
orientation because the economic problems the nation faced did not seem
possible to change at the neighborhood levels. 1940 to 1960. Saul Alinsky,
based in Chicago, is credited with originating the term "community organizer"
during this time period. Alinsky wrote "Reveille for Radicals", published in
1946, and "Rules for Radicals", published in 1971. With these books, Alinsky
was the first person in America to codify key strategies and aims of community
organizing. He also founded the first national community organizing training
network, the Industrial Areas Foundation, subsequently led by one of his former
lieutenants, Edward Chambers. 1960 to present. The civil rights movement, anti-
war movements, Chicano movement, feminist movement, and gay rights movement all
influenced and were influenced by ideas of neighborhood organizing. Experience
with federal anti-poverty programs and the upheavals in the cities produced a
thoughtful response among activists and theorists in the early 1970s that has
informed activities, organizations, strategies and movements through the end of
the century. Less dramatically, civic associations and neighborhood block clubs
were formed all across the country to foster community spirit and civic duty,
as well as provide a social outlet. Loss of urban communities. During these
decades, the emergence of an ongoing process of white flight, the ability of
middle-class African Americans to move out of majority Black areas, and the
professionalization of community organizations into 501(c)3 nonprofits, among
other issues, increasingly dissolved the tight ethnic and racial communities
that had been so prevalent in urban areas during the first part of the century.
As a result, community organizers began to move away from efforts to mobilize
existing communities and towards efforts to "create" community, fostering
relationships between community members. While community organizers like
Alinsky had long worked with churches, these trends led to an increasing focus
on congregational organizing during the 1980s, as organizing groups rooted
themselves in one of the few remaining broad-based community institutions. This
shift also led to an increased focus on relationships among religion, faith,
and social struggle. Emergence of national organizing support organizations. A
collection of training and support organizations for national coalitions of
mostly locally governed and mostly FBCO community organizing groups were
founded in the Alinsky tradition. The Industrial Areas Foundation was the
first, created by Alinsky himself in 1940. The other key organizations include
ACORN, PICO National Network, Direct Action and Research Training Center, and
the Gamaliel Foundation. The role of the organizer in these organizations was
"professionalized" to some extent and resources were sought so that being an
organizer could be more of a long term career than a relatively brief, mostly
unfunded interlude. The training provided by these national "umbrella"
organizations helps local volunteer leaders learn a common "language" about
organizing while seeking to expand the skills of organizers. The Midwest
Academy, based in Chicago, provides week-long training in organizing nationally
to organizers and leaders who are not part of these established national
organizations. The Center for Third World Organizing provides training focused
on "change efforts in communities of color." The distinction between an
"organizer" who staffs a community organization and "leaders" who make
decisions and provide the public face of their groups was increasingly
standardized over these years, even in many organizations not linked to
"umbrella" training groups as the Alinsky tradition became increasingly
influential. Examples of community organizers. Many of the most notable leaders
in community organizing today emerged from the National Welfare Rights
Organization. John Calkins of DART, Ernesto Cortes of the Industrial Areas
Foundation, Wade Rathke of ACORN, John Dodds of Philadelphia Unemployment
Project and Mark Splain of the AFL-CIO, among others. There are many other
notable community organizers: Mark Andersen, Heather Booth, César Chávez,
Lois Gibbs, Ella Baker, Huey P. Newton, Mary Harris "Mother" Jones, Martin
Luther King, Jr., Ralph Nader, Barack Obama, and Paul Wellstone. Youth
organizing. More recently has come the emergence of youth organizing groups
around the country. These groups use neo-Alinsky strategies while also usually
providing social and sometimes material support to less-privileged youth. Most
of these groups are created by and directed by youth or former youth
organizers. 2008 presidential election. Prior to his entry into politics,
President Barack Obama worked as an organizer for a Gamaliel Foundation FBCO
organization in Chicago. Marshall Ganz, former lieutenant of César Chávez,
adapted techniques from community organizing for Obama's 2008 presidential
election. At the 2008 Republican National Convention, former New York City
mayor Rudolph Giuliani questioned Obama's role as a community organizer, asking
the crowd "What does a community organizer actually do?", and was answered with
resounding applause. This was seconded by the Vice Presidential nominee, Alaska
governor Sarah Palin, who stated that her experience as the mayor of Wasilla,
Alaska was "sort of like being a community organizer, except that you have
actual responsibilities." In response, some progressives, such as Congressman
Steve Cohen (D-TN) and liberal pundit Donna Brazile, started saying that "Jesus
was a community organizer, Pontius Pilate was a governor", a phrase produced on
bumper stickers and elsewhere. Pontius Pilate was the Roman Prefect who ordered
the execution of Jesus. Since Obama's election, the campaign website, formerly
part of "Obama for America," has been renamed "Organizing for America," and has
been placed under the auspices of the Democratic National Committee (DNC). This
rebranded organization promotes the president's legislative agenda items, such
as health care reform, which was a key focus of the new "OFA" during 2009."
History of community organizing in the United Kingdom. Citizens UK has been
promoting community organising in the UK since 1989 and has established the
profession of Community Organiser through the Guild of Community Organisers
teaching the disciplines of strategy and politics. Neil Jameson, the Executive
Director of Citizens UK, founded the organisation after training with the
Industrial Areas Foundation in the USA. Citizens UK (formerly the Citizens
Organising Foundation) established citizens groups in Liverpool, North Wales,
the Black Country, Sheffield, Bristol, Milton Keynes and London. TCC (Together
Creating Communities) in North Wales is longest established beginning in 1995.
It has been independent of COF since 2001. London Citizens' forerunner TELCO
was formed in 1996. Milton Keynes Citizens began in 2010. The others had a
brief and glorious start lasting roughly 3 years when COF was unable to finance
them any longer. Together Creating Communities in North East Wales is
remarkable in community organising in that its area of operation includes
substantial rural areas. Its current membership of 40 groups includes churches,
schools and the Wrexham Muslim Association as well as community groups. Amongst
its actions,it has successfully prevented a waste incinerator being built in
Wrexham, and in 2010 secured the appointment of a specialist nurse for
Parkinson's Disease sufferers. It has held accountability meetings for
Westminster and Welsh Assembly Elections in 2001, 2005, 2007, 2010 and 2011.
Manchester Changemakers was formed in 2007 and is independent of Citizens UK.
London Citizens. London Citizens began life in East London in 1996 as TELCO
(the East London Communities Organisation) subsequently expanding to South
London, West London and by 2011 into North London. London Citizens has a dues
paying institutional membership of over 160 schools, churches, mosques, trade
unions, synagogues and voluntary organisations. In the beginning small actions
were undertaken to prevent a factory from contaminating the area with noxious
smells and prevent drug dealing in school neighbourhoods. Over time larger
campaigns were undertaken. Before Mayoral elections for the Greater London
Authority in 2000, 2004 and 2008 major Accountability Assemblies were held with
the main mayoral candidates. They were asked to support London Citizens and
work with them on issues such as London Living wage; an amnesty for
undocumented migrants; safer cities initiatives and development of community
land trust housing. South London Citizens held a citizens enquiry into the
working of the Home Office department at Lunar House and its impact on the
lives of refugees and migrants. This resulted in the building of a visitor
centre. Political analysis. Community organising in the UK is distinctive
because it deliberately sets out to build permanent alliances of citizens to
exercise power in society. The UK analysis is that to understand Society it is
necessary to distinguish Civil Society from the State and the Market. In a
totalitarian Society all three may virtually coincide. In a fully democratic
society the three will be distinct. Where the state and the market become
predominant, even in a democracy, civil society is reduced on the one hand to
voting and volunteering and on the other to consuming. This is very dangerous
for democracy because the sense of citizenship and agency becomes feeble and
ineffective. In other words Civil Society becomes powerless. Community
organising and the role of the professional Community Organiser is working out
how to take back power from the State and the Market by holding them
accountable. The state and the market cannot operate without moral values and
direction. It is not the role of the state or the market to determine those
values. In a democratic society there has to be a genuine public discourse
concerning justice and the common good. Problems with the global banking system
in 2008 in large part arose because “light touch regulation” meant that
there was no underlying moral system. The market was left to its own devices
with disastrous consequences for the global economy. Intermediate Institutions.
Community organising works because it organises people and money through the
institutions which have the potential to engage in the public discourse about
what is the common good. These are the institutions which can mediate between
the family and the State – such as faith organisations, cooperatives,
schools, trades unions, universities and voluntary agencies. Community
organising builds these institutions into permanent citizens membership
alliances which work together to identify issues and agree ways of introducing
solutions. Community organising teaches the art of non partisan, democratic
politics. Because community organising brings together diverse institutions
which do not normally work together it is sometimes referred to as Broad Based
community organising. Community organising starts with the recognition that
change can only come about when communities come together to compel public
authorities and businesses to respond to the needs of ordinary people. It
identifies and trains leaders in diverse communities, bringing them together to
voice their needs and it organises campaigns to ensure that these needs are
met. “Our answer is to organise people through the places where they have
regular contact with their neighbours – faith institutions and workplaces and
educational establishments. Our experience of practising broad based community
organising across the UK has confirmed for us that the threads that once
connected the individual to the family, the family to their community and the
community to the wider society are fraying and in danger of breaking
altogether. We believe these strands, connections and alliances are vital for a
healthy democracy and should be the building blocks of any vibrant civil
society. “We believe in building for power which is fundamentally reciprocal,
where both parties are influenced by each other and mutual respect develops.
The power and influence that we seek is tempered by our religious teachings and
moral values and is exercised in the fluid and ever-changing relationship with
our fellow leaders, allies and adversaries. We value and seek to operate in the
public sphere. We believe that UK public life should be occupied not just by a
few celebrities and politicians – but also by the people themselves seeking a
part of the action.” The Institute for Community Organising. Citizens UK set
up the Institute for Community Organising (ICO) as part of its Centre for Civil
Society established in 2010 in response to growing demands for its training.
The ICO is the first operating division of the Centre and was established to
offer a series of training opportunities for those who wish to make community
organising a full or part-time career and also for Community Leaders who wish
to learn the broad philosophy and skills of community organising and who are in
a position to put them into practice in their institutions and neighbourhoods.
The Institute provides training and consultancy on a commercial basis to other
agencies which wish to employ the skills and techniques of community organising
in their institutions. The ICO has an Academic Advisory Board and an
International Professional Advisory Body drawn from the global network of
Community Organising Institutes in the UK (CITIZENS UK), USA (Industrial Areas
Foundation) and Germany (DICO). Campaigns. Citizens UK General Election
Assembly. In May 2010 Citizens UK held a General Election Assembly at the
Methodist Central Hall Westminster with 2,500 people from member institutions
and the world media present. This event was three days before the election and
proved to be the most dynamic and electric event of the election campaign.
Citizens UK had negotiated to have David Cameron, Nick Clegg and Gordon Brown
as the leaders of the three main political parties attend. Each candidate for
Prime Minister was questioned on stage concerning their willingness to work
with Citizens UK if elected. Each undertook to work with Citizens UK and come
to future assemblies to give account of work achieved. In particular they
agreed to work to introduce the Living Wage and to end the practice of holding
children of refugee families in detention. Living wage. In 1994, the city of
Baltimore passed the first living-wage law in the USA. This was to change the
working and living conditions of Baltimore's low-wage service workers and
become the example for other cities in the USA. In London it was a campaign
launched in 2001 by London Citizens, the largest civil alliance in the Citizens
UK network. The Living Wage Campaign calls for every worker in the country to
earn enough to provide their family with the essentials of life. Launched by
London Citizens in 2001, the campaign had by 2010 persuaded more than 100
employers to pay the Living wage and won over £40 million of Living Wages,
lifting 6,500 families out of working poverty. The Living Wage is a number. An
hourly rate, set independently, every year (by the Greater London Authority in
London). It is calculated according to cost of living and gives the minimum pay
rate required for a worker to provide their family with the essentials of life.
In London the 2010-11 rate was £7.85 per hour. London is now being copied by
other cities around the UK. As a result Citizens UK set up the Living Wage
Foundation in 2011 to provide companies with intelligence and accreditation. It
also moderates the hourly rate applicable for the Living Wage outside London.
People’s Olympic Legacy. When London announced it would bid to be the host
city for the Olympic Games in 2012, London citizens used their power to gain a
lasting legacy for Londoners from the billions that was to be spent. Following
on from hundreds of one-to-one meetings and a listening campaign across member
institutions, in 2004 London Citizens signed an historic agreement with the
London 2012 bid team, which set in stone precisely what the people of east
London could expect in return for their support in hosting the Olympic Games.
1) 2012 permanently affordable homes for local people through a Community land
trust and mutual home ownership; 2) Money from the Olympic development to be
set aside to improve local schools and the health service; 3) University of
East London to be main higher education beneficiary of the sports legacy and to
consider becoming a Sports Centre of Excellence 4) At least £2m set aside
immediately for a Construction Academy to train up local people; 5) That at
least 30% of jobs are set aside for local people; 6) That the Lower Lea Valley
is designated a ‘Living Wage Zone’ and all jobs guaranteed a living wage
The Olympic Delivery Authority, the London Organising Committee for the Olympic
Games and the Olympic Legacy Company work with London Citizens to ensure that
these promises are delivered. Independent Asylum Commission. Citizens UK set up
the Independent Asylum Commission in order to investigate widespread concern
about the way refugees and asylum seekers were being treated by the UK Borders
Agency. The report made a series of over 200 recommendations for change which
are still being negotiated. This resulted in the ending of the practice of
holding children of refugee families in detention by the Coaltion government
elected in 2010. History of community organizing in Australia. Since 2000,
active discussion about community organizing had begun in Sydney. A community
organizing school was held in 2005 in Currawong, involving unions, community
organizations and religious organizations. In 2007, Amanda Tattersall, a union
and community organizer, approached Unions NSW to sponsor the initial stages of
a new community organizing coalition called the Sydney Alliance. She had
learned about community organizing from interest in coalitions between unions
and community organizations, reading Saul Alinsky and spending time with a
variety of community organizations in the US and UK. By November 2007, thirteen
organizations had agreed to sponsor the building of an Alliance in Sydney,
including the Uniting Church Synod, the Jewish Board of Deputies and six
unions. By November 2008, twenty two organizations had joined, including the
Archdiocese of the Catholic Church. But mid-2010 it was 28 organizations. The
Sydney Alliance launched on the 15th September 2011 with 43 organisations and
is supporting the establishment of other community organizing coalitions across
the country. What community organizing is not. Understanding what community
organizing "is" can be aided by understanding what it "is not" from the
perspective of community organizers. While these distinctions are useful, in
actual practice the boundaries are often less clear. Community organizing for
international development. One of Alinsky's associates, Presbyterian minister
Herbert White, became a missionary in South Korea and the Philippines and
brought Alinsky’s ideas, books and materials with him. He helped start a
community organization in the Manila slum of Tondo in the 1970s. The concepts
of community organizing spread through the many local NGO and activists groups
in the Philippines. Filipino community organizers melded Alinsky's ideas with
concepts from liberation theology, a pro-poor theological movement in the
developing world, and the philosophy of Brazilian educationalist Paulo Freire.
They found this community organizing a well-suited method to work among the
poor during the martial law era of the dictator Ferdinand Marcos. Unlike the
communist guerrillas, community organizers quietly worked to encourage critical
thinking about the status quo, facilitate organization and the support the
solving of concrete collective problems. Community organizing was thus able to
lay the groundwork for the People Power Revolution of 1986, which nonviolently
pushed Marcos out of power. A 1974 manual summarizing some of the Filipino
experience of community organizing "Organizing People for Power" actually
became quite popular in the South Africa, among activist groups organizing
communities in Soweto. The concepts of community organizing have now filtered
into many international organizations as a way of promoting participation of
communities in social, economic and political change in developing countries.
This is often referred to as participatory development, participatory rural
appraisal, participatory action research or local capacity building. Robert
Chambers has been a particularly notable advocate of such techniques. In 2004,
members and staff of ACORN created ACORN International which has since
developed organization and campaigns in Peru, India, Canada, Kenya, Argentina,
the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Honduras, the Czech Republic, and elsewhere.
