Compulsory purchase order A compulsory purchase order (CPO) is a legal function
in the United Kingdom and Ireland that allows certain bodies which need to
obtain land or property to do so without the consent of the owner. It may be
enforced if a proposed development is considered one for public betterment -
for example - when building motorways where a land owner does not want to sell.
Similarly, if town councils wish to develop a town centre, they may issue
compulsory purchase orders. In Ireland, CPOs are quite common due to the
massive road upgrade programme under the National Development Plan. CPOs are
also used for rail projects. If a person objects to the issuing of a CPO, they
may appeal to the High Court. Compensation is available to ensure the person is
restored as far as possible to the same position they were in before land and
property were acquired, so that the person is left in the same financial
position after the CPO as they were in before the process. In the United
Kingdom, most Orders are made as subordinate legislation under powers given to
Local Authorities in existing legislation (e.g. an Order for road works is made
under the Highways Act 1980). Whilst the powers are strong the Authority must
demonstrate that the taking of the land is necessary and there is a "compelling
case in the public interest". Owners or occupiers can challenge this, and their
objection will be heard by an independent Inspector. Compensation rights
usually include the value of the property, costs of acquiring and moving to a
new property, and sometimes additional payments. Costs of professional advice
regarding compensation are usually reimbursed by the Authority, so that people
affected by a compulsory purchase order can seek advice from a solicitor and a
surveyor and expect to be reimbursed.
