Competition law Competition law, known in the United States as antitrust law,
is law that promotes or maintains market competition by regulating anti-
competitive conduct by companies. The history of competition law reaches back
to the Roman Empire. The business practices of market traders, guilds and
governments have always been subject to scrutiny, and sometimes severe
sanctions. Since the 20th century, competition law has become global. The two
largest and most influential systems of competition regulation are United
States antitrust law and European Union competition law. National and regional
competition authorities across the world have formed international support and
enforcement networks. Modern competition law has historically evolved on a
country level to promote and maintain competition in markets principally within
the territorial boundaries of nation-states. National competition law usually
does not cover activity beyond territorial borders unless it has significant
effects at nation-state level. Countries may allow for extraterritorial
jurisdiction in competition cases based on so-called effects doctrine. The
protection of international competition is governed by international
competition agreements. In 1945, during the negotiations preceding the adoption
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1947, limited
international competition obligations were proposed within the "Charter for an
International Trade Organisation". These obligations were not included in GATT,
but in 1994, with the conclusion of the Uruguay Round of GATT Multilateral
Negotiations, the World Trade Organization (WTO) was created. The "Agreement
Establishing the WTO" included a range of limited provisions on various cross-
border competition issues on a sector specific basis. Principle. Substance and
practice of competition law varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
Protecting the interests of consumers (consumer welfare) and ensuring that
entrepreneurs have an opportunity to compete in the market economy are often
treated as important objectives. Competition law is closely connected with law
on deregulation of access to markets, state aids and subsidies, the
privatization of state owned assets and the establishment of independent sector
regulators, among other market-oriented supply-side policies. In recent
decades, competition law has been viewed as a way to provide better public
services. Robert Bork has argued that competition laws can produce adverse
effects when they reduce competition by protecting inefficient competitors and
when costs of legal intervention are greater than benefits for the consumers.
Ideas about competitive law were published during the 18th century with such
works as Adam Smith's "The Wealth of Nations". Different terms were used to
describe this area of the law, including "restrictive practices," "the law of
monopolies," "combination acts" and the "restraint of trade." History. Roman
legislation. An early example of competition law can be found in Roman law. The
"Lex Julia de Annona" was enacted during the Roman Republic around 50 BC. To
protect the grain trade, heavy fines were imposed on anyone directly,
deliberately, and insidiously stopping supply ships. Under Diocletian in 301
AD, an edict imposed the death penalty for anyone violating a tariff system,
for example by buying up, concealing, or contriving the scarcity of everyday
goods. More legislation came under the constitution of Zeno of 483 AD, which
can be traced into Florentine Municipal laws of 1322 and 1325. This provided
for confiscation of property and banishment for any trade combination or joint
action of monopolies private "or" granted by the Emperor. Zeno rescinded all
previously granted exclusive rights. Justinian I subsequently introduced
legislation to pay officials to manage state monopolies. Middle ages.
Legislation in England to control monopolies and restrictive practices were in
force well before the Norman Conquest. The Domesday Book recorded that
"foresteel" (i.e. forestalling, the practice of buying up goods before they
reach market and then inflating the prices) was one of three forfeitures that
King Edward the Confessor could carry out through England. But concern for fair
prices also led to attempts to directly regulate the market. Under Henry III an
act was passed in 1266 to fix bread and ale prices in correspondence with grain
prices laid down by the assizes. Penalties for breach included amercements,
pillory and tumbrel. A 14th century statute labelled forestallers as
"oppressors of the poor and the community at large and enemies of the whole
country." Under King Edward III the Statute of Labourers of 1349 fixed wages of
artificers and workmen and decreed that foodstuffs should be sold at reasonable
prices. On top of existing penalties, the statute stated that overcharging
merchants must pay the injured party double the sum he received, an idea that
has been replicated in punitive treble damages under US antitrust law. Also
under Edward III, the following statutory provision outlawed trade combination.
"...we have ordained and established, that no merchant or other shall make
Confederacy, Conspiracy, Coin, Imagination, or Murmur, or Evil Device in any
point that may turn to the Impeachment, Disturbance, Defeating or Decay of the
said Staples, or of anything that to them pertaineth, or may pertain." In
continental Europe competition principles developed in Lex Mercatoria. Examples
of legislation enshrining competition principles include the "constitutiones
juris metallici" by Wenceslaus II of Bohemia between 1283 and 1305, condemning
combination of ore traders increasing prices; the Municipal Statutes of
Florence in 1322 and 1325 followed Zeno's legislation against state monopolies;
and under Emperor Charles V in the Holy Roman Empire a law was passed "to
prevent losses resulting from monopolies and improper contracts which many
merchants and artisans made in the Netherlands." In 1553 King Henry VIII
reintroduced tariffs for foodstuffs, designed to stabilize prices, in the face
of fluctuations in supply from overseas. So the legislation read here that
whereas, 25 Hen. 8, c. 2. Around this time organizations representing various
tradesmen and handicrafts people, known as guilds had been developing, and
enjoyed many concessions and exemptions from the laws against monopolies. The
privileges conferred were not abolished until the Municipal Corporations Act
1835. Early competition law in Europe. The English common law of restraint of
trade is the direct predecessor to modern competition law later developed in
the US. It is based on the prohibition of agreements that ran counter to public
policy, unless the reasonableness of an agreement could be shown. It
effectively prohibited agreements designed to restrain another's trade. The
1414 "Dyer's" is the first known restrictive trade agreement to be examined
under English common law. A dyer had given a bond not to exercise his trade in
the same town as the plaintiff for six months but the plaintiff had promised
nothing in return. On hearing the plaintiff's attempt to enforce this
restraint, Hull J exclaimed, "per Dieu, if the plaintiff were here, he should
go to prison until he had paid a fine to the King." The court denied the
collection of a bond for the dyer's breach of agreement because the agreement
was held to be a restriction on trade. English courts subsequently decided a
range of cases which gradually developed competition related case law, which
eventually were transformed into statute law. Europe around the 16th century
was changing quickly. The new world had just been opened up, overseas trade and
plunder was pouring wealth through the international economy and attitudes
among businessmen were shifting. In 1561 a system of Industrial Monopoly
Licenses, similar to modern patents had been introduced into England. But by
the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, the system was reputedly much abused and used
merely to preserve privileges, encouraging nothing new in the way of innovation
or manufacture. In response English courts developed case law on restrictive
business practices. The statute followed the unanimous decision in "Darcy v.
Allein" 1602, also known as the Case of Monopolies, of the King's bench to
declare void the sole right that Queen Elizabeth I had granted to Darcy to
import playing cards into England. Darcy, an officer of the Queen's household,
claimed damages for the defendant's infringement of this right. The court found
the grant void and that three characteristics of monopoly were (1) price
increases (2) quality decrease (3) the tendency to reduce artificers to
idleness and beggary. This put an end to granted monopolies until King James I
began to grant them again. In 1623 Parliament passed the Statute of Monopolies,
which for the most part excluded patent rights from its prohibitions, as well
as guilds. From King Charles I, through the civil war and to King Charles II,
monopolies continued, especially useful for raising revenue. Then in 1684, in
"East India Company v. Sandys" it was decided that exclusive rights to trade
only outside the realm were legitimate, on the grounds that only large and
powerful concerns could trade in the conditions prevailing overseas. The
development of early competition law in England and Europe progressed with the
diffusion of Adam Smith's work, who first established the concept of the
"market economy". At the same time industrialisation replaced the individual
artisan, or group of artisans, with paid labourers and machine-based
production. Commercial success increasingly dependent on maximising production
while minimising cost. Therefore the size of a company became increasingly
important and a number of European countries responded by enacting laws to
regulate large companies which restricted trade. Following the French
Revolution in 1789 the law of 14â€“17 June 1791 declared agreements by members
of the same trade that fixed the price of an industry or labour as void,
unconstitutional, and hostile to liberty. Similarly the Austrian Penal Code of
1852 established that "agreements... to raise the price of a commodity... to
the disadvantage of the public' should be punished as misdemeanours." Austria
passed a law in 1870 abolishing the penalties, though such agreements remained
void. However, in Germany laws clearly validated agreements between firms to
raise prices. Throughout the 18th and 19th century ideas that dominant private
companies or legal monopolies could excessively restrict trade were further
developed in Europe. However, as in the late 19th century a depression spread
through Europe, known as the Panic of 1873, ideas of competition lost favour
and it was felt that companies had to co-operate by forming cartels to
withstand huge pressures on prices and profits. Modern competition law. While
the development of competition law stalled in Europe during the late 19th
century, in 1889 Canada enacted what is considered the first competition
statute of modern times. The "Act for the Prevention and Suppression of
Combinations formed in restraint of Trade" was passed one year before the
United States enacted the most famous legal statute on competition law, the
Sherman Act of 1890. It was named after Senator John Sherman who argued that
the Act "does not announce a new principle of law, but applies old and well
recognised principles of common law". United States antitrust. The Sherman Act
of 1890 attempted to outlaw the restriction of competition by large companies,
who co-operated with rivals to fix outputs, prices and market shares, initially
through "pools" and later through "trusts". Trusts first appeared in the US
railroads, where the capital requirement of railroad construction precluded
competitive services in then scarcely settled territories. This trust allowed
railroads to discriminate on rates imposed and services provided to consumers
and businesses and to destroy potential competitors. Different trusts could be
dominant in different industries. The Standard Oil Company trust in the 1880s
controlled a number of markets, including the market in fuel oil, lead and
whiskey. Vast numbers of citizens became sufficiently aware and publicly
concerned about how the trusts negatively impacted them that the Act became a
priority for both major parties. A primary concern of this act is that
competitive markets themselves should provide the primary regulation of prices,
outputs, interests and profits. Instead, the Act outlawed anticompetitive
practices, codifying the common law restraint of trade doctrine. Prof Rudolph
Peritz has argued that competition law in the United States has evolved around
two sometimes conflicting concepts of competition: first that of individual
liberty, free of government intervention, and second a fair competitive
environment free of excessive economic power. Since the enactment of the
Sherman Act enforcement of competition law has been based on various economic
theories adopted by Government. Section 1 of the Sherman Act declared illegal
"every contract, in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint
of trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations".
Section 2 prohibits monopolies, or attempts and conspiracies to monopolize.
Following the enactment in 1890 US court applies these principles to business
and markets. Courts applied the Act without consistent economic analysis until
1914, when it was complemented by the Clayton Act which specifically prohibited
exclusive dealing agreements, particularly tying agreements and interlocking
directorates, and mergers achieved by purchasing stock. From 1915 onwards the
"rule of reason" analysis was frequently applied by courts to competition
cases. However, the period was characterized by the lack of competition law
enforcement. From 1936 to 1972 courts' application of anti-trust law was
dominated by the "structure-conduct-performance" paradigm of the Harvard
School. From 1973 to 1991, the enforcement of anti-trust law was based on
efficiency explanations as the Chicago School became dominant. Since 1992 game
theory has frequently been used in anti-trust cases. European Union law.
Competition law gained new recognition in Europe in the inter-war years, with
Germany enacting its first anti-cartel law in 1923 and Sweden and Norway
adopting similar laws in 1925 and 1926 respectively. However, with the Great
Depression of 1929 competition law disappeared from Europe and was revived
following the second world war when the United Kingdom and Germany, following
pressure from the United States, became the first European countries to adopt
fully fledged competition laws. At a regional level EU competition law has its
origins in the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) agreement between
France, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg and Germany in 1951
following the Second World War. The agreement aimed to prevent Germany from re-
establishing dominance in the production of coal and steel as it was felt that
this dominance had contributed to the outbreak of the war. Article 65 of the
agreement banned cartels and article 66 made provisions for concentrations, or
mergers, and the abuse of a dominant position by companies. This was the first
time that competition law principles were included in a plurilateral regional
agreement and established the trans-European model of competition law. In 1957
competition rules were included in the Treaty of Rome, also known as the EC
Treaty, which established the European Economic Community (EEC). The Treaty of
Rome established the enactment of competition law as one of the main aims of
the EEC through the "institution of a system ensuring that competition in the
common market is not distorted". The two central provisions on EU competition
law on companies were established in article 85, which prohibited anti-
competitive agreements, subject to some exemptions, and article 86 prohibiting
the abuse of dominant position. The treaty also established principles on
competition law for member states, with article 90 covering public
undertakings, and article 92 making provisions on state aid. Regulations on
mergers were not included as member states could not establish consensus on the
issue at the time. Today, the Treaty of Lisbon prohibits anti-competitive
agreements in Article 101(1), including price fixing. According to Article 101
(2) any such agreements are automatically void. Article 101(3) establishes
exemptions, if the collusion is for distributional or technological innovation,
gives consumers a "fair share" of the benefit and does not include unreasonable
restraints that risk eliminating competition anywhere (or compliant with the
general principle of European Union law of proportionality). Article 102
prohibits the abuse of dominant position, such as price discrimination and
exclusive dealing. Article 102 allows the European Council regulations to
govern mergers between firms (the current regulation is the Regulation 139/
2004/EC). The general test is whether a concentration (i.e. merger or
acquisition) with a community dimension (i.e. affects a number of EU member
states) might significantly impede effective competition. Articles 106 and 107
provide that member state's right to deliver public services may not be
obstructed, but that otherwise public enterprises must adhere to the same
competition principles as companies. Article 107 lays down a general rule that
the state may not aid or subsidize private parties in distortion of free
competition and provides exemptions for charities, regional development
objectives and in the event of a natural disaster. International expansion. By
2008 111 countries had enacted competition laws, which is more than 50 percent
of countries with a population exceeding 80,000 people. 81 of the 111 countries
had adopted their competition laws in the past 20 years, signalling the spread
of competition law following the collapse of the Soviet Union and the expansion
of the European Union. Enforcement. In the European Union, the Modernisation
Regulation 1/2003 means that the European Commission is no longer the only body
capable of public enforcement of European Union competition law. This was done
to facilitate quicker resolution of competition-related inquiries. In 2005 the
Commission issued a Green Paper on "Damages actions for the breach of the EC
antitrust rules", which suggested ways of making private damages claims against
cartels easier. Chapter 5 of the post war Havana Charter contained an Antitrust
code but this was never incorporated into the WTO's forerunner, the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1947. Office of Fair Trading Director and
Professor Richard Whish wrote sceptically that it "seems unlikely at the
current stage of its development that the WTO will metamorphose into a global
competition authority." Despite that, at the ongoing Doha round of trade talks
for the World Trade Organization, discussion includes the prospect of
competition law enforcement moving up to a global level. While it is incapable
of enforcement itself, the newly established International Competition Network
(ICN) is a way for national authorities to coordinate their own enforcement
activities. Theory. Classical perspective. Under the doctrine of laissez-faire,
antitrust is seen as unnecessary as competition is viewed as a long-term
dynamic process where firms compete against each other for market dominance. In
some markets a firm may successfully dominate, but it is because of superior
skill or innovativeness. However, according to laissez-faire theorists, when it
tries to raise prices to take advantage of its monopoly position it creates
profitable opportunities for others to compete. A process of creative
destruction begins which erodes the monopoly. Therefore, government should not
try to break up monopoly but should allow the market to work. The classical
perspective on competition was that certain agreements and business practice
could be an unreasonable restraint on the individual liberty of tradespeople to
carry on their livelihoods. Restraints were judged as permissible or not by
courts as new cases appeared and in the light of changing business
circumstances. Hence the courts found specific categories of agreement,
specific clauses, to fall foul of their doctrine on economic fairness, and they
did not contrive an overarching conception of market power. Earlier theorists
like Adam Smith rejected any monopoly power on this basis. Smith (1776) Book I,
Chapter 7, para 26 In "The Wealth of Nations" (1776) Adam Smith also pointed
out the cartel problem, but did not advocate specific legal measures to combat
them. Smith (1776) Book I, Chapter 10, para 82 By the latter half of the 19th
century it had become clear that large firms had become a fact of the market
economy. John Stuart Mill's approach was laid down in his treatise "On Liberty"
(1859). Mill (1859) Chapter V, para 4 Neo-classical synthesis. After Mill,
there was a shift in economic theory, which emphasized a more precise and
theoretical model of competition. A simple neo-classical model of free markets
holds that production and distribution of goods and services in competitive
free markets maximizes social welfare. This model assumes that new firms can
freely enter markets and compete with existing firms, or to use legal language,
there are no barriers to entry. By this term economists mean something very
specific, that competitive free markets deliver allocative, productive and
dynamic efficiency. Allocative efficiency is also known as Pareto efficiency
after the Italian economist Vilfredo Pareto and means that resources in an
economy over the long run will go precisely to those who are willing and able
to pay for them. Because rational producers will keep producing and selling,
and buyers will keep buying up to the last marginal unit of possible output â€“
or alternatively rational producers will be reduce their output to the margin
at which buyers will buy the same amount as produced â€“ there is no waste, the
greatest number wants of the greatest number of people become satisfied and
utility is perfected because resources can no longer be reallocated to make
anyone better off without making someone else worse off; society has achieved
allocative efficiency. Productive efficiency simply means that society is
making as much as it can. Free markets are meant to reward those who work hard,
and therefore those who will put society's resources towards the frontier of
its possible production. Dynamic efficiency refers to the idea that business
which constantly competes must research, create and innovate to keep its share
of consumers. This traces to Austrian-American political scientist Joseph
Schumpeter's notion that a "perennial gale of creative destruction" is ever
sweeping through capitalist economies, driving enterprise at the market's
mercy. This led Schumpeter to argue that monopolies did not need to be broken
up (as with Standard Oil) because the next gale of economic innovation would do
the same. Contrasting with the allocatively, productively and dynamically
efficient market model are monopolies, oligopolies, and cartels. When only one
or a few firms exist in the market, and there is no credible threat of the
entry of competing firms, prices rise above the competitive level, to either a
monopolistic or oligopolistic equilibrium price. Production is also decreased,
further decreasing social welfare by creating a deadweight loss. Sources of
this market power are said to include the existence of externalities, barriers
to entry of the market, and the free rider problem. Markets may fail to be
efficient for a variety of reasons, so the exception of competition law's
intervention to the rule of "laissez faire" is justified if government failure
can be avoided. Orthodox economists fully acknowledge that perfect competition
is seldom observed in the real world, and so aim for what is called "workable
competition". This follows the theory that if one cannot achieve the ideal,
then go for the second best option by using the law to tame market operation
where it can. Chicago School. A group of economists and lawyers, who are
largely associated with the University of Chicago, advocate an approach to
competition law guided by the proposition that some actions that were
originally considered to be anticompetitive could actually promote competition.
The U.S. Supreme Court has used the Chicago School approach in several recent
cases. One view of the Chicago School approach to antitrust is found in United
States Circuit Court of Appeals Judge Richard Posner's books "Antitrust Law"
and "Economic Analysis of Law". Robert Bork was highly critical of court
decisions on United States antitrust law in a series of law review articles and
his book "The Antitrust Paradox". Bork argued that both the original intention
of antitrust laws and economic efficiency was the pursuit "only" of consumer
welfare, the protection of competition rather than competitors. Furthermore,
only a few acts should be prohibited, namely cartels that fix prices and divide
markets, mergers that create monopolies, and dominant firms pricing
predatorily, while allowing such practices as vertical agreements and price
discrimination on the grounds that it did not harm consumers. Running through
the different critiques of US antitrust policy is the common theme that
government interference in the operation of free markets does more harm than
good. "The only cure for bad theory", writes Bork, "is better theory". The late
Harvard Law School Professor Philip Areeda, who favours more aggressive
antitrust policy, in at least one Supreme Court case challenged Robert Bork's
preference for non-intervention. Practice. Dominance and monopoly. When firms
hold large market shares, consumers risk paying higher prices and getting lower
quality products than compared to competitive markets. However, the existence
of a very high market share does not always mean consumers are paying excessive
prices since the threat of new entrants to the market can restrain a high-
market-share firm's price increases. Competition law does not make merely
having a monopoly illegal, but rather abusing the power that a monopoly may
confer, for instance through exclusionary practices. First it is necessary to
determine whether a firm is dominant, or whether it behaves "to an appreciable
extent independently of its competitors, customers and ultimately of its
consumer." Under EU law, very large market shares raise a presumption that a
firm is dominant, which may be rebuttable. Similarly as with collusive conduct,
market shares are determined with reference to the particular market in which
the firm and product in question is sold. Then although the lists are seldom
closed, Tying one product into the sale of another can be considered abuse too,
being restrictive of consumer choice and depriving competitors of outlets. This
was the alleged case in "Microsoft v. Commission" leading to an eventual fine
of â‚¬497 million for including its Windows Media Player with the Microsoft
Windows platform. A refusal to supply a facility which is essential for all
businesses attempting to compete to use can constitute an abuse. One example
was in a case involving a medical company named "Commercial Solvents". When it
set up its own rival in the tuberculosis drugs market, Commercial Solvents were
forced to continue supplying a company named Zoja with the raw materials for
the drug. Zoja was the only market competitor, so without the court forcing
supply, all competition would have been eliminated. Forms of abuse relating
directly to pricing include price exploitation. It is difficult to prove at
what point a dominant firm's prices become "exploitative" and this category of
abuse is rarely found. In one case however, a French funeral service was found
to have demanded exploitative prices, and this was justified on the basis that
prices of funeral services outside the region could be compared. A more tricky
issue is predatory pricing. This is the practice of dropping prices of a
product so much that one's smaller competitors cannot cover their costs and
fall out of business. The Chicago School (economics) considers predatory
pricing to be unlikely. However in "France Telecom SA v. Commission" a
broadband internet company was forced to pay â‚¬10.35 million for dropping its
prices below its own production costs. It had "no interest in applying such
prices except that of eliminating competitors" and was being cross-subsidized
to capture the lion's share of a booming market. One last category of pricing
abuse is price discrimination. An example of this could be offering rebates to
industrial customers who export your company's sugar, but not to customers who
are selling their goods in the same market as you are in. Mergers and
acquisitions. A merger or acquisition involves, from a competition law
perspective, the concentration of economic power in the hands of fewer than
before. This usually means that one firm buys out the shares of another. The
reasons for oversight of economic concentrations by the state are the same as
the reasons to restrict firms who abuse a position of dominance, only that
regulation of mergers and acquisitions attempts to deal with the problem before
it arises, "ex ante" prevention of market dominance. In the United States
merger regulation began under the Clayton Act, and in the European Union, under
the Merger Regulation 139/2004 (known as the "ECMR"). Competition law requires
that firms proposing to merge gain authorization from the relevant government
authority. The theory behind mergers is that transaction costs can be reduced
compared to operating on an open market through bilateral contracts.
Concentrations can increase economies of scale and scope. However often firms
take advantage of their increase in market power, their increased market share
and decreased number of competitors, which can adversely affect the deal that
consumers get. Merger control is about predicting what the market might be
like, not knowing and making a judgment. Hence the central provision under EU
law asks whether a concentration "would" if it went ahead "significantly impede
effective competition... in particular as a result of the creation or
strengthening off a dominant position..." and the corresponding provision under
US antitrust states similarly, Clayton Act Section 7, codified at  What amounts
to a substantial lessening of, or significant impediment to competition is
usually answered through empirical study. The market shares of the merging
companies can be assessed and added, although this kind of analysis only gives
rise to presumptions, not conclusions. The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index is used
to calculate the "density" of the market, or what concentration exists. Aside
from the maths, it is important to consider the product in question and the
rate of technical innovation in the market. A further problem of collective
dominance, or oligopoly through "economic links" can arise, whereby the new
market becomes more conducive to collusion. It is relevant how transparent a
market is, because a more concentrated structure could mean firms can
coordinate their behavior more easily, whether firms can deploy deterrents and
whether firms are safe from a reaction by their competitors and consumers. The
entry of new firms to the market, and any barriers that they might encounter
should be considered. If firms are shown to be creating an uncompetitive
concentration, in the US they can still argue that they create efficiencies
enough to outweigh any detriment, and similar reference to "technical and
economic progress" is mentioned in Art. 2 of the ECMR. Another defense might be
that a firm which is being taken over is about to fail or go insolvent, and
taking it over leaves a no less competitive state than what would happen
anyway. Mergers vertically in the market are rarely of concern, although in
"AOL/Time Warner" the European Commission required that a joint venture with a
competitor Bertelsmann be ceased beforehand. The EU authorities have also
focused lately on the effect of conglomerate mergers, where companies acquire a
large portfolio of related products, though without necessarily dominant shares
in any individual market. Public sector regulation. Public sector industries,
or industries which are by their nature providing a public service, are
involved in competition law in many ways similar to private companies. Many
industries, such as railways, electricity, gas, water and media have their own
independent sector regulators. These government agencies are charged with
ensuring that private providers carry out certain public service duties in line
of social welfare goals. For instance, an electricity company may not be
allowed to disconnect someone's supply merely because they have not paid their
bills up to date, because that could leave a person in the dark and cold just
because they are poor. Instead the electricity company would have to give the
person a number of warnings and offer assistance until government welfare
support kicks in. Intellectual property, innovation and competition. Some
scholars suggest that a prize instead of patent would solve the problem of
deadweight loss, when innovators got their reward from the prize, provided by
the government or non-profit organization, rather than directly selling to the
market, see Millennium Prize Problems. However innovators may accept the prize
only when it is at least as much as how much they earn from patent, which is a
question difficult to determine.
