Compulsory voting [[File:Compulsory voting.svg|thumb|400px| Compulsory voting
is a system in which electors are obliged to vote in elections or attend a
polling place on voting day. If an eligible voter does not attend a polling
place, he or she may be subject to punitive measures such as fines, community
service, or perhaps imprisonment if fines are unpaid or community service is
not performed. History. Athenian democracy held that it was every citizen's
duty to participate in decision making, but attendance at the assembly was
voluntary. Sometimes there was some form of social to those not participating.
For example, Aristophanes's comedy "Acharnians" 17–22, in the 5th century BC,
shows public slaves herding citizens from the agora into the assembly meeting
place ("pnyx") with a red-stained rope. Those with red on their clothes were
fined. Arguments for. Jonathan Levine claimed that victorious political leaders
of compulsory systems may claim a higher degree of political legitimacy than
those of non-compulsory systems with lower voter turnout. The victorious
candidate represents a majority of the population, not just the politically
motivated individuals who would vote without compulsion, and do not
underrepresent sections of society that are less active politically. Compulsory
voting prevents disenfranchisement of the socially disadvantaged. In a similar
way that the secret ballot is designed to prevent interference with the votes
actually cast, compelling voters to the polls for an election reduces the
impact that external factors may have on an individual's capacity to vote such
as the weather, transport, or restrictive employers. If everybody must vote,
then restrictions on voting are easily identified and steps are taken to remove
them. Countries with compulsory voting generally hold elections on a Saturday
or Sunday as evidenced in nations such as Australia, to ensure that working
people can fulfill their duty to cast their vote. Postal and pre-poll voting is
provided to people who cannot vote on polling day, and mobile voting booths may
also be taken to old age homes and hospitals to cater for immobilized citizens.
If voters do not want to support any given choice, they may cast spoilt votes
or blank votes. According to compulsory voting supporters, this is preferred to
not voting at all because it ensures there is no possibility that the person
has been intimidated or prevented from voting should they wish. In certain
jurisdictions, voters have the option to vote none of the above if they do not
support any of the candidates to indicate clear dissatisfaction with the
candidate list rather than simple apathy at the whole process. Compulsory
voting may encourage voters to research the candidates' political positions
more thoroughly. Since they are voting anyway they may take more of an interest
into the nature of the politicians they may vote for, rather than simply opting
out. This means candidates need to appeal to a more general audience, rather
than a small section of the community. A result of this setup is that it is
therefore more difficult for extremist or special interest groups to vote
themselves into power or to influence mainstream candidates. Under a non-
compulsory voting system, if fewer people vote then it is easier for smaller
sectional interests and lobby groups to motivate a small section of the people
to the polls and thereby control the outcome of the political process. The
outcome of an election where voting is compulsory reflects more of the will of
the people ("Who do I want to lead the country?") rather than reflecting who
was more able to convince people to take time out of their day to cast a vote
("Do I even want to vote today?"). Political scientist Arend Lijphart writes
that compulsory voting has been found to increase voting by 7–16% in national
elections, and by even more in local and provincial elections and elections to
the European Parliament. The large increases in turnout are found even where
the penalties for not voting are extremely low. He notes that other civic
duties also exist, like paying taxes, attending school and, in some
democracies, military conscription and jury duty. All of these obligations
require far more time and effort than voting does, thus compulsory voting can
be seen as constituting a much smaller intrusion of freedom than many other
activities. Apart from the increased turnout as a value in itself, Lijphart
lists other advantages to compulsory voting. First, the increase in voting
participation may stimulate stronger participation and interest in other
political activities. Secondly, as no large campaign funds are needed to goad
votes to the polls, the role of money in politics decreases. Thirdly,
compulsory voting acts as a sort of civil education and political stimulation,
which creates a better informed population. Fourthly, high levels of
participation decreases the risk of political instability created by crises or
dangerous but charismatic leaders. Arguments against. Any compulsion affects
the freedom of an individual, and the fining of recalcitrant non-voters is an
additional impact on a potential recalcitrant voter. Voting may be seen as a
civic right rather than a civic duty. While citizens may exercise their civil
rights (free speech, marriage, etc.) they are not compelled to. Furthermore,
compulsory voting may infringe other rights. For example, most Jehovah's
Witnesses and Christadelphians believe that they should not participate in
political events. Forcing them to vote ostensibly denies them their freedom of
religious practice. In some countries with compulsory voting, Jehovah's
Witnesses and others may be excused on these grounds. If however they are
forced to go to the polling place, they can still use a blank or invalid vote.
Another argument against compulsory voting, prevalent among legal scholars in
the United States, is that it is essentially a compelled speech act, which
violates freedom of speech because the freedom to speak necessarily includes
the freedom "not" to speak. Some do not support the idea of compulsory voting,
particularly if they have no interest in politics or no knowledge of the
candidates. Others may be well-informed, but have no preference for any
particular candidate, and have no wish to give support to the incumbent
political system. In compulsory voting areas, such people may vote at random
simply to fulfill legal requirements: the so called donkey-vote may account for
1–2% of votes in these systems, which may affect the electoral process.
Similarly, citizens may vote with a complete absence of knowledge of any of the
candidates, or deliberately skew their ballot to slow the polling process or
disrupt the election. Another group opposed to compulsory voting are principled
nonvoters. They believe that the political process is inherently corrupt and
violent, and prefer to minimize their personal involvement with it. If one
adheres to Murray Rothbard's view of the state as a "gang of thieves writ
large" then compulsory voting is a form of conscription into the largest mob
with the biggest guns. Supporters of voluntary voting assert that low voter
participation in a voluntary election is not necessarily an expression of voter
dissatisfaction or general political apathy. It may be simply an expression of
the citizenry's political will, indicating satisfaction with the political
establishment in an electorate. Former Australian opposition leader, Mark
Latham, urged Australians to hand in blank votes for the 2010 election. He
stated the government should not force citizens to vote or threaten them with a
fine. By countries. Present day. There are currently 23 countries with
compulsory voting. Of these, only 10 countries (and one Swiss canton) enforce
it. Of the 30 member states of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, 10 had forms of compulsory voting. Measures to encourage voting.
Although voting in a country may be compulsory, penalties for failing to vote
are not always strictly enforced. In Australia and Brazil, providing a
legitimate reason for not voting (such as being sick or outside the country) is
accepted. In Argentina, those who were ill on voting day or over away from
their voting place are also excused, by requesting a doctor to prove their
condition, in the first case or asking for a certificate at a police station
near where they are in the second case. Belgian voters can vote in an embassy
if they are abroad or can empower another voter to cast the vote in their name,
to do this the voter must give a "permission to vote" and carry a copy of the
eID card and their own on the actual elections. States that sanction non-voters
with fines generally impose small or nominal penalties. However, penalties for
failing to vote are not limited to fines and legal sanctions. Belgian voters
who repeatedly fail to vote in elections may be subject to disenfranchisement.
Singapore voters who fail to vote in an general election or presidential
election will be subjected to disenfranchisement until a valid reason is given
or a fine is paid. Goods and services provided by public offices may be denied
to those failing to vote in Peru and Greece. In Brazil, if a person fails to
vote in an election, they are barred from obtaining a passport until after they
have voted in the two most recent elections. If a Bolivian voter fails to
participate in an election, the citizen may be denied withdrawal of his or her
salary from the bank for three months. In Turkey, according to a law passed by
the parliament in 1986, if an eligible elector does not cast a vote in the
elections, then they pay a fee of about 5 Turkish lira (about $3 US). It has
also been suggested that a payment to voters could prove an incentive without
penalising the poor by means of a fine (such as £20 to those who vote or a
free lottery ticket).
