Confederation A confederation (or confederacy), in modern political terms, is a
permanent union of political units for common action in relation to other
units. Usually created by treaty but often later adopting a common
constitution, confederations tend to be established for dealing with critical
issues (such as defense, foreign affairs, or a common currency), with the
central government being required to provide support for all members. The
nature of the relationship among the states constituting a confederation varies
considerably. Likewise, the relationship between the member states, the central
government, and the distribution of powers among them is highly variable. Some
looser confederations are similar to intergovernmental organizations, while
tighter confederations may resemble federations. In a non-political context,
confederation is used to describe a type of organization which consolidates
authority from other autonomous (or semi-autonomous) bodies. Examples include
sports confederations or confederations of pan-European trades unions. In
Canada, the word "confederation" has an additional, unrelated meaning.
"Confederation" refers to the process of (or the event of) establishing or
joining the Canadian federal state. In the context of the history of the
indigenous peoples of the Americas, a confederacy may refer to a semi-permanent
political and military alliance consisting of multiple nations (or "tribes",
"bands", or "villages") which maintained their separate leadership. One of the
most well-known is the Iroquois Confederacy, but there were many others during
different eras and locations across North America; these include the Western
Confederacy, Powhatan Confederacy, Seven Nations of Canada, Pontiac's
Confederacy, Illinois Confederation, Tecumseh's Confederacy, Great Sioux
Nation, Blackfoot Confederacy, and Iron Confederacy. Examples. Belgium. Many
authors are now speaking of Belgium as a country with some aspects of a
confederation. C.E. Lagasse wrote it about the agreements between Belgian
Regions and Communities: "We are near the political system of a Confederation."
Vincent de Coorebyter, Director of the CRISP wrote in "Le Soir" "Belgium is
undoubtedly a federation... has some aspects of a confederation." Michel
Qu√©vit, Professor at the Catholic University of Leuven wrote also in Le Soir
"The Belgian political system is already in dynamics of a Confederation." The
same author wrote previously about this issue in 1984 with other professors.
Nevertheless, the Belgian regions and communities lack the crucial autonomy to
quit the Belgian state. As such, the federal aspects seems to dominate. Canada.
Canada is a federation and not a confederation, since it is a single sovereign
nation-state. Canadian Confederation generally refers to the Constitution Act,
1867 which initially formed the Dominion of Canada from three of the colonies
of British North America, and to the subsequent incorporation of other colonies
and territories. Thus on July 1, 1867 Canada became a self-governing dominion
of the British Empire with a federal structure under the leadership of Sir John
A. Macdonald. The provinces originally involved were Canada (comprising Canada
West, now Ontario, formerly Upper Canada; and Canada East now Quebec, formerly
Lower Canada), Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick. Later participants were
Manitoba, British Columbia, Prince Edward Island, Alberta and Saskatchewan
(created as provinces from the Northwest Territories in 1905), and finally
Newfoundland (now Newfoundland and Labrador) in 1949. Canada is an unusually
decentralized, "collaborative" federal state and not a confederate association
of sovereign states, (the usual meaning of "confederation" in modern terms). A
Canadian law, the Clarity Act, and a court ruling, Reference re Secession of
Quebec, set forth the conditions for negotiations to allow Canadian provinces
(though not territories) to leave the Canadian federal state; however, as this
would require a constitutional amendment, there is no current "constitutional"
method for withdrawal. European Union. Due to its unique nature, and the
political sensitivities surrounding it, there is no common or legal
classification for the European Union (EU). However, it does bear some
resemblance to both a confederation and a federation. The EU operates common
economic policies with hundreds of common laws, which enable a single economic
market, open internal borders, a common currency and allow for numerous other
areas where powers have been transferred and directly applicable laws are made.
However, unlike a federation, the EU does not have exclusive powers over
foreign affairs, defence and taxation. Furthermore, laws sometimes must be
transcribed into national law by national parliaments; decisions by member
states are taken by special majorities with blocking minorities accounted for;
and treaty amendment requires ratification by every member state before it can
come into force. However, academic observers more usually discuss the EU in the
terms of it being a federation. As international law professor Joseph H. H.
Weiler (of the Hague Academy and more recently New York University) wrote,
"Europe has charted its own brand of constitutional federalism." Jean-Michel
Josselin and Alain Marciano see the European Court of Justice as being a
primary force behind building a federal legal order in the Union with Josselin
stating that "A complete shift from a confederation to a federation would have
required to straightforwardly replace the principality of the member states
vis-√ -vis the Union by that of the European citizens. ... As a consequence,
both confederate and federate features coexist in the judicial landscape."
Rutgers University political science professor R. Daniel Kelemen has observed:
"Those uncomfortable using the 'F' word in the EU context should feel free to
refer to it as a quasi-federal or federal-like system. Nevertheless ... the EU
has the necessary attributes of a federal system. It is striking that while
many scholars of the EU continue to resist analyzing it as a federation, most
contemporary students of federalism view the EU as a federal system." According
to Thomas Risse and Tanja A. B√∂rzel, "the EU only lacks two significant
features of a federation. First, the Member States remain the 'masters' of the
treaties, i.e., they have the exclusive power to amend or change the
constitutive treaties of the EU. Second, the EU lacks a real 'tax and spend'
capacity, in other words, there is no fiscal federalism." Val√©ry Giscard
d'Estaing found opposition from the United Kingdom towards including the word
"federal" in the European Constitution, and hence replaced the word with
"Community". Iroquois League. The Iroquois League, historically the Iroquois
Confederacy, is a group of Native Americans (in what is now the United States)
and First Nations (in what is now Canada) that consists of six nations: the
Mohawk, the Oneida, the Onondaga, the Cayuga, the Seneca and the Tuscarora. The
Iroquois have a representative government known as the Grand Council. The Grand
Council is the oldest governmental institution still maintaining its original
form in North America. The League has been functioning since prior to major
European contact. Each tribe sends chiefs to act as representatives and make
decisions for the whole nation. Serbia and Montenegro. Serbia and Montenegro
(2003‚Äì2006) was a confederation that was formed by the two remaining
republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFR Yugoslavia):
Montenegro and neighboring Serbia were sole legal successors to FR Yugoslavia,
which consequently ceased to exist. The country was reconstituted as a very
loose political union called the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. It was
established on February 4, 2003. As a confederation, Serbia and Montenegro were
united only in very few realms, such as defense, foreign affairs and a very
weak common president of the confederation. The two constituent republics
functioned separately throughout the period of its short existence, and
continued to operate under separate economic policies, as well as using
separate currencies (the euro was and still is the only legal tender in
Montenegro, while the dinar was still the legal tender in Serbia). On 21 May
2006, the Montenegrin independence referendum was held. Final official results
indicated on 31 May that 55.5% of voters voted in favor of independence. The
state union effectively came to an end after Montenegro's formal declaration of
independence on 3 June 2006, and Serbia's formal declaration of independence on
5 June. Switzerland. Switzerland, officially known as the Swiss Confederation,
is an example of a modern country that refers to itself as a confederation.
However, Switzerland is a confederation only in name, as after the civil war of
1847, when some of the Catholic cantons tried to set up a separate alliance
(the Sonderbundskrieg), the resulting political system acquired all the
characteristics of a federation. It had been a confederacy since its inception
in 1291 as the Old Swiss Confederacy, originally created as an alliance among
the valley communities of the central Alps, and retains the confederal name.
The confederacy facilitated management of common interests (free trade) and
ensured peace in the important mountain trade. Historical confederations.
Historical confederations (especially those predating the 20th century) may not
fit the current definition of a confederation, may be proclaimed as a
federation but be confederal (or the reverse), and may not show any qualities
that are today recognized as those of a confederation. Some have more the
characteristics of a personal union, but they are listed here because of their
self-styling.
