Congress of Vienna The Congress of Vienna ("German: Wiener Kongress") was a
conference of ambassadors of European states chaired by Austrian statesman
Klemens Wenzel von Metternich, and held in Vienna from November 1814 to June
1815. The objective of the Congress was to settle the many issues arising from
the French Revolutionary Wars, the Napoleonic Wars, and the dissolution of the
Holy Roman Empire. This objective resulted in the redrawing of the continent's
political map, establishing the boundaries of France, the Duchy of Warsaw, the
Netherlands, the states of the Rhine, the German province of Saxony, and
various Italian territories, and the creation of spheres of influence through
which Austria, Britain, France and Russia brokered local and regional problems.
The Congress of Vienna was the first of a series of international meetings that
came to be known as the Concert of Europe, which was an attempt to forge a
peaceful balance of power in Europe, and served as a model for later
organizations such as the League of Nations and United Nations. The immediate
background was Napoleonic France's defeat and surrender in May 1814, which
brought an end to twenty-five years of nearly continuous war. Negotiations
continued despite the outbreak of fighting triggered by Napoleon's dramatic
return from exile and resumption of power in France during the Hundred Days of
Marchâ€“July, 1815. The Congress's "Final Act" was signed nine days before his
final defeat at Waterloo on 18 June 1815. In a technical sense, the "Congress
of Vienna" was not properly a Congress: it never met in plenary session, and
most of the discussions occurred in informal, face-to-face, sessions among the
Great Powers of Austria, France, Russia, the United Kingdom and sometimes
Prussia, with limited or no participation by other delegates. On the other
hand, the Congress was the first occasion in history where, on a continental
scale, national representatives came together to formulate treaties, instead of
relying mostly on messengers and messages between the several capitals. The
Congress of Vienna settlement, despite later changes, formed the framework for
European international politics until the outbreak of the First World War in
1914. Preliminaries. Partial settlements had already occurred at the Treaty of
Paris between France and the Sixth Coalition, and the Treaty of Kiel which
covered issues raised regarding Scandinavia. The Treaty of Paris had determined
that a "general congress" should be held in Vienna, and that invitations would
be issued to "all the Powers engaged on either side in the present war." The
opening was scheduled for July 1814. Participants. [[File:Congress of
Vienna.PNG|thumb|400px| Â Â  Wacken (Recorder) Â Â  Friedrich von Gentz
(Congress Secretary)  Others. Virtually every state in Europe had a delegation
in Vienna â€“ more than 200 states and princely houses were represented at the
Congress. In addition, there were representatives of cities, corporations,
religious organizations (for instance, abbeys) and special interest groups e.g.
a delegation representing German publishers, demanding a copyright law and
freedom of the press. The Congress was noted for its lavish entertainment:
according to a famous joke it did not move, but danced. Course of the Congress.
Initially, the representatives of the four victorious powers hoped to exclude
the French from serious participation in the negotiations, but Talleyrand
managed to skillfully insert himself into "her inner councils" in the first
weeks of negotiations. He allied himself to a Committee of Eight lesser powers
(including Spain, Sweden, and Portugal) to control the negotiations. Once
Talleyrand was able to use this committee to make himself a part of the inner
negotiations, he then left it, once again abandoning his allies. The major
Allies' indecision on how to conduct their affairs without provoking a united
protest from the lesser powers led to the calling of a preliminary conference
on protocol, to which Talleyrand and the Marquis of Labrador, Spain's
representative, were invited on 30 September 1814. Congress Secretary Friedrich
von Gentz reported, "The intervention of Talleyrand and Labrador has hopelessly
upset all our plans. Talleyrand protested against the procedure we have adopted
and soundly rated us for two hours. It was a scene I shall never forget." The
embarrassed representatives of the Allies replied that the document concerning
the protocol they had arranged actually meant nothing. "If it means so little,
why did you sign it?" snapped Labrador. Talleyrand's policy, directed as much
by national as personal ambitions, demanded the close but by no means amicable
relationship he had with Labrador, whom Talleyrand regarded with disdain.
Labrador later remarked of Talleyrand: "that cripple, unfortunately, is going
to Vienna." Talleyrand skirted additional articles suggested by Labrador: he
had no intention of handing over the 12,000 "afrancesados" â€“ Spanish
fugitives, sympathetic to France, who had sworn fealty to Joseph Bonaparte
(with whom he had unscrupulous business connections) â€“ nor the bulk of the
documents, paintings, pieces of fine art, and works of hydrography and natural
history that had been looted from the archives, palaces, churches and
cathedrals of Spain. Final Act. Polish-Saxon crisis. The most controversial
subject at the Congress was the so-called Polish-Saxon Crisis. The Russians and
Prussians proposed a deal in which much of the Prussian and Austrian shares of
the partitions of Poland would go to Russia, which would create a Polish
Kingdom in personal union with Russia and Alexander as king. In compensation,
the Prussians would receive all of Saxony, whose King was considered to have
forfeited his throne as he had not abandoned Napoleon soon enough. The
Austrians, French, and British did not approve of this plan, and, at the
inspiration of Talleyrand, signed a secret treaty on 3 January 1815, agreeing
to go to war, if necessary, to prevent the Russo-Prussian plan from coming to
fruition. Though none of the three powers was ready for war, the Russians did
not call the bluff, and an amicable settlement was set on 24 October 1815, by
which Russia received most of the Napoleonic Duchy of Warsaw as a "Kingdom of
Poland" â€“ called Congress Poland â€“ but did not receive the district of
PoznaÅ„, Grand Duchy of PoznaÅ„, which was given to Prussia, nor KrakÃ³w, which
became a free city. Prussia received 40% of Saxony â€“ later known as the
Province of Saxony, with the remainder returned to King Frederick Augustus I
â€“ Kingdom of Saxony. Other changes. The Congress's principal results, apart
from its confirmation of France's loss of the territories annexed between
1795â€“1810, which had already been settled by the Treaty of Paris, were the
enlargement of Russia, (which gained most of the Duchy of Warsaw) and Prussia,
which acquired Westphalia and the northern Rhineland. The consolidation of
Germany from the nearly 300 states of the Holy Roman Empire (dissolved in 1806)
into a much more manageable thirty-nine states (4 of which were free cities)
was confirmed. These states were formed into a loose German Confederation under
the leadership of Prussia and Austria. Representatives at the Congress agreed
to numerous other territorial changes. By the Treaty of Kiel, Norway had been
ceded by the king of Denmark-Norway to the king of Sweden. This sparked the
nationalist movement which led to the establishment of the Kingdom of Norway on
May 17, 1814 and the subsequent personal Union with Sweden. Austria gained
Lombardy-Venetia in Northern Italy, while much of the rest of North-Central
Italy went to Habsburg dynasties (the Grand Duchy of Tuscany, the Duchy of
Modena, and the Duchy of Parma). The Papal States were restored to the Pope.
The Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia was restored to its mainland possessions, and
also gained control of the Republic of Genoa. In Southern Italy, Napoleon's
brother-in-law, Joachim Murat, was originally allowed to retain his Kingdom of
Naples, but his support of Napoleon in the Hundred Days led to the restoration
of the Bourbon Ferdinand IV to the throne. A large United Kingdom of the
Netherlands was created for the Prince of Orange, including both the old United
Provinces and the formerly Austrian-ruled territories in the Southern
Netherlands. There were other, less important territorial adjustments,
including significant territorial gains for the German Kingdoms of Hanover
(which gained East Frisia from Prussia and various other territories in
Northwest Germany) and Bavaria (which gained the Rhenish Palatinate and
territories in Franconia). The Duchy of Lauenburg was transferred from Hanover
to Denmark, and Swedish Pomerania was annexed by Prussia. Switzerland was
enlarged, and Swiss neutrality was established. Swiss mercenaries had played a
significant role in European Wars for a couple of hundred years, and the
intention was to put a stop to these activities permanently. During the wars,
Portugal had lost its town of OlivenÃ§a to Spain and moved to have it restored.
Portugal is historically the oldest ally of the United Kingdom, and with its
support succeeded in having the re-incorporation of OlivenÃ§a decreed in
Article 105 of the Final Act, which stated that the Congress "understood the
occupation of OlivenÃ§a to be illegal and recognized Portugal's rights".
Portugal ratified the Final Act in 1815 but Spain would not sign and this
became the most important hold-out against the Congress of Vienna. Deciding in
the end that it was better to become part of Europe than stand alone, Spain
finally accepted the Treaty on 7 May 1817; however, OlivenÃ§a and its
surroundings were never returned to Portuguese control and this question
remains unresolved. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland received
parts of the West Indies at the expense of the Netherlands and Spain and kept
the former Dutch colonies of Ceylon and the Cape Colony as well as Malta and
Heligoland. Under the Treaty of Paris, Britain obtained the protectorate over
the United States of the Ionian Islands and the Seychelles. Later criticism.
The Congress of Vienna was frequently criticized by nineteenth-century and more
recent historians for ignoring national and liberal impulses, and for imposing
a stifling reaction on the Continent. It was an integral part in what became
known as the Conservative Order, in which the liberties and civil rights
associated with the American and French Revolutions were de-emphasized, so that
a fair balance of power, peace and stability, might be achieved. In the 20th
century, however, many historians have come to admire the statesmen at the
Congress, whose work prevented another widespread European war for nearly a
hundred years (1815â€“1914). Among these is Henry Kissinger, who in 1954 wrote
his doctoral dissertation, "A World Restored", on it. Prior to the opening of
the Paris peace conference of 1918, the British Foreign Office commissioned a
history of the Congress of Vienna to serve as an example to its own delegates
of how to achieve an equally successful peace. Besides, the main decisions of
the Congress were made by the Four Great Powers and not all the countries of
Europe could extend their rights at the Congress. The Italian peninsula became
a mere "geographical expression" as divided into seven parts: Lombardy-Venetia,
Modena, Naples-Sicily, Parma, Piedmont-Sardinia, Tuscany, and the Papal States
under the control of different powers. Poland was under the influence of Russia
after the Congress. The arrangements made by the Four Great Powers sought to
ensure future disputes would be settled in a manner that would avoid the
terrible wars of the previous twenty years. Although, the Congress of Vienna
preserved the balance of power in Europe, it could not check the spread of
revolutionary movements across the continent some 30 years later.
