Constitutional patriotism Constitutional patriotism ("Verfassungspatriotismus")
is a concept associated with the German philosopher JÃ¼rgen Habermas, although
originating from political scientist Dolf Sternberger. He used it first as the
heading of the leader for German national newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung of 23 May 1979 - the day the German constitution (Basic Law) turned
thirty. It is a key part of postnationalism theories, has been influential in
the development of the European Union, and is considered a key quality of
Europeanism. Yet it is much older: "Switzerland with its four different
linguistic communities does not hold together as a nation; it is not a nation,
it is united through its constitution. The recurrent annual "Bundesfeier"
(celebration of the Federation) proves it. The United States of America with a
population originating from different countries in Europe, Asia and Africa, a
colourful mix unmatched by any other community in the world, are united by
nothing else but their constitution and by the patriotic feelings by which the
constitution is respected. The recurrent annual commemoration day of the
Declaration of Independence, which has been a sort of constitution in itself,
proves it". According to the principle of constitutional patriotism,
citizenship thus often relies on a shared sense of values rather than a common
history or ethnic origin. In Spain, the utilization of this concept for both
left and right parties, has become an argument for the Spanish unitarian
identity in front of peripheral nationalisms.
