Constitutional crisis A constitutional crisis is a situation that the legal
system's constitution or other basic principles of operation appear unable to
resolve; it often results in a breakdown in the orderly operation of
government. Often, generally speaking, a constitutional crisis is a situation
in which separate factions within a government disagree about the extent to
which each of these factions hold sovereignty. Most commonly, constitutional
crises involve some degree of conflict between different branches of government
(e.g., executive, legislature, and/or judiciary), or between different levels
of government in a federal system (e.g., state and federal governments). A
constitutional crisis may occur because one or more parties to the dispute
willfully chooses to violate a provision of a constitution or an unwritten
constitutional convention, or it may occur when the disputants disagree over
the interpretation of such a provision or convention. If the dispute arises
because some aspect of the constitution is ambiguous or unclear, the ultimate
resolution of the crisis often establishes a precedent for the future. For
instance, the United States constitution is silent on the question of whether
states are allowed to secede from the Union; however, after the secession of
several states was forcibly prevented in the American Civil War, it has become
generally accepted that states cannot leave the Union. A constitutional crisis
is distinct from a rebellion, which is defined as when factions "outside" of a
government challenge that government's sovereignty, as in a coup or revolution
led by the military or civilian protesters. A constitutional crisis can lead to
government paralysis, collapse, or civil war. European Constitutional crises.
Scotland. This covers the Kingdom of Scotland, which became part of the Kingdom
of Great Britain after 1707. For constitutional crises since then, see United
Kingdom below.
