Consumption (economics) Consumption is a common concept in economics and many
other social sciences, and gives rise to derived concepts such as consumer
debt. Generally, consumption is defined in part by comparison to production.
But the precise definition can vary because different schools of economists
define production quite differently. According to mainstream economists, only
the final purchase of goods and services by individuals constitutes
consumption, while other types of expenditure — in particular, fixed
investment, intermediate consumption, and government spending — are placed in
separate categories. See consumer choice. Other economists define consumption
much more broadly, as the aggregate of all economic activity that does not
entail the design, production and marketing of goods and services (e.g. the
selection, adoption, use, disposal and recycling of goods and services).
Likewise, consumption can be measured by a variety of different ways such as
energy in energy economics metrics. The total consumer spending in an economy
is generally calculated using the consumption function, a metric devised by
John Maynard Keynes, which simply expresses consumption as a function of the
aggregate disposable income. This metric essentially defines consumption as the
part of disposable income that does not go into saving. But disposable income
in turn can be defined in a number of ways - e.g. to include borrowed funds or
expenditures from savings. Consumption also increases demand. Old-age spending.
"Spending the Kids' Inheritance" (originally the title of a book on the subject
by Annie Hulley) and the acronyms SKI and SKI'ing refer to the growing number
of older people in Western society spending their money on travel, cars and
property, in contrast to previous generations who tended to leave that money to
their children. "Die Broke" (from the book "Die Broke: A Radical Four-Part
Financial Plan" by Stephen Pollan and, Mark Levine) is a similar idea. Links. y
