Consistent life ethic The consistent life ethic, or the consistent ethic of
life, was a term coined in 1983 by Joseph Bernardin to express an ethical,
religious, and political ideology based on the premise that all human life is
sacred and should be protected by law. The ideology opposes abortion, capital
punishment, assisted suicide, economic injustice, and euthanasia. Adherents are
opposed, at the very least, to unjust war, while some adherents also profess
pacifism, or opposition to all war. History. Joseph Cardinal Bernardin. Joseph
Cardinal Bernardin (April 2, 1928Â â€“ November 14, 1996) of Chicago developed
the CLE idea in 1983. Initially, Bernardin spoke out against nuclear war and
abortion. However, he quickly expanded the scope of his view to include all
aspects of human life (according to the church's definition). In one of the
first speeches given on the topic at Fordham University, Bernardin said: "The
spectrum of life cuts across the issues of genetics, abortion, capital
punishment, modern warfare and the care of the terminally ill." Bernardin said
that although each of the issues was distinct (euthanasia, for example, was not
the same as abortion), nevertheless the issues were linked since the valuing
and defending of (human) life (according to the Catholic definition) were, he
believed, at the center of both issues. Cardinal Bernardin told an audience in
Portland, Oregon: "When human life is considered 'cheap' or easily expendable
in one area, eventually nothing is held as sacred and all lives are in
jeopardy." Bernardin drew his stance from New Testament principles,
specifically of forgiveness and reconciliation, yet he argued that neither the
themes nor the content generated from those themes were specifically Christian.
By doing this, Bernardin attempted to create a dialogue with others who were
not necessarily aligned with Christianity. Capital punishment. Bernardin and
other advocates of this ethic sought to form a consistent policy that would
link abortion, capital punishment, economic injustice, euthanasia, and unjust
war. Bernardin sought to unify conservative Catholics (who opposed abortion)
and liberal Catholics (who opposed capital punishment) in the United States. By
relying on fundamental principles, Bernardin also sought to coordinate work on
several different spheres of Catholic moral theology. In addition, Bernardin
argued that since the 1950s the church had moved against its own historical,
casuistic exceptions to the protection of life. "To summarize the shift
succinctly, the presumption against taking human life has been strengthened and
the exceptions made ever more restrictive." Bernardin and other CLE advocates
recognize the right of the state to use capital punishment. However, they
reject the necessity of this type of punishment for many reasons, arguing that
there are more appropriate and effective ways for the state to defend its
people. Traditionally, arguments for the death penalty focus on the idea that
it: 1) deters further violence; 2) enacts just retribution on the criminal,
effectively gaining a sense of revenge for society and those affected by the
crime; 3) seeks to reform other criminals with the threat of such severe
punishment and, 4) protects society from those criminals which the government
has deemed to be the most heinous. The consistent ethic's opposition to capital
punishment is rooted in the conviction that an atmosphere of respect for life
must pervade a society, and resorting to the death penalty does not support
this attitude. Adherents argue that the result of the death penalty â€“
removing the criminal from society, enacting justice on the criminal, and
bringing about feelings of revenge for those affected and the greater society
â€“ do not necessarily have to be accomplished by taking a life. This viewpoint
was emphasized by Pope John Paul II in his 1995 encyclical, "Evangelium Vitae"
(Gospel of Life). This book-length document outlined the Pope's emphasis on
fostering a culture of life based on the New Testament and the life of Jesus.
Specifically, he emphasized the value and inviolability of human life, from
conception until natural death. One of today's most out-spoken and prominent
anti-death penalty activists is Sister Helen Prejean. Her books "Dead Man
Walking" and "The Death of Innocents: An Eyewitness Account to Wrongful
Executions" are autobiographical accounts of the time she spent ministering to
death row inmates. She also has close ties to the National Coalition to Abolish
the Death Penalty. Other supporters. Individual endorsers belonging to the
Consistent Life organization include Father Daniel Berrigan, Sister Joan
Chittister, theologian Harvey Cox, "Village Voice" columnist Nat Hentoff,
Father Theodore Hesburgh, actress Patricia Heaton, "L'Arche" founder Jean
Vanier, activist Jim Wallis, Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams and Nobel
Peace Prize laureates Tenzin Gyatso, 14th Dalai Lama, Mairead Corrigan Maguire
and Adolfo PÃ©rez Esquivel. Rachel MacNair is the director of the Institute for
Integrated Social Analysis, the research arm of Consistent Life. In the US,
several organizations have promoted the "consistent ethic of life" approach,
including many Vatican-sanctioned Catholic groups, such as the National
Conference of Catholic Bishops, as well as independent groups. Another notable
independent Catholic anti-death penalty organization is Priests for Life. In
1971, Roman Catholic pacifist Eileen Egan used the phrase "seamless garment" to
describe a holistic reverence for life. The phrase is a Bible reference from
John 19:23 to the seamless robe of Jesus, which his executioners did not tear
apart. The seamless garment philosophy holds that issues such as abortion,
capital punishment, militarism, euthanasia, social injustice, and economic
injustice all demand a consistent application of moral principles that value
the sacredness of human life. "The protection of life", said Egan, "is a
seamless garment. You can't protect some life and not others." Her words were
meant to challenge those members of the pro-life movement who were in favor of
capital punishment. Criticisms. Right-wing criticisms. According to writer
Joseph Sobran, "the seamless garment has turned out to be nothing but a
loophole for hypocritical Catholic politicians. If anything", he adds, "it has
actually made it easier for them than for non-Catholics to give their effective
support to legalized abortionâ€”that is, it has allowed them to be inconsistent
and unprincipled about the very issues that Cardinal Bernardin said demand
consistency and principle". Regarding the Church's position on the death
penalty, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (later Pope Benedict XVI) wrote in 2004 that
Catholics could have a legitimate diversity of opinions on the matter, but not
on abortion or euthanasia. Left-wing criticisms. Jacob Appel, an American
bioethicist, has described the consistent life ethic as an effort "to impose a
particular set of theological values upon society-at-large" under the guise of
a moral philosophy that is "no less misguided than the Inquisition or the
Crusades."
