Constitutional convention (political meeting) A constitutional convention is
now a gathering for the purpose of writing a new constitution or revising an
existing constitution. A general constitutional convention is called to create
the first constitution of a political unit or to entirely replace an existing
constitution. An unlimited constitutional convention is called to revise an
existing constitution to the extent that it deems to be proper, whereas a
"limited constitutional convention" is restricted to revising only the areas of
the current constitution named in the convention's "call", the legal mandate
establishing the convention. Constitutional conventions have also been used by
constituent states of federations — such as the individual states of the
United States — to create, replace, or revise their own constitutions. Though
the several states have never held a national constitutional convention for the
purpose of proposing amendments, the 21st Amendment to the US Constitution was
ratified not by the state legislatures, but by state level conventions after it
was passed by Congress, as described as an alternate method of ratification in
Article V of the US Constitution. Several American academics have criticized
the United States Constitution for specific shortcomings and have called for a
"Second Constitutional Convention", including University of Texas
constitutional law expert Sanford Levinson, University of Virginia professor
Larry Sabato, University of Kentucky professor Richard Labunski, Vanderbilt
University professor Dana D. Nelson, and Yale University professor Robert A.
Dahl, although professor Dahl believes there is no real hope that such a
Convention might ever happen. In Ireland, the government elected in March 2011
has committed to establishing a "constitutional convention" to recommend
constitutional amendments on six specified issues and others it may consider;
the government has separately promised amendments on five other issues.
