Consul (representative) The political title Consul is used for the official
representatives of the government of one state in the territory of another,
normally acting to assist and protect the citizens of the consul's own country,
and to facilitate trade and friendship between the peoples of the two
countries. A consul is distinguished from an ambassador, the latter being a
representative from one head of state to another. There can be only one
ambassador from one country to another, representing the first country's head
of state to that of the second, and her or his duties revolve around diplomatic
relations between the two countries; however, there may be several consuls, one
in each of several main cities, providing assistance with bureaucratic issues
to both the citizens of the consul's own country travelling or living abroad
and to the citizens of the country the consul resides in who wish to travel to
or trade with the consul's country. Antecedent: the Classical Greek Proxenos.
In Classical Greece, some of the functions of the modern Consul were fulfilled
by a Proxenos. Unlike the modern position, this was a citizen of the host
polity (in Greece, a city state). The Proxenos was usually a rich merchant who
had socio-economic ties with another city and who helped its citizens when they
were in trouble in his own city. The position of Proxenos was often hereditary
in a particular family. Modern Honorary Consuls fulfil a function that is to a
degree similar to that of the Ancient Greek institution. Historical development
of the terms. Consuls were the highest magistrates of the Roman Republic. The
term was revived by the city-state of Genoa which, unlike Rome, bestowed it on
various state officials, not necessarily restricted to the highest. Among these
were Genoese officials stationed in various Mediterranean ports, whose role
included duties similar to those of the modern consul, i.e. helping Genoese
merchants and sailors in difficulties with the local authorities. The "Consolat
de mar" was an institution established under the reign of Peter IV of Aragon in
the fourteenth century, and which spread to 47 locations throughout the
Mediterranean. It was primarily a judicial body, administering maritime and
commercial law as "Lex Mercatoria". Although the "Consolat de mar" was
established by the Corts General (parliament) of the Crown of Aragon, the
consuls were independent from the King. This distinction between consular and
diplomatic functions remains (at least formally) to this day. Modern consuls
retain limited judicial powers to settle disputes on ships from their country
(notably regarding the payment of wages to sailors). The "Consulado de
mercaderes" was set up in 1543 in Seville as a merchant guild to control trade
with Latin America. As such, it had branches in the principal cities of the
Spanish colonies. The connection of "consul" with trade and commercial law is
retained in French. In francophone countries, a "juge consulaire" (consular
judge) is a non-professional judge elected by the chamber of commerce to settle
commercial disputes in the first instance (in France, sitting in panels of
three; in Belgium, in conjunction with a professional magistrate). Consulates
and embassies. The office of a Consul is termed a "Consulate", and is usually
subordinate to the state's main representation in that foreign country, usually
an "Embassy", or "High Commission" between Commonwealth countries, in the
capital city of the host state. Like the term "embassy", the word "consulate"
may refer not only to the office of consul, but also to the building occupied
by the consul and his or her staff. In capital cities, the consulate may share
the premises with the embassy itself. Consular rank. A consul of higher rank is
termed a "consul-general", and his or her office a "consulate-general". He or
she typically has one or several "Deputy Consuls-General", "Consuls", "Vice-
Consuls" and "Consular Agents" working under the consul-general. Consulates-
general need not have their offices in the capital city, but rather could have
then in the most important/appropriate cities in terms of bilateral relations
(commerce, travel, etc.). In the United States, for example, most countries
have a consulate-general in New York City (the home of the United Nations), and
some have consulates-general in several major cities (e.g., Atlanta, Boston,
Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, San Francisco). The same is the case for
other large countries like Germany - where many consulates-general are located
in cities such as Bonn, Frankfurt, Hamburg, and Munich; the Russian Federation
- where many consulates-general are located in St. Petersburg, Vladivostok,
etc.; Canada - where many consulates-general are located in Toronto and
Vancouver; Brazil - where many consulates-general are located in Rio de Janeiro
and Sao Paulo; and Australia - where many consulates-general are located in
Sydney and Melbourne. Authority and activities. Consuls of various ranks may
have specific legal authority for certain activities, such as notarizing
documents. As such, diplomatic personnel with other responsibilities may
receive consular letters patent (commissions). Aside from those outlined in the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, there are few formal requirements
outlining what a consular official must do. For example, for some countries,
consular officials may be responsible for the issuance of visas; other
countries may limit "consular services" to providing assistance to compatriots,
legalization of documents, etc. Nonetheless, consulates proper will be headed
by consuls of various ranks, even if such officials have little or no
connection with the more limited sense of consular service. Activities of a
consulate include protecting the interests of their citizens temporarily or
permanently resident in the host country, issuing passports; issuing visas to
foreigners and public diplomacy. However, the principal role of a consulate
lies traditionally in promoting tradeâ€”assisting companies to invest and to
import and export goods and services both inwardly to their home country and
outward to their host country. And although it is never admitted publicly,
consulates, like embassies, may also gather intelligence information from the
assigned country. Consular districts. In many cases, such as the United States,
consulates are established for specific consular districts of another nation-
state. For instance, the consular representation in India and Bhutan is divided
into 5 regions, one of which, the New Delhi Consular District (based at the
U.S. consulate in New Delhi), covers the Indian states of Delhi, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttaranchal and the Kingdom of Bhutan. Consular districts are demarcated to
serve only citizens resident within the district with non-immigrant visas. Role
in diplomatic missions. Contrary to popular belief, although many of the staff
of consulates may be career diplomats, they do not generally have diplomatic
immunity (unless they are also accredited as such). Immunities and privileges
for consuls and accredited staff of consulates (consular immunity) are
generally limited to actions undertaken in their official capacity and, with
respect to the consulate itself, to those required for official duties. In
practice, the extension and application of consular privileges and immunities
can be subject to wide discrepancies from country to country. Consulates are
more numerous than diplomatic missions (e.g., embassies), since the latter are
posted only in a foreign nation's capital (exceptionally even outside the
country, in case of a multiple mandate; e.g., a minor power may well accredit a
single Ambassador with several neighbouring states of modest relative
importance that are not considered important allies), while consular ones are
also posted in various cities throughout the country, especially centres of
economic activity, or wherever there is a significant population of its
citizens (expatriates) in residence. Consulates are subordinate posts of their
home country's diplomatic mission (typically an embassy, in the capital city of
the host country). Diplomatic missions are established in international law
under the Vienna Conventions, while consulates-general and consulates are
established in international law under the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations. Formally, at least within the US system, the consular career
(ranking in descending order: Consul-General, Consul, Vice-Consul, Honorary
Consul) forms a different hierarchy from the diplomats in the strict sense.
However, it is common for individuals to be transferred from one hierarchy to
the other, and for consular officials to serve in a capital carrying out
strictly consular duties within the "consular section" of a diplomatic post;
e.g., within an embassy. Between Commonwealth countries, both diplomatic and
consular activities may be undertaken by a High Commission in the capital,
although larger Commonwealth nations generally also have consulates and
consulates-general in major cities. For example, Toronto in Canada, Sydney in
Australia and Auckland, New Zealand, are of greater economic importance than
their respective national capitals, hence the need for consulates there. In
British colonies, most notably Hong Kong before the transfer of its sovereignty
to the People's Republic of China in 1997, senior envoys from Commonwealth
states in these missions are usually known as Commissioners. (All previous
Commissioners in Hong Kong are now styled Consuls-General.) Consul general. A
consul general is a consular officer who heads a consulate general and is a
consul of the highest rank serving at a particular location. A consul general
may also be responsible for consular districts which contain other, subordinate
consular offices within a country. The consul general serves as a
representative who speaks on behalf of his or her state in the country to which
he or she is located, although ultimate jurisdiction over the right to speak on
behalf of a home country within another country ultimately belongs to the
single ambassador. It is abbreviated "CG" and the plural form is consuls
general. In most embassies, the consular section is headed by a consul general
who is also a member of the ambassador's country team. Honorary consul. Some
consuls are not career officials of the represented state at all; some are
locally-engaged staff with the nationality of the sending country, and in
smaller cities, or in cities that are very distant from full-time diplomatic
missions, a foreign government which feels that some form of representation is
nevertheless desirable may appoint a person who has not hitherto been part of
their diplomatic service to fulfill this role. Such a consul may well combine
the job with his or her own (often commercial) private activities, and in some
instances may not even be a citizen of the sending country. Such consular
appointments are usually given the title of "honorary consul". Graham Greene
used this position as the title of his 1973 novel "The Honorary Consul".
Notwithstanding their other roles, Honorary Consular Officers (in the widest
use of the term) also have responsibility for the welfare of citizens of the
appointing country within their bailiwick. Thus, particularly within a port
town, an Honorary Consul may be called out (at any time, day or night) to
attend to the well-being of a citizen of the appointing country who has been
arrested. Their role in this situation is to ensure that the arrested persons
are treated in a like manner as would be the citizen of the country in which
this person was arrested, and understand their rights & obligations. Historical
role. LÃ¼beck. In the social life of 19th century LÃ¼beck as depicted in Thomas
Mann's novel "Buddenbrooks" - based on Mann's thorough personal knowledge of
his own birth milieu - an appointment as the Consul of a foreign country was a
source of considerable social prestige among the city's merchant elite. As
depicted in the book, the position of a Consul for a particular country was in
practice hereditary in a specific family, whose mansion bore the represented
country's coat of arms, and with that country confirming the Consul's son or
other heir in the position on the death of the previous Consul. As repeatedly
referenced by Mann, Consul's wife was known as "Consulin" and continued to bear
that title even on the death of her husband. Characters in the book are
mentioned as Consuls for Denmark, The Netherlands and Portugal. United States
consuls in the early years. From 1798 to 1883 the foreign affairs of the United
States were largely the responsibility of those wearing the gold braid of U.S.
navy officers. Since there were no formal diplomatic relationships with
countries in many regions, the U.S. government often relied on those most
experienced in trade relations â€“ the consuls â€“ to seize opportunities for
commercial and diplomatic contacts. Early United States consuls were really
chief merchant-agents, receiving but an administrative pittance (apart from
"insider trading" information on port commerce) and issuing reports to the
Department of State on their circumscribed duties in safeguarding American
property and estates and caring for sailors and residents. American consuls
undertook an informal kind of proto-diplomacy as they functioned mostly to
support commerce, acting on their own authority in support of the trading
community. The U.S. government, while underwriting such functions, did nothing
to guarantee legal protection for American citizens or to accord judicial
authority to consuls. In a notable case of 1821, an Italian sailor on the
American ship "Emily", Francis Terranova, accidentally killed a Chinese woman.
Chinese authorities demanded that Terranova be turned over to them, and
executed him when the Americans complied. Early in the 1830s, as part of
American interest in expanding competitively in the Pacific region and East
Asia, President Andrew Jackson and Secretary of State Edward Livingston made
initiatives toward strengthening the American consular role, with respect to
remuneration and the coordination of commercial and naval interests. Both were
greatly influenced by the "activist" reports of Edmund Roberts, former American
consul in Demerara (scene of the Demerara rebellion of 1823 that attracted
British attention to the need to abolish slavery,) and by John Shillaber, the
American consul in Batavia (modern Jakarta). Shillaber, a Massachusetts native,
served as the American consul in Batavia between 1825 and 1832, officially
resigning from that post in 1835 while in China. In 1826, in Batavia, he tried
unsuccessfully to secure the authority to sign American treaties with Siam and
other kingdoms in the East Indies, like Sumatra, where, in 1831, the native
population attacked American shipping (which resulted in the US Navy's First
Sumatran expedition a year later.) While on leave in 1831, at the request of
the Department of State, he prepared treaty outlines dealing with Japan,
expressing hopeful opinions about the future of U.S.-Japan relations. In 1832
Secretary of the Navy Levi Woodbury, a leading proponent of increased naval
power in China, used his influence to have President Jackson appoint his friend
Roberts, rather than Shillaber, as a special envoy to look into treaty
possibilities. In 1832 Roberts was awarded the commission to negotiate treaties
that Shillaber still expected to receive. Then in 1833 he wrote to Secretary
Woodbury stating the need for a naval force in Chinese and Philippine waters to
counteract the coastal piracy of the infamous Ladrones (Thieves Islands).
Shillaber was discouraged at being passed over for the assignment to Siam
secured by Roberts, so in 1834 he attempted to gain the even more prestigious
consular post at Canton. In his letters to President Jackson and to Secretary
Livingston describing the post-monopoly, pre-treaty political and commercial
situation, Shillaber attempted to define himself as a "China expert" and
diplomatic pundit. Shillaber's detailed correspondence preserved in his own
hand among the U.S. consular despatches in the National Archives in Washington,
is remarkably prescient with respect to the inevitability of Sino-British
hostilities and the need to define a more assertive American position in China.
He recommended that American consuls have official power to represent the
government before the Chinese authorities, protect the property and rights of
American citizens, make vigorous efforts to open more ports to trade, and that
Americans maintain an armed naval presence in East Asian waters. Significantly,
Shillaber felt that American policy should have another purpose, namely, to
show the Chinese that Americans were a breed apart, different from other
Westerners, especially the British, who came to do business, assume control,
and wreak havoc in China. Following Roberts' treaty with Said bin Sultan,
Sultan of Muscat and Oman, Richard Waters, a native of Salem, Massachusetts,
was appointed American Consul from 1837 to 1845 in Zanzibar; Gilbert gives an
account of the difficulties facing a neophyte American consul.
