Contract theory In economics, contract theory studies how economic actors can
and do construct contractual arrangements, generally in the presence of
asymmetric information. Because of its connections with both agency and
incentives, contract theory is often categorized within a field known as Law
and economics. One prominent application of it is the design of optimal schemes
of managerial compensation. In the field of economics, the first formal
treatment of this topic was given by Kenneth Arrow in the 1960s. A standard
practice in the microeconomics of contract theory is to represent the behaviour
of a decision maker under certain numerical utility structures, and then apply
an optimization algorithm to identify optimal decisions. Such a procedure has
been used in the contract theory framework to several typical situations,
labeled "moral hazard", "adverse selection" and "signalling". The spirit of
these models lies in finding theoretical ways to motivate agents to take
appropriate actions, even under an insurance contract. The main results
achieved through this family of models involve: mathematical properties of the
utility structure of the principal and the agent, relaxation of assumptions,
and variations of the "time structure" of the contract relationship, among
others. It is customary to model people as maximizers of some von
Neumannâ€“Morgenstern utility functions, as stated by expected utility theory.
Main models of agency problems. Moral hazard. In moral hazard models, the
information asymmetry is the principal's inability to observe and/or verify the
agent's action. Performance-based contracts that depend on observable and
verifiable output can often be employed to create incentives for the agent to
act in the principal's interest. When agents are risk-averse, however, such
contracts are generally only second-best because incentivization precludes full
insurance. subject to the agent's "individual rationality (IR)" constraint, and
the agent's "incentive compatibility (IC)" constraint, where formula_4 is the
wage as a function of output formula_5, which in turn is a function of effort:
formula_6. formula_7 represents the cost of effort, and reservation utility is
given by formula_8. formula_9 is the "utility function", which is concave for
the risk-averse agent, is convex for the risk-prone agent, and is linear for
the risk-neutral agent. Adverse selection. In adverse selection models, the
principal is not informed about a certain characteristic of the agent. For
example, health insurance is more likely to be purchased by people who are more
likely to get sick. Incomplete contracts. Contract theory also utilizes the
notion of a complete contract, which is thought of as a contract that specifies
the legal consequences of every possible state of the world. More recent
developments known as the theory of incomplete contracts, pioneered by Oliver
Hart and his coauthors, study the incentive effects of parties' inability to
write complete contingent contracts, e.g. concerning relationship-specific
investments. Because it would be impossibly complex and costly for the parties
to an agreement to make their contract complete, the law provides default rules
which fill in the gaps in the actual agreement of the parties. During the last
20 years, much effort has gone into the analysis of dynamic contracts.
Important early contributors to this literature include, among others, Edward
J. Green, Stephen Spear, and Sanjay Srivastava.
