Cornell College Cornell College is a private liberal arts college in Mount
Vernon, Iowa. Originally called the Iowa Conference Seminary, the school was
founded in 1853 by Reverend Samuel M. Fellows. Four years later, in 1857, the
name was changed to Cornell College, in honor of iron tycoon William Wesley
Cornell, who was a distant relative of Ezra Cornell (founder of Cornell
University in Ithaca, New York). Overview. Cornell students study "one course
at a time" (commonly referred to as "the block plan" or "OCAAT"). Since 1978,
school years have been divided into nine "blocks" of three-and-a-half weeks
each (usually followed by a four-day "block break" to round out to four weeks),
during which students are enrolled in a single class; what would normally be
covered in a full semester's worth of class at a typical university is covered
in just seventeen-and-one-half Cornell class days. While schedules vary from
class to class, most courses consist of around 30 hours of lecture, along with
additional time spent in the laboratory, studying audio-visual media, or other
activities. Colorado College in Colorado Springs, Colorado; Quest University in
Squamish, British Columbia; Tusculum College in Tusculum, Tennessee; and The
University of Montana - Western are the only other colleges operating under
this academic calendar. Beginning academic year 2012â€“2013, Cornell will be
changing to an eight block calendar. From its inception, Cornell has accepted
women into all degree programs. In 1858, Cornell was host to Iowa's first
female recipient of a baccalaureate degree, Mary Fellows, a member of the first
graduating class from Cornell College. She received a bachelor's degree in
mathematics. In 1871, Harriette J. Cooke became the first female college
professor in the United States to become a full professor with a salary equal
to that of her male colleagues. Campus buildings. The most widely recognizable
building on Cornell's campus is King Chapel. The chapel is the site of the
annual convocation at the commencement of the school year as well as the
baccalaureate service in the spring for graduating students. The chapel
contains a large organ (over 3000 pipes) and is often the site of musical
performances. No classes are held in the chapel, and religious services are
held in the nearby Allee Chapel. Old Sem, for a short while the only building
of the original college, now houses administrative offices of the college.
Cornell contains 9 academic buildings. College Hall (also sometimes called "Old
Main"), the second-oldest building of the college, houses classrooms and
offices of several social science and humanities departments. South Hall,
originally a male dormitory, houses the Politics and English Departments. Prall
House contains offices and classrooms of the Philosophy and Religion
Departments. The Merle West Science Center houses the Physics, Biology, and
Chemistry Departments. West Science contains the school's only stadium seating
lecture-style classroom, with a capacity around 100. The Norton Geology Center
contains both an extensive museum and classrooms for geological sciences. Law
Hall includes the Math, Computer Science, and Psychology Departments, and also
is the computing hub of the campus. McWethy Hall, formerly a gymnasium, was
remodeled and now contains the studios and offices of the Art Department.
Armstrong Hall and Youngker Hall are adjoining fine arts buildings. Armstrong
Hall is the location of the Music Department, while Youngker Hall contains the
Theatre Department, including Kimmel Theatre. In addition, the Small Sport
Center and the Lytle House contain classrooms of the Kinesiology Department.
Cole Library serves both the college and the Mount Vernon community. Cornell
has several residence halls. Pfeiffer Hall, Tarr Hall, and Dows Hall together
form the "Tri-Hall" area. Tarr was once an all-male residence hall, but now
houses both males and females. Dows is an all-female residence hall, and
Pfeiffer is co-ed for all years. Pfeiffer was extensively renovated in 2008.
Pauley-Rorem Hall is a combination of two residence halls that are joined in
the middle by a common set of stairs. Until 2012-2013, female first-years
resided in Pauley, and male first-years resided in Rorem. In the school year of
2012-2013, both residence halls became coed by floor. Olin Hall and Merner Hall
are co-ed upper-class residence halls. New Hall and Russell Hall (formerly
Clock Tower Hall) were opened in 2005 and 2007, respectively, and offer suite-
style living. Students may choose more independent living options in apartments
at 10th Avenue, Armstrong House, and Harlan House, and even at the Sleep Inn
through an arrangement with Cornell. Nearly all Cornell students are required
to live on-campus or in campus apartments, so most students do not rent non-
college housing, and many students choose to live in the residence halls for
all four years at Cornell. The Cornell campus is centered around a modest hill,
the feature noted in the moniker "Hilltop Campus." Several campus buildings are
grouped on the hilltop, while the athletic facilities and some residential
buildings are located farther downhill on the campus's northwest side.
Athletics. Cornell College fields 19 intercollegiate athletic teams, all of
which compete in NCAA Division III sports. It is a member of the Iowa
Intercollegiate Athletic Conference. Cornell has achieved its greatest success
in wrestling. Cornell wrestlers have won eight individual national titles, and
in 1947, the wrestling team won the NCAA Division I and AAU national
championships. Sixty-Two Cornell wrestlers have been named NCAA All-Americans,
and seven have been elected to the National Wrestling Hall of Fame. Seven
wrestlers have also been in the Olympics. Another Cornell team has also met
with success recently. In 2011, the women's volleyball team captured the IIAC
title and went on to take part in the national tournament for the first time in
school history. After 15 years of playing in the Iowa Intercollegiate Athletic
Conference, Cornell College will move to the Midwest Conference beginning in
the 2012-13 academic year. Twenty-five Cornell students have earned NCAA
Postgraduate Scholarships, awarded annually to students in their final year of
eligibility who excel both athletically and academically. Cornell ranks in the
top 15 Division III colleges in recipients of this award. Cornell's football
rivalry with Coe College dates to 1891, making it the oldest intercollegiate
rivalry west of the Mississippi. Coe currently holds the lead in the series,
60-51-4. Cornell's mascot is a Ram. In 1949 the Royal Purple, the school's
yearbook, offered a $5 prize for someone who could come up with a new mascot to
replace either the "Purples" or "Hilltoppers." A sophomore came up with the
idea for the ram. Intercollegiate Mock Trial. A very young program, having
existed for only four years, the Cornell College Mock Trial team has been
relatively successful, and is currently ranked 16th in the nation. Competing
against over 700 teams in the nation including: Yale university, Princeton
University, New York University and Washington and Lee University, the Cornell
Mock Trial team finished sixth in the nation at the 2010 AMTA (American Mock
Trial Association) Nationals. The Cornell Team has seen success throughout the
year seeing victories in Mac II hosted by Macalester College in St. Paul,
Minnesota, the Bluejay Invitational hosted by Creighton University, the
Fantastic Flyer Invitational hosted by Lewis University in Oak Brook, Illinois,
and St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota and the AMTA Opening Round
Championship held in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Cornell Mockers have received
numerous individual awards including two All-American attorney awards at the
Gold Round National competition in April 2010. Greek life. Cornell College has
14 officially recognized unique non-national Fraternities and Sororities.
