Corporate welfare Corporate welfare is a sociological concept that analogizes
corporate subsidies to welfare payments for the poor. The term is often used
derogatorily to describe a government's bestowal of money grants, tax breaks,
or other special favorable treatment on corporations or selected corporations,
and implies that corporations are much less needy of such treatment than the
poor. In practice, the term is often used virtually interchangeably with crony
capitalism. To the extent that there is a distinction, the latter term could be
considered broader, including all types of governmental decisions that favor
the "cronies" (big businesses and industry groups providing substantial
campaign contributions), while corporate welfare might be restricted only to
direct government subsidies. History. Ralph Nader, an American critic of
corporate welfare, is often credited with coining the term. The Canadian New
Democratic Party picked up the term as a major theme in its 1972 federal
election campaign. United States. Background. Subsidies considered excessive,
unwarranted, wasteful, unfair, inefficient, or bought by lobbying are often
called corporate welfare. The label of corporate welfare is often used to decry
projects advertised as benefiting the general welfare that spend a
disproportionate amount of funds on large corporations, and often in
uncompetitive, or anti-competitive ways. For instance, in the United States,
agricultural subsidies are usually portrayed as helping honest, hardworking
independent farmers stay afloat. However, the majority of income gained from
commodity support programs actually goes to large agribusiness corporations
such as Archer Daniels Midland, as they own a considerably larger percentage of
production. Alan Peters and Peter Fisher (Associate Professors, Graduate
Program in Urban and Regional Planning, University of Iowa) have estimated that
state and local governments provide $40â€“50 billion annually in economic
development incentives, which critics characterize as corporate welfare. Some
economists consider the recent bank bailouts in the United States to be
corporate welfare. U.S. politicians have also contended that zero-interest
loans from the Federal Reserve System to financial institutions during the
global financial crisis were a hidden, backdoor form of corporate welfare.
Comprehensive analyses. Cato Institute. Policy analysis conducted by the Cato
Institute, an American libertarian think tank, argued that United States fiscal
policy allocated approximately in the 2006 federal budget toward programs that
the authors considered to be corporate welfare. Subsequent analysis by the
institute estimated that number to be in the 2012 federal budget. It should be
noted, however, that Cato's criteria, which are not clearly defined, do not
include tax loopholes or trade barriers. Independent. Huff noted that
deliberate obfuscation was a complicating factor. Commentary. In 2002, Bernie
Sanders scrutinized corporate welfare policies in the United States, which he
considered to total annually.
