Cost In production, research, retail, and accounting, a cost is the value of
money that has been used up to produce something, and hence is not available
for use anymore. In business, the cost may be one of acquisition, in which case
the amount of money expended to acquire it is counted as cost. In this case,
money is the input that is gone in order to acquire the thing. This acquisition
cost may be the sum of the cost of production as incurred by the original
producer, and further costs of transaction as incurred by the acquirer over and
above the price paid to the producer. Usually, the price also includes a mark-
up for profit over the cost of production. More generalized in the field of
economics, cost is a metric that is totaling up as a result of a process or as
a differential for the result of a decision. Hence cost is the metric used in
the standard modeling paradigm applied to economic processes. Costs (pl.) are
often further described based on their timing or their applicability. Types of
accounting costs. In accounting, costs are the monetary value of expenditures
for supplies, services, labor, products, equipment and other items purchased
for use by a business or other accounting entity. It is the amount denoted on
invoices as the price and recorded in bookkeeping records as an expense or
asset cost basis. Opportunity cost, also referred to as "economic cost" is the
value of the best alternative that was not chosen in order to pursue the
current endeavorâ€”i.e., what could have been accomplished with the resources
expended in the undertaking. It represents opportunities forgone. In
theoretical economics, cost used without qualification often means opportunity
cost. Comparing private, external, social, and psychic costs. When a
transaction takes place, it typically involves both private costs and external
costs. Private costs are the costs that the buyer of a good or service pays the
seller. This can also be described as the costs internal to the firm's
production function. External costs (also called externalities), in contrast,
are the costs that people other than the buyer are forced to pay as a result of
the transaction. The bearers of such costs can be either particular individuals
or society at large. Note that external costs are often both non-monetary and
problematic to quantify for comparison with monetary values. They include
things like pollution, things that society will likely have to pay for in some
way or at some time in the future, but that are not included in transaction
prices. Social costs are the sum of private costs and external costs. For
example, the manufacturing cost of a car (i.e., the costs of buying inputs,
land tax rates for the car plant, overhead costs of running the plant and labor
costs) reflects the "private cost" for the manufacturer (in some ways, normal
profit can also be seen as a cost of production; see, e.g., Ison and Wall,
2007, p.Â 181). The polluted waters or polluted air also created as part of the
process of producing the car is an "external cost" borne by those who are
affected by the pollution or who value unpolluted air or water. Because the
manufacturer does not pay for this external cost (the cost of emitting
undesirable waste into the commons), and does not include this cost in the
price of the car (a Kaldor-Hicks compensation), they are said to be external to
the market pricing mechanism. The air pollution from driving the car is also an
externality produced by the car user in the process of using his good. The
driver does not compensate for the environmental damage caused by using the
car. A psychic cost is a subset of social costs that specifically represent the
costs of added stress or losses to quality of life. Cost estimation. When
developing a business plan for a new or existing company, product, or project,
planners typically make cost estimates in order to assess whether revenues/
benefits will cover costs (see cost-benefit analysis). This is done in both
business and government. Costs are often underestimated, resulting in cost
overrun during execution. The main causes of cost underestimation and overrun
are optimism bias and strategic misrepresentation (Flyvbjerg et al. 2002).
Reference class forecasting was developed to curb optimism bias and strategic
misrepresentation and arrive at more accurate cost estimates. Cost-plus
pricing, is where the price equals cost plus a percentage of overhead or profit
margin. Path cost. Also seen as a term in networking to define the worthiness
of a path, see Routing.
