Cost curve In economics, a cost curve is a graph of the costs of production as
a function of total quantity produced. In a free market economy, productively
efficient firms use these curves to find the optimal point of production
(minimising cost), and profit maximizing firms can use them to decide output
quantities to achieve those aims. There are various types of cost curves, all
related to each other, including total and average cost curves, and marginal
("for each additional unit") cost curves, which are the equal to the
differential of the total cost curves. Some are applicable to the short run,
others to the long run. Short-run average variable cost curve (SRAVC). Average
variable cost (which is a short-run concept) is the variable cost (typically
labor cost) per unit of output: SRAVC = wL / Q where w is the wage rate, L is
the quantity of labor used, and Q is the quantity of output produced. The SRAVC
curve plots the short-run average variable cost against the level of output,
and is typically drawn as U-shaped. Short-run average total cost curve (SRATC
or SRAC). The average total cost curve is constructed to capture the relation
between cost per unit of output and the level of output, "ceteris paribus". A
perfectly competitive and productively efficient firm organizes its factors of
production in such a way that the average cost of production is at the lowest
point. In the short run, when at least one factor of production is fixed, this
occurs at the output level where it has enjoyed all possible average cost gains
from increasing production. This is at the minimum point in the diagram on the
right. Short-run total cost is given by where APK = Q/K is the average product
of capital and APL = Q/L is the average product of labor. Short run average
cost equals average fixed costs plus average variable costs. Average fixed cost
continuously falls as production increases in the short run, because K is fixed
in the short run. The shape of the average variable cost curve is directly
determined by increasing and then diminishing marginal returns to the variable
input (conventionally labor). Long-run average cost curve (LRAC). The long-run
average cost curve depicts the cost per unit of output in the long runâ€”that
is, when all productive inputs' usage levels can be varied. All points on the
line represent least-cost factor combinations; points above the line are
attainable but unwise, while points below are unattainable given present
factors of production. The behavioral assumption underlying the curve is that
the producer will select the combination of inputs that will produce a given
output at the lowest possible cost. Given that LRAC is an "average" quantity,
one must not confuse it with the long-run "marginal" cost curve, which is the
cost of one more unit. The LRAC curve is created as an envelope of an infinite
number of short-run average total cost curves, each based on a particular fixed
level of capital usage. The typical LRAC curve is U-shaped, reflecting
increasing returns of scale where negatively-sloped, constant returns to scale
where horizontal and decreasing returns (due to increases in factor prices)
where positively sloped. Contrary to Viner, the envelope is not created by the
minimum point of each short-run average cost curve. This mistake is recognized
as Viner's Error. In a long-run perfectly competitive environment, the
equilibrium level of output corresponds to the minimum efficient scale, marked
as Q2 in the diagram. This is due to the zero-profit requirement of a perfectly
competitive equilibrium. This result, which implies production is at a level
corresponding to the lowest possible average cost, does not imply that
production levels other than that at the minimum point are not efficient. All
points along the LRAC are productively efficient, by definition, but not all
are equilibrium points in a long-run perfectly competitive environment. In some
industries, the bottom of the LRAC curve is large in comparison to market size
(that is to say, for all intents and purposes, it is always declining and
economies of scale exist indefinitely). This means that the largest firm tends
to have a cost advantage, and the industry tends naturally to become a
monopoly, and hence is called a natural monopoly. Natural monopolies tend to
exist in industries with high capital costs in relation to variable costs, such
as water supply and electricity supply. Short-run marginal cost curve (SRMC). A
short-run marginal cost curve graphically represents the relation between
marginal (i.e., incremental) cost incurred by a firm in the short-run
production of a good or service and the quantity of output produced. This curve
is constructed to capture the relation between marginal cost and the level of
output, holding other variables, like technology and resource prices, constant.
The marginal cost curve is U-shaped. Marginal cost is relatively high at small
quantities of output; then as production increases, marginal cost declines,
reaches a minimum value, then rises. The marginal cost is shown in relation to
marginal revenue, the incremental amount of sales revenue that an additional
unit of the product or service will bring to the firm. This shape of the
marginal cost curve is directly attributable to increasing, then decreasing
marginal returns (and the law of diminishing marginal returns). Marginal cost
equals w/MPL. For most production processes the marginal product of labor
initially rises, reaches a maximum value and then continuously falls as
production increases. Thus marginal cost initially falls, reaches a minimum
value and then increases. The marginal cost curve intersects both the average
variable cost curve and (short-run) average total cost curve at their minimum
points. When the marginal cost curve is above an average cost curve the average
curve is rising. When the marginal costs curve is below an average curve the
average curve is falling. This relation holds regardless of whether the
marginal curve is rising or falling. Long-run marginal cost curve (LRMC). The
long-run marginal cost curve shows for each unit of output the added total cost
incurred in the long run, that is, the conceptual period when all factors of
production are variable so as minimize long-run average total cost. Stated
otherwise, LRMC is the minimum increase in total cost associated with an
increase of one unit of output when all inputs are variable. The long-run
marginal cost curve is shaped by economies and diseconomies of scale, a long-
run concept, rather than the law of diminishing marginal returns, which is a
short-run concept. The long-run marginal cost curve tends to be flatter than
its short-run counterpart due to increased input flexibility as to cost
minimization. The long-run marginal cost curve intersects the long-run average
cost curve at the minimum point of the latter. When long-run marginal costs are
below long-run average costs, long-run average costs are falling (as to
additional units of output). When long-run marginal costs are above long run
average costs, average costs are rising. Long-run marginal cost equals short
run marginal-cost at the least-long-run-average-cost level of production. LRMC
is the slope of the LR total-cost function. Graphing cost curves together. Cost
curves can be combined to provide information about firms. In this diagram for
example, firms are assumed to be in a perfectly competitive market. In a
perfectly competitive market the price that firms are faced with would be the
price at which the marginal cost curve cuts the average cost curve. Cost curves
and production functions. Assuming that factor prices are constant, the
production function determines all cost functions. The variable cost curve is
the inverted short-run production function or total product curve and its
behavior and properties are determined by the production function. Because the
production function determines the variable cost function it necessarily
determines the shape and properties of marginal cost curve and the average cost
curves. If the firm is a perfect competitor in all input markets, and thus the
per-unit prices of all its inputs are unaffected by how much of the inputs the
firm purchases, then it can be shown that at a particular level of output, the
firm has economies of scale (i.e., is operating in a downward sloping region of
the long-run average cost curve) if and only if it has increasing returns to
scale. Likewise, it has diseconomies of scale (is operating in an upward
sloping region of the long-run average cost curve) if and only if it has
decreasing returns to scale, and has neither economies nor diseconomies of
scale if it has constant returns to scale. In this case, with perfect
competition in the output market the long-run market equilibrium will involve
all firms operating at the minimum point of their long-run average cost curves
(i.e., at the borderline between economies and diseconomies of scale). If,
however, the firm is not a perfect competitor in the input markets, then the
above conclusions are modified. For example, if there are increasing returns to
scale in some range of output levels, but the firm is so big in one or more
input markets that increasing its purchases of an input drives up the input's
per-unit cost, then the firm could have diseconomies of scale in that range of
output levels. Conversely, if the firm is able to get bulk discounts of an
input, then it could have economies of scale in some range of output levels
even if it has decreasing returns in production in that output range.
Relationship between short run and long run cost curves. Basic: For each
quantity of output there is one cost minimizing level of capital and a unique
short run average cost curve associated with producing the given quantity.
These statements assume that the firm is using the optimal level of capital for
the quantity produced. If not, then the SRAC curve would lie "wholly above" the
LRAC and would not be tangent at any point. U-shaped curves. Both the SRAC and
LRAC curves are typically expressed as U-shaped. However, the shapes of the
curves are not due to the same factors. For the short run curve the initial
downward slope is largely due to declining average fixed costs. Increasing
returns to the variable input at low levels of production also play a role,
while the upward slope is due to diminishing marginal returns to the variable
input. With the long run curve the shape by definition reflects economies and
diseconomies of scale. At low levels of production long run production
functions generally exhibit increasing returns to scale, which, for firms that
are perfect competitors in input markets, means that the long run average cost
is falling; the upward slope of the long run average cost function at higher
levels of output is due to decreasing returns to scale at those output levels.
