Cournot competition An essential assumption of this model is the "not
conjecture" that each firm aims to maximize profits, based on the expectation
that its own output decision will not have an effect on the decisions of its
rivals. Price is a commonly known decreasing function of total output. All
firms know formula_1, the total number of firms in the market, and take the
output of the others as given. Each firm has a cost function formula_2.
Normally the cost functions are treated as common knowledge. The cost functions
may be the same or different among firms. The market price is set at a level
such that demand equals the total quantity produced by all firms. Each firm
takes the quantity set by its competitors as a given, evaluates its residual
demand, and then behaves as a monopoly. Graphically finding the Cournot duopoly
equilibrium. This section presents an analysis of the model with 2 firms and
constant marginal cost. This implies that firm 1â€™s profit is given by
formula_9 Calculating the equilibrium. In very general terms, let the price
function for the (duopoly) industry be formula_36 and firm i have the cost
structure formula_37. To calculate the Nash equilibrium, the best response
functions of the firms must first be calculated. The values of formula_39 that
satisfy this equation are the best responses. The Nash equilibria are where
both formula_5 and formula_6 are best responses given those values of formula_5
and formula_6. An example. The symmetric Nash equilibrium is at formula_70.
(See Holt (2005, Chapter 13) for asymmetric examples.) Making suitable
assumptions for the partial derivatives (for example, assuming each firm's cost
is a linear function of quantity and thus using the slope of that function in
the calculation), the equilibrium quantities can be substituted in the assumed
industry price structure formula_54 to obtain the equilibrium market price.
Cournot competition with many firms and the Cournot Theorem. edit; we should
specify the constants. Given the following results are these; Market Demand;
formula_72 Cost Function; formula_73, for all i and The Cournot Theorem then
states that, in absence of fixed costs of production, as the number of firms in
the market, N, goes to infinity, market output, Nq, goes to the competitive
level and the price converges to marginal cost. Hence with many firms a Cournot
market approximates a perfectly competitive market. This result can be
generalized to the case of firms with different cost structures (under
appropriate restrictions) and non-linear demand. This equilibrium is usually
known as Cournot equilibrium with endogenous entry, or Marshall equilibrium.
Bertrand versus Cournot. However, as the number of firms increases towards
infinity, the Cournot model gives the same result as in Bertrand model: The
market price is pushed to marginal cost level.
