Criticisms of socialism Criticism of socialism refers to a critique of
socialist models of economic organization, their efficiency and feasibility; as
well as the political and social implications of such a system. Some criticisms
are not directed toward socialism as a system, but are directed toward the
socialist movement, socialist political parties or existing socialist states.
Some critics consider socialism to be a purely theoretical concept that should
be criticized on theoretical grounds; others hold that certain historical
examples exist and that can be criticized on practical grounds. Because
socialism is a broad concept, some criticisms presented in this article will
only apply a specific model of socialism that may differ sharply from other
types of socialism. Economic liberals, pro-capitalist libertarians, and some
classical liberals view private enterprise, private ownership of the means of
production, and the market exchange as a natural and/or moral phenomena,
central to their conceptions of freedom and liberty. Contrawise, members of
these three groups may perceive public ownership of the means of production,
cooperatives, and state-sponsored economic planning as infringements on
liberty. Critics from the neoclassical school of economics criticize socialist
theories that promote state-ownership and/or centralization of capital on the
grounds that there is a lack of incentive in state institutions to act on
information as efficiently as managers in capitalist firms do because they lack
a hard budget constraint (profit and loss mechanism), resulting in reduced
overall economic welfare for society. Critics from the Austrian school of
economics argue that socialist systems based on economic planning are
unfeasible because they lack the information to perform economic calculation in
the first place due to a lack of price signals and a free price system, which
they believe are required for rational economic calculation. Critics of the
socialist political movement often criticize the internal conflicts of the
socialist movement as creating a sort of "responsibility void." The criticisms
presented below may not apply to all forms of socialism as some forms of
socialism advocate state ownership of capital in a market economy, while other
forms advocate state-directed economic planning and state-ownership of capital.
Other strands of socialist thought reject state ownership altogether and
instead argue for participatory economics and non-governmental worker-
cooperative ownership of the means of production. It is important to note that
many socialist theories and models are opposed to, and often criticize, other
types of socialism for various reasons. Critique of centralized planning.
Distorted or absent price signals. The "economic calculation problem" is a
criticism of central economic planning. It was first proposed by Ludwig von
Mises in 1920 and later expounded by Friedrich Hayek. The problem referred to
is that of how to distribute resources rationally in an economy. The free
market solution is the price mechanism, wherein people individually have the
ability to decide how a good should be distributed based on their willingness
to give money for it. The price conveys embedded information about the
abundance of resources as well as their desirability which in turn allows, on
the basis of individual consensual decisions, corrections that prevent
shortages and surpluses; Mises and Hayek argued that this is the only possible
solution, and without the information provided by market prices socialism lacks
a method to rationally allocate resources. Those who agree with this criticism
argue it is a refutation of socialism and that it shows that a socialist
planned economy could never work. The debate raged in the 1920s and 1930s, and
that specific period of the debate has come to be known by economic historians
as "the Socialist Calculation Debate." Ludwig von Mises argued in a famous 1920
article "Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth" that the pricing
systems in socialist economies were necessarily deficient because if government
owned the means of production, then no prices could be obtained for capital
goods as they were merely internal transfers of goods in a socialist system and
not "objects of exchange," unlike final goods. Therefore, they were unpriced
and hence the system would be necessarily inefficient since the central
planners would not know how to allocate the available resources efficiently.
This led him to declare "...that rational economic activity is impossible in a
socialist commonwealth.". Mises developed his critique of socialism more
completely in his 1922 book "Socialism, an Economic and Sociological Analysis".
Friedrich Hayek argued in 1977 that "prices are an instrument of communication
and guidance which embody more information than we directly have", and
therefore "the whole idea that you can bring about the same order based on the
division of labor by simple direction falls to the ground". He further argued
that "if you need prices, including the prices of labor, to direct people to go
where they are needed, you cannot have another distribution except the one from
the market principle." Ludwig von Mises argued that a socialist system based
upon a planned economy would not be able to allocate resources effectively due
to the lack of price signals. Because the means of production would be
controlled by a single entity, approximating prices for capital goods in a
planned economy would be impossible. His argument was that socialism must fail
economically because of the economic calculation problemthe impossibility of a
socialist government being able to make the economic calculations required to
organize a complex economy. Mises projected that without a market economy there
would be no functional price system, which he held essential for achieving
rational and efficient allocation of capital goods to their most productive
uses. Socialism would fail as demand cannot be known without prices, according
to Mises. These arguments were elaborated by subsequent Austrian economists
such as Friedrich Hayek and students such as Hans Sennholz. The anarcho-
capitalist economist Hans-Hermann Hoppe argues that, in the absence of prices
for the means of production, there is no cost-accounting which would direct
labor and resources to the most valuable uses. Hungarian economist Janos Kornai
has written that "the attempt to realize market socialism ... produces an
incoherent system, in which there are elements that repel each other: the
dominance of public ownership and the operation of the market are not
compatible." Proponents of lassiez-faire capitalism argue that although private
monopolies don't have any actual competition, there are many potential
competitors watching them, and if they were delivering inadequate service, or
charging an excessive amount for a good or service, investors would start a
competing enterprise. In her book "How We Survived Communism & Even Laughed",
Slavenka DrakuliÄ‡ claims that a major contributor to the fall of socialist
planned economies in the former Soviet bloc was the failure to produce the
basic consumer goods that its people desired. She argues that, because of the
makeup of the leadership of these regimes, the concerns of women got
particularly short shrift. She illustrates this, in particular, by the system's
failure to produce washing machines. If a state-owned industry is able to keep
operating with losses, it may continue operating indefinitely producing things
that are not in high consumer demand. If consumer demand is too low to sustain
the industry with voluntary payments by consumers then it is tax-subsidized.
This prevents resources (capital and labor) from being applied to satisfying
more urgent consumer demands. According to economist Milton Friedman "The loss
part is just as important as the profit part. What distinguishes the private
system from a government socialist system is the loss part. If an
entrepreneur's project doesn't work, he closes it down. If it had been a
government project, it would have been expanded, because there is not the
discipline of the profit and loss element." Proponents of chaos theory argue
that it is impossible to make accurate long-term predictions for highly complex
systems such as an economy. Pierre-Joseph Proudhon raises similar calculational
issues in his "General Idea of the Revolution in the 19th Century" but also
proposes certain voluntary arrangements, which would also require economic
calculation. Leon Trotsky, a proponent of decentralized planning, argued that
centralized economic planning would be "insoluble without the daily experience
of millions, without their critical review of their own collective experience,
without their expression of their needs and demands and could not be carried
out within the confines of the official sanctums", and "Even if the Politburo
consisted of seven universal geniuses, of seven Marxes, or seven Lenins, it
will still be unable, all on its own, with all its creative imagination, to
assert command over the economy of 170 million people." According to Tibor R.
Machan, "Without a market in which allocations can be made in obedience to the
law of supply and demand, it is difficult or impossible to funnel resources
with respect to actual human preferences and goals." In contrast to the lack of
a marketplace, market socialism can be viewed as an alternative to the
traditional socialist model. Theoretically, the fundamental difference between
a traditional socialist economy and a market socialist economy is the existence
of a market for the means of production and capital goods. Suppression of
economic democracy and self-management. Central planning is also criticized by
elements of the radical left. Libertarian socialist economist Robin Hahnel
notes that even if central planning overcame its inherent inhibitions of
incentives and innovation it would nevertheless be unable to maximize economic
democracy and self-management, which he believes are concepts that are more
intellectually coherent, consistent and just than mainstream notions of
economic freedom. As Hahnel explains, "Combined with a more democratic
political system, and redone to closer approximate a best case version,
centrally planned economies no doubt would have performed better. But they
could never have delivered economic self-management, they would always have
been slow to innovate as apathy and frustration took their inevitable toll, and
they would always have been susceptible to growing inequities and
inefficiencies as the effects of differential economic power grew. Under
central planning neither planners, managers, nor workers had incentives to
promote the social economic interest. Nor did impending markets for final goods
to the planning system enfranchise consumers in meaningful ways. But central
planning would have been incompatible with economic democracy even if it had
overcome its information and incentive liabilities. And the truth is that it
survived as long as it did only because it was propped up by unprecedented
totalitarian political power." Critique of public enterprise. Slow or stagnant
technological advance. Milton Friedman, an economist, argued that socialism, by
which he meant state ownership over the means of production, impedes
technological progress due to competition being stifled. As evidence, he said
that we need only look to the U.S. to see where socialism fails, by observing
that the most technologically backward areas are those where government owns
the means of production. Without a reward system, it is argued, many inventors
or investors would not risk time or capital for research. This was one of the
reasons for the United States patent system and copyright law. Socialism has
proved no more efficient at home than abroad. What are our most technologically
backward areas? The delivery of first class mail, the schools, the judiciary,
the legislative system â€“ all mired in outdated technology. No doubt we need
socialism for the judicial and legislative systems. We do not for mail or
schools, as has been shown by Federal Express and others, and by the ability of
many private schools to provide superior education to underprivileged
youngsters at half the cost of government schooling... We all justly complain
about the waste, fraud and inefficiency of the military. Why? Because it is a
socialist activity â€“ one that there seems no feasible way to privatize. But
why should we be any better at running socialist enterprises than the Russians
or Chinese? By extending socialism far beyond the area where it is unavoidable,
we have ended up performing essential government functions far less well than
is not only possible but than was attained earlier. In a poorer and less
socialist era, we produced a nationwide network of roads and bridges and subway
systems that were the envy of the world. Today we are unable even to maintain
them. Reduced incentives. However, he later altered his views and adopted a
socialist perspective, adding chapters to his "Principles of Political Economy"
in defense of a socialist outlook, and defending some socialist causes. Within
this revised work he also made the radical proposal that the whole wage system
be abolished in favour of a co-operative wage system. Nonetheless, some of his
views on the idea of flat taxation remained, albeit in a slightly toned down
form. Reduced prosperity. According to economist Hans-Hermann Hoppe, countries
where the means of production are socialized are not as prosperous as those
where the means of production are under private control. Ludwig von Mises, a
classical liberal economist, argued that aiming for more equal incomes through
state intervention necessarily leads to a reduction in national income and
therefore average income. Consequently, the socialist chooses a more equal
distribution of income, on the assumption that the marginal utility of income
to a poor person is greater than that to a rich person. According to Mises,
this mandates a preference for a lower average income over inequality of income
at a higher average income. He sees no rational justification for this
preference. Market socialism. Marxists criticize this form of socialism because
it does not end commodity production, alienates individuals from the products
of their labor, atomizes individuals and creates a degenerate commercialized
culture. Libertarian socialists and anarchists argue that market socialism
fails to see any alternatives outside of the narrow confines of market-based or
state-based solutions. Social and political effects. Friedrich Hayek in "The
Road to Serfdom", argued that the more even distribution of wealth through the
nationalization of the means of production advocated by certain socialists
cannot be achieved without a loss of political, economic, and human rights.
According to Hayek, to achieve control over means of production and
distribution of wealth it is necessary for such socialists to acquire
significant powers of coercion. Hayek argued that the road to socialism leads
society to totalitarianism, and argued that fascism and Nazism were the
inevitable outcome of socialist trends in Italy and Germany during the
preceding period. Hayek was critical of the bias shown by university teachers
and intellectuals towards socialist ideals. He argued that socialism is not a
working class movement as socialists contend, but rather "the construction of
theorists, deriving from certain tendencies of abstract thought with which for
a long time only the intellectuals were familiar; and it required long efforts
by the intellectuals before the working classes could be persuaded to adopt it
as their program." Several theorists have shown that bad economic theory leads
directly to bad practice, and the two cannot be separated. For example, Milton
Friedman argued that the absence of voluntary economic activity makes it too
easy for repressive political leaders to grant themselves coercive powers.
Friedman's view was also shared by Friedrich Hayek and John Maynard Keynes,
both of whom believed that capitalism is vital for freedom to survive and
thrive. Peter Self criticizes the traditional socialist planned economy and
argues against pursuing "extreme equality" because he believes it requires
"strong coercion" and does not allow for "reasonable recognition different
individual needs, tastes (for work or leisure) and talents." He recommends
market socialism instead. Objectivists criticize socialism as devaluing the
individual, and making people incapable of choosing their own values, as
decisions are made centrally. They also reject socialism's indifference to
property rights.
