Cult of personality A cult of personality arises when an individual uses mass
media, propaganda, or other methods, to create an idealized, heroic, and, at
times god-like public image, often through unquestioning flattery and praise.
Sociologist Max Weber developed a tripartite classification of authority; the
"cult of personality" holds parallels with what Weber defined as "charismatic
authority". A cult of personality is similar to hero worship, except that it is
established by mass media and propaganda. Etymology. The term Cult of
personality or Personality Cult first appeared in Nikita Khrushchev's Secret
Speech in 1956. Cult of the individual is a more accurate translation.
Background. Throughout history, monarchs and heads of state were almost always
held in enormous reverence. Through the principle of the divine right of kings,
for example, rulers were said to hold office by the will of God. Imperial China
(see Mandate of Heaven), ancient Egypt, Japan, the Inca, the Aztecs, Tibet,
Thailand, and the Roman Empire (see imperial cult) are especially noted for
redefining monarchs as god-kings. The spread of democratic and secular ideas in
Europe and North America in the 18th and 19th centuries made it increasingly
difficult for monarchs to preserve this aura. However, the subsequent
development of photography, sound recording, film, and mass production, as well
as public education and techniques used in commercial advertising, enabled
political leaders to project a positive image like never before. It was from
these circumstances in the 20th century that the best-known personality cults
arose. Often these cults are a form of political religion. Purpose. Personality
cults were first described in relation to totalitarian regimes that sought to
alter or transform society according to radical ideas. Often, a single leader
became associated with this revolutionary transformation, and came to be
treated as a benevolent "guide" for the nation without whom the transformation
to a better future couldn't occur. This has been generally the justification
for personality cults that arose in totalitarian societies of the 20th century,
such as those of Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin. Not all dictatorships foster
personality cults, not all personality cults are dictatorships (some are
nominally democratic), and some leaders may actively seek to minimize their own
public adulation. For example, during the Cambodian Khmer Rouge regime, images
of dictator Pol Pot (Saloth Sar) were rarely seen in public, and his identity
was under dispute abroad until after his fall from power. The same applied to
numerous Eastern European Communist regimes following World War II (although
not those of Enver Hoxha and Nicolae Ceau»ôescu, mentioned below). Examples.
Historical examples. Argentina. Juan Per√≥n, elected three times as President
of Argentina, and his second wife, Eva Duarte de Per√≥n, were immensely popular
among many of the Argentine people, and to this day they are still considered
icons by the Peronist Party. The Per√≥ns' followers praised their efforts to
eliminate poverty and to dignify labor, while their detractors considered them
demagogues and dictators. To achieve their political goals, the Peronists had
to unite around the head of state. As a result, a personality cult developed
around both Per√≥n and his wife. Azerbaijan. Heydar Aliyev's cult of
personality became a significant part of Azerbaijani politics and society after
Heydar Aliyev came to power in 1993 and continuing after his death in 2003,
when his son Ilham Aliyev succeeded him. Aliyev, a former Soviet politburo
member and the leader of Soviet Azerbaijan from 1969 to 1987, became the
President of Azerbaijan in 1993. He then began to carefully design an
autocratic system, with heavy reliance on family and clan members, oil revenues
and patronage. In Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev is presented as "Father of the
Azeri nation", often compared to Kemal Atat√ºrk. China. A personality cult in
the Republic of China was centered on the Kuomintang party founder Sun Yat-sen,
and his successor, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek. The personality cult of
Chiang Kai-shek went further after the republican government fled to Taiwan. He
was usually referred as "Lord Chiang" (Ëî£ÂÖ¨) in public and a "Nuo tai" were
required in printed materials. Articles in textbooks and songs glorifying him
were common to be seen in Taiwan before 1987. The People's Republic of China
under Mao Zedong can also be considered a cult of personality. Culture of the
People's Republic of China before 1981 were highly influenced by the
personality cult of Mao Zedong and went to a peak during the Cultural
Revolution. Mao was referred as "the great leader Chairman Mao"
(‰ºüÂ§ßÈ¢ÜË¢ñÊØõ‰∏ªÂ∏≠) in public and was entitled as "the great leader, the
great supreme commander, the great teacher and the great helmsman"
(‰ºüÂ§ßÁöÑÈ¢ÜË¢ñ„ÄÅ‰ºüÂ§ßÁöÑÁªüÂ∏Ö„ÄÅ‰ºüÂ§ßÁöÑÂØºÂ∏à„ÄÅ‰ºüÂ§ßÁöÑËàµÊâã) in
Cultural Revolution. Badges and books of his quotations were largely produced.
Most of people were required to recite the quotation of Mao and printed
material at that time usually quote Mao's words in bold in preface. Loyalty
dance (Âø Â≠óËàû) was also introduced in Cultural Revolution. The cult of
personality continued for a short time after Mao's death. His successor, Hua
Guofeng also practised the cult of personality and was referred as "the
brilliant leader Chairman Hua" (Ëã±ÊòéÈ¢ÜË¢ñÂçé‰∏ªÂ∏≠). Reforms in 1981 led to
a deconstruction of his cult status and the Chinese Communist Party was
aversive to a cult of personality style rule lest it recreate the chaos of the
Cultural Revolution. French Indochina. Cambodian schoolchildren in French
Indochina at one point in the early 1940s began their school-day with prayers
to Marshal Philippe P√©tain, opening with the words, "Our father, which art our
Leader, glorious be thy name... deliver us from evil". Soviet Union. Some
authors (e.g., Alexander Zinovyev) have argued that Leonid Brezhnev's rule was
also characterized by a cult of personality, though unlike Stalin, Brezhnev did
not initiate large-scale persecutions in the country. One of the aspects of
Leonid Brezhnev's cult of personality was Brezhnev's obsession with titles,
rewards and decorations, leading to his inflated decoration with medals, orders
and so on. This was often ridiculed by the ordinary people and led to the
creation of many political jokes. Turkmenistan. Saparmurat Niyazov, who was
ruler of Turkmenistan from 1985 to 2006, is another oft-cited cultivator of a
cult of personality. Niyazov simultaneously cut funding to and partially
disassembled the education system in the name of "reform", while injecting
ideological indoctrination into it by requiring all schools to take his own
book, the Ruhnama, as its primary text, and like Kim Il-sung, there is even a
creation myth surrounding him. During Niyazov's rule there was no freedom of
the press nor was there freedom of speech. This further meant that opposition
to Niyazov was strictly forbidden and "major opposition figures have been
imprisoned, institutionalized, deported, or have fled the country, and their
family members are routinely harassed by the authorities." Additionally, a
silhouette of Niyazov was used as a logo on television broadcasts and statues
and pictures of him were "erected everywhere". For these, and other reasons,
the US Government has gone on to claim that by the time he died, "Niyazov‚Äôs
personality cult...had reached the dimensions of a state-imposed religion".
Togo. In a 2004 article on personality cults, "The Economist" identified Togo's
Gnassingb√© Eyad√©ma as maintaining an extensive personality cult, to the point
of having schoolchildren begin their day by singing his praises. United States.
The personal life of John F. Kennedy was celebrated as "Camelot" during his
life, and has only become more mythical after his death. North Korea.
Journalist Bradley Martin documented the personality cults of North Korea's
father-son leadership, "Great Leader" Kim Il-sung and "Dear Leader" Kim Jong-
il. While visiting North Korea in 1979 he noted that nearly all music, art, and
sculpture that he observed glorified "Great Leader" Kim Il-sung, whose
personality cult was then being extended to his son, "Dear Leader" Kim Jong-il.
Kim Il-sung rejected the notion that he had created a cult around himself and
accused those who suggested so of "factionalism". A US religious freedom
investigation confirmed Martin's observation that North Korean schoolchildren
learn to thank Kim Il-sung for all blessings as part of the cult. Evidence of
the cult of Kim Il-sung continues into the 21st century (despite his death in
1994) with the erection of "Yeong Saeng" ("eternal life") monuments throughout
the country, each dedicated to the departed "Great Leader", at which citizens
are expected to pay annual tribute on his official birthday or the anniversary
of his death. Current. Russia. Vladimir Putin has attracted many devout
followers and even has a sect of women who worships him. He is also featured in
a brand of vodka, popular songs, and nightclub parties. Syria. As one of his
strategies to maintain power over Syria, Hafez al-Assad developed a state-
sponsored cult of personality. Portraits of him, often depicting him engaging
in heroic activities, were placed in every public space. He named myriad
numbers of places and institutions in Syria after himself, and other members of
his family. At school, children were taught to sing songs of adulation about
Hafez al-Assad. Teachers would begin each lesson with the song "Our eternal
leader, Hafez al-Assad". In some cases, he portrayed himself with apparently
divine properties. Sculptures and portraits depicted him alongside the prophet
Mohammad, while, following her death, the government produced portraits of
Assad's mother surrounded by a halo. Syrian officials were made to refer to him
as the 'Sanctified one' (al-Muqaddas). The personality cult that he developed
portrayed him as wise, modest and just leader of the country. This strategy of
creating a cult of personality was pursued further by Hafez's son and current
ruler Bashar al-Assad. Turkey. In Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Atat√ºrk is
commemorated by many memorials throughout the country, such as the Atat√ºrk
International Airport in Istanbul, the Atat√ºrk Bridge over the Golden Horn
(Hali√ß), the Atat√ºrk Dam, and Atat√ºrk Stadium. Atat√ºrk statues have been
erected in all Turkish cities by Turkish Government, and most towns have their
own memorial to him. His face and name are seen and heard everywhere in Turkey;
his portrait can be seen in all public buildings, in all schools and
classrooms, on all school books, on all Turkish lira banknotes, and in the
homes of many Turkish families. At the exact time of his death, on every 10
November, at 09:05¬ am, most vehicles and people in the country's streets pause
for one minute in remembrance. In 1951, the outlawing () or representing him,
which is still in force. A government website was created to denounce the
websites that violate this law, and the Turkish government as of 2011 has
filters in place to block websites deemed to contain materials insulting to his
memory. Turkmenistan. Human Rights Watch, in its "World Report 2012", says
there is a cult of personality of President Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow and that
it is strengthening. Agence France-Presse reports a developing personality
cult. Reporters Without Borders says the president is promoting a cult of
personality of himself and that his portraits have taken the place of the ones
of the previous president.
