Dartmouth College Dartmouth College (commonly referred to as Dartmouth ( ) is a
private Ivy League research university located in Hanover, New Hampshire,
United States. The institution consists of a liberal arts college, the Geisel
School of Medicine, the Thayer School of Engineering, and the Tuck School of
Business, as well as 19 graduate programs in the arts and sciences.
Incorporated as "the Trustees of Dartmouth College," it is one of the nine
Colonial Colleges founded before the American Revolution. With an undergraduate
enrollment of 4,248 and a total student enrollment of 6,141, Dartmouth is the
smallest school in the Ivy League. Dartmouth College was established in 1769 by
Congregational minister Eleazar Wheelock. After a long period of financial and
political struggles, Dartmouth emerged in the early 20th century from relative
obscurity. Dartmouth alumni, from Daniel Webster to the many donors in the 19th
and 20th centuries, have been famously involved in their college. Dartmouth is
located on a rural campus in the Upper Valley region of New Hampshire. The
campus is isolated, and participation in athletics and the school's Greek
system is strong. Dartmouth's 34 varsity sports teams compete in the Ivy League
conference of the NCAA Division I. Students are well known for preserving a
variety of strong campus traditions. History. Dartmouth was founded by Eleazar
Wheelock, a Puritan minister from Columbia, Connecticut, who had previously
sought to establish a school to train Native Americans as missionaries.
Wheelock's ostensible inspiration for such an establishment resulted from his
relationship with Mohegan Indian Samson Occom. Occom became an ordained
minister after studying under Wheelock from 1743 to 1747, and later moved to
Long Island to preach to the Montauks. Wheelock founded Moor's Indian Charity
School in 1755. The Charity School proved somewhat successful, but additional
funding was necessary to continue schoolâ€™s operations, and Wheelock sought
the help of friends to raise money. Occom, accompanied by Reverend Nathaniel
Whitaker, traveled to England in 1766 to raise money from churches. With these
funds, they established a trust to help Wheelock. The head of the trust was a
Methodist named William Legge, 2nd Earl of Dartmouth. Although the fund
provided Wheelock ample financial support for the Charity School, Wheelock had
trouble recruiting Indians to the institution, primarily because its location
was far from tribal territories. In seeking to expand the school into a
college, Wheelock relocated it to Hanover, in the Province of New Hampshire.
The move from Connecticut followed a lengthy and sometimes frustrating effort
to find resources and secure a charter. The Royal Governor of New Hampshire,
John Wentworth, provided the land upon which Dartmouth would be built and on
December 13, 1769, issued the charter in the name of King George III
establishing the College. That charter created a college "for the education and
instruction of Youth of the Indian Tribes in this Land ... and also of English
Youth and any others." The reference to educating Native American youth was
included to connect Dartmouth to the Charity School and enable use of the
Charity School's unspent trust funds. Named for William Legge, 2nd Earl of
DartmouthÂ â€” an important supporter of Eleazar Wheelock's earlier efforts but
who, in fact, opposed creation of the College and never donated to itÂ â€”
Dartmouth is the nation's ninth oldest college and the last institution of
higher learning established under Colonial rule. The College granted its first
degrees in 1771 . Given the limited success of the Charity School, however,
Wheelock intended his new College as one primarily for whites. Occom,
disappointed with Wheelock's departure from the school's original goal of
Indian Christianization, went on to form his own community of New England
Indians called Brothertown Indians in New York. In 1819, Dartmouth College was
the subject of the historic Dartmouth College case, which challenged New
Hampshire's 1816 attempt to amend the College's royal charter to make the
school a public university. An institution called Dartmouth University occupied
the College buildings and began operating in Hanover in 1817, though the
College continued teaching classes in rented rooms nearby. Daniel Webster, an
alumnus of the class of 1801, presented the College's case to the Supreme
Court, which found the amendment of Dartmouth's charter to be an illegal
impairment of a contract by the state and reversed New Hampshire's takeover of
the College. Webster concluded his peroration with the famous words: "It is,
Sir, as I have said, a small college. And yet there are those who love it."
Dartmouth emerged onto the national academic stage at the turn of the 20th
century. Prior to this period, the College had clung to traditional methods of
instruction and was relatively poorly funded. Under the presidency of William
Jewett Tucker (1893â€“1909), Dartmouth underwent a major revitalization of
facilities, faculty, and the student body, following large endowments such as
the $10,000 given by Dartmouth alumnus and law professor John Ordronaux. 20 new
structures replaced antiquated buildings, while the student body and faculty
both expanded threefold. Tucker is often credited for having "refounded
Dartmouth" and bringing it into national prestige. Ernest Fox Nichols
(1909â€“16) and Ernest Martin Hopkins (1916â€“45) continued Tucker's trend of
modernization, further improving campus facilities and introducing selective
admissions in the 1920s. John Sloan Dickey, serving as president from 1945
until 1970, strongly emphasized the liberal arts, particularly public policy
and international relations. During World War II, Dartmouth was one of 131
colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College
Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission. In 1970,
longtime professor of mathematics and computer science John George Kemeny
became president of Dartmouth. Kemeny oversaw several major changes at the
College. Dartmouth, previously serving as a men's institution, began admitting
women as full-time students and undergraduate degree candidates in 1972 amid
much controversy. At about the same time, the College adopted its "Dartmouth
Plan" of academic scheduling, permitting the student body to increase in size
within the existing facilities. During the 1990s, the College saw a major
academic overhaul under President James O. Freedman and a controversial (and
ultimately unsuccessful) 1999 initiative to encourage the school's single-sex
Greek houses to go coed. The first decade of the 21st century saw the
commencement of the $1.3 billion Campaign for the Dartmouth Experience, the
largest capital fundraising campaign in the College's history, which surpassed
$1 billion in 2008. The mid- and late first decade of the 21st century have
also seen extensive campus construction, with the erection of two new housing
complexes, full renovation of two dormitories, and a forthcoming dining hall,
life sciences center, and visual arts center. In 2004, Booz Allen Hamilton
selected Dartmouth College as a model of institutional endurance "whose record
of endurance has had implications and benefits for all American organizations,
both academic and commercial," citing "Trustees of Dartmouth College v.
Woodward" and Dartmouth's successful self-reinvention in the late 19th century.
Since the election of a number of petition-nominated trustees to the Board of
Trustees starting in 2004, the role of alumni in Dartmouth governance has been
the subject of ongoing conflict. President James Wright announced his
retirement in February 2008 and was replaced by Harvard University professor
and physician Jim Yong Kim on July 1, 2009. In May 2010 Dartmouth joined the
Matariki Network of Universities (MNU) together with Durham University (UK),
Queenâ€™s University (Canada), University of Otago (New Zealand), University of
TÃ¼bingen (Germany), University of Western Australia (Australia) and Uppsala
University (Sweden). Academics, administration, and ranking. Dartmouth, a
liberal arts institution, offers a four-year Bachelor of Arts and ABET-
accredited Bachelor of Engineering degree to undergraduate students. The
college boasts 39 academic departments offering 56 major programs, while
students are free to design special majors or engage in dual majors. In 2008,
the most popular majors were economics, government, history, psychological and
brain sciences, English, biology, and engineering sciences. The Government
Department, whose prominent professors include Stephen Brooks, Richard Ned
Lebow, and William Wohlforth, was ranked the top solely undergraduate political
science program in the world by researchers at the London School of Economics
in 2003. The Economics Department, whose prominent professors include David
Blanchflower and Andrew Samwick, also holds the distinction as the top-ranked
bachelor's-only economics program in the world. In 2012, Dartmouth was ranked
tenth among undergraduate programs at national universities by "U.S. News &
World Report". Dartmouth's strength in undergraduate education is highlighted
by "U.S. News & World Report" when in 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012 it ranked
Dartmouth first in undergraduate teaching at national universities. It also
ranks first in High School Counselor Rankings as of 2012. The college ranks
number seven in "The Wall Street Journal"'s ranking of top feeder schools. The
2006 Carnegie Foundation classification listed Dartmouth as the only "majority-
undergraduate", "arts-and-sciences focus", "research university" in the country
that also had "some graduate coexistence" and "very high research activity."
Internationally, Dartmouth College was ranked 113th in the world in the 2012 QS
World University Rankings. In 2011, 22,385 students applied for approximately
1,100 places, and 9.7% of applicants were admitted. Of those admitted whose
high schools reported a class rank, 94% were ranked in the top 10% of their
high school graduating class, 40% were valedictorians, and 10% were
salutatorians. The mean SAT scores of admitted students by section were 734 for
verbal, 740 for math, and 744 for writing. Dartmouth meets 100% of students'
demonstrated financial need in order to attend the College, and currently
admits all students, including internationals, on a need-blind basis. Beginning
in the 2008â€“2009 academic year, Dartmouth instituted a new financial aid
policy extending need-blind admission to international students and replaced
all student loans with scholarships and grants. Students from families with a
combined annual income of less than $75,000 are not charged any tuition.
However, in early 2010, the College announced that it would re-introduce loans
to its financial aid packages beginning in the 2011â€“2012 school year due to
its changed financial situation. In order to graduate, a student must complete
35 total courses, eight to ten of which are typically part of a chosen major
program. Other requirements for graduation include the completion of ten
"distributive requirements" in a variety of academic fields, proficiency in a
foreign language, and completion of a writing class and first-year seminar in
writing. Many departments offer honors programs requiring students seeking that
distinction to engage in "independent, sustained work," culminating in the
production of a thesis. In addition to the courses offered in Hanover,
Dartmouth offers 57 different off-campus programs, including Foreign Study
Programs, Language Study Abroad programs, and Exchange Programs. Through the
Graduate Studies program, Dartmouth grants doctorate and master's degrees in 19
Arts & Sciences graduate programs. Although the first graduate degree, a PhD in
classics, was awarded in 1885, many of the current PhD programs trace their
origins to the 1960s. Furthermore, Dartmouth is home to three professional
schools: Dartmouth Medical School (established 1797), Thayer School of
Engineering (1867)Â â€” which also serves as the undergraduate department of
engineering sciencesÂ â€” and Tuck School of Business (1900). With these
professional schools and graduate programs, conventional American usage would
accord Dartmouth the label of "Dartmouth University"; however, because of
historical and nostalgic reasons (such as "Dartmouth College v. Woodward"), the
school uses the name "Dartmouth College" to refer to the entire institution.
Dartmouth employs a total of 607 tenured or tenure-track faculty members,
including the highest proportion of female tenured professors among the Ivy
League universities. Faculty members have been at the forefront of such major
academic developments as the Dartmouth Conferences, the Dartmouth Time Sharing
System, Dartmouth BASIC, and Dartmouth ALGOL 30. In 2005, sponsored project
awards to Dartmouth faculty research amounted to $169 million. Dartmouth serves
as the host institution of the University Press of New England, a university
press founded in 1970 that is supported by a consortium of schools that also
includes Brandeis University, the University of New Hampshire, Northeastern
University, Tufts University and the University of Vermont. The Dartmouth Plan.
Dartmouth functions on a quarter system, operating year-round on four ten-week
academic terms. The Dartmouth Plan (or simply "D-Plan") is an academic
scheduling system that permits the customization of each student's academic
year. All undergraduates are required to be in residence for the fall, winter,
and spring terms of their freshman and senior years, as well as the summer term
of their sophomore year. During all other terms, students are permitted to
choose between studying on-campus, studying at an off-campus program, or taking
a term off for vacation, outside internships, or research projects. The typical
course load is three classes per term, and students will generally enroll in
classes for 12 total terms over the course of their academic career. The D-Plan
was instituted in the early 1970s at the same time that Dartmouth began
accepting female undergraduates. It was initially devised as a plan to increase
the enrollment without enlarging campus accommodations, and has been described
as "a way to put 4,000 students into 3,000 beds." Although new dormitories have
been built since, the number of students has also increased and the D-Plan
remains in effect. It was modified in the 1980s in an attempt to reduce the
problems of lack of social and academic continuity. Board of Trustees.
Dartmouth is governed by a Board of Trustees comprising the College president
("ex officio"), the state governor ("ex officio"), 13 trustees nominated and
elected by the board (called "charter trustees"), and eight trustees nominated
by alumni and elected by the board ("alumni trustees"). The nominees for alumni
trustee are determined by a poll of the members of the Association of Alumni of
Dartmouth College, selecting from among names put forward by the Alumni Council
or by alumni petition. Although the Board elected its members from the two
sources of nominees in equal proportions between 1891 and 2007, the Board
decided in 2007 to add several new members, all charter trustees. In the
controversy that followed the decision, the Association of Alumni filed a
lawsuit, although it later withdrew the action. In 2008, the Board added five
new charter trustees. Campus. Dartmouth College is situated in the rural town
of Hanover, New Hampshire, located in the Upper Valley along the Connecticut
River in New England. Its campus is centered on a five-acre (two-hectare)
"Green", a former field of pine trees cleared by the College in 1771. Dartmouth
is the largest private landowner of the town of Hanover, and its total
landholdings and facilities are worth an estimated $434 million. In addition to
its campus in Hanover, Dartmouth owns of Mount Moosilauke in the White
Mountains Region and a tract of land in northern New Hampshire known as the
Second College Grant. Dartmouth's campus buildings vary in age from Wentworth
and Thornton Halls of the 1820s (the oldest surviving buildings constructed by
the College) to new dormitories and mathematics facilities completed in 2006.
Most of Dartmouth's buildings are designed in the Georgian American colonial
style, a theme which has been preserved in recent architectural additions. The
College has actively sought to reduce carbon emissions and energy usage on
campus, earning it the grade of A- from the Sustainable Endowments Institute on
its College Sustainability Report Card 2008. Academic facilities. The College's
creative and performing arts facility is the Hopkins Center for the Arts ("the
Hop"). Opened in 1962, the Hop houses the College's drama, music, film, and
studio arts departments, as well as a woodshop, pottery studio, and jewelry
studio which are open for use by students and faculty. The building was
designed by the famed architect Wallace Harrison, who would later design the
similar-looking faÃ§ade of Manhattan's Metropolitan Opera House at Lincoln
Center. Its facilities include two theaters and one 900-seat auditorium. The
Hop is also the location of all student mailboxes ("Hinman boxes") and the
Courtyard CafÃ© dining facility. The Hop is connected to the Hood Museum of
Art, arguably North America's oldest museum in continuous operation, and the
Loew Auditorium, where films are screened. In addition to its 19 graduate
programs in the arts and sciences, Dartmouth is home to three separate graduate
schools. Dartmouth Medical School is located in a complex on the north side of
campus and includes laboratories, classrooms, offices, and a biomedical
library. The Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, located several miles to the
south in Lebanon, New Hampshire, contains a 396-bed teaching hospital for the
Medical School. The Thayer School of Engineering and the Tuck School of
Business are both located at the end of Tuck Mall, west of the center of campus
and near the Connecticut River. The Thayer School presently comprises two
buildings; Tuck has seven academic and administrative buildings, as well as
several common areas. The two graduate schools share a library, the Feldberg
Business & Engineering Library. Dartmouth's nine libraries are all part of the
collective Dartmouth College Library, which comprises 2.48 million volumes and
6 million total resources, including videos, maps, sound recordings, and
photographs. Its specialized libraries include the Biomedical Libraries, Evans
Map Room, Feldberg Business & Engineering Library, Jones Media Center, Kresge
Physical Sciences Library, Paddock Music Library, Rauner Special Collections
Library, and Sherman Art Library. Baker-Berry Library is the main library at
Dartmouth, comprising Baker Memorial Library (opened 1928) and Berry Library
(opened 2000). Located on the northern side of the Green, Baker's tower is an
iconic symbol of the College. Athletic facilities. Dartmouth's original sports
field was the Green, where students played cricket and old division football
during the 19th century. Today, two of Dartmouth's athletic facilities are
located in the southeast corner of campus. The center of athletic life is the
Alumni Gymnasium, which includes the Karl Michael Competition Pool and the
Spaulding Pool, a state of the art fitness center, a weight room, and a 1/13th-
mile (123Â m) indoor track. Attached to Alumni Gymnasium is the Berry Sports
Center, which contains basketball and volleyball courts (Leede Arena), as well
as the Kresge Fitness Center. Behind the Alumni Gymnasium is Memorial Field, a
15,600-seat stadium overlooking Dartmouth's football field and track. The
nearby Thompson Arena, designed by Italian engineer Pier Luigi Nervi and
constructed in 1975, houses Dartmouth's ice rink. Also visible from Memorial
Field is the Nathaniel Leverone Fieldhouse, home to the indoor track. The new
softball field, Dartmouth Softball Park, was constructed in 2012, sharing
parking facilities with Thompson arena. Dartmouth's other athletic facilities
in Hanover include the Friends of Dartmouth Rowing Boathouse and the old rowing
house storage facility (both located along the Connecticut River), the Hanover
Country Club, Dartmouth's oldest remaining athletic facility (established in
1899), and the Corey Ford Rugby Clubhouse. The College also maintains the
Dartmouth Skiway, a skiing facility located over two mountains near the Hanover
campus in Lyme Center, New Hampshire that serves as the winter practice grounds
for the nationally dominant Dartmouth ski team. Housing and student life
facilities. Instead of ungrouped dormitories or residential colleges, Dartmouth
has nine residential communities located throughout campus. The dormitories
vary in design from modern to traditional Georgian styles, and room
arrangements range from singles to quads and apartment suites. Since 2006, the
College has guaranteed housing for students during their freshman and sophomore
years. More than 3,000 students elect to live in housing provided by College.
Campus meals are served by Dartmouth Dining Services, which operates 11 dining
establishments around campus. Four of them are located at the center of campus
in Thayer Dining Hall. The Collis Center is the center of student life and
programming, serving as what would be generically termed the "student union" or
"campus center." It contains a cafÃ©, study space, common areas, and a number
of administrative departments, including the Academic Skills Centre. Robinson
Hall, next door to both Collis and Thayer, contains the offices of a number of
student organizations including the Dartmouth Outing Club and "The Dartmouth"
daily newspaper. Student life. In 2006, "The Princeton Review" ranked Dartmouth
third in its "Quality of Life" category, and sixth for having the "Happiest
Students." Athletics and participation in the Greek system are the most popular
campus activities; in all, Dartmouth offers more than 350 organizations, teams,
and sports. The school is also home to a variety of longstanding traditions and
celebrations. Student groups. Dartmouth's more than 200 student organizations
and clubs cover a wide range of interests. In 2007, the College hosted eight
academic groups, 17 cultural groups, two honor societies, 30 "issue-oriented"
groups, 25 performing groups, 12 pre-professional groups, 20 publications, and
11 recreational groups. Notable student groups include the nation's largest and
oldest collegiate outdoors club, the Dartmouth Outing Club, which includes the
nationally recognized Big Green Bus, the controversial conservative newspaper
"The Dartmouth Review", and "The Dartmouth", arguably the nation's oldest
university newspaper. "The Dartmouth" describes itself as "America's Oldest
College Newspaper, Founded 1799." Partially because of Dartmouth's rural,
isolated location, the Greek system dating from the 1840s is one of the most
popular social outlets for students. Dartmouth is home to 32 recognized Greek
houses: 17 fraternities, 12 sororities, and three coeducational organizations,
In 2007, roughly 70% of eligible students belong to a Greek organization; since
1987, students have not been permitted to join Greek organizations until their
sophomore year. Dartmouth College was among the first institutions of higher
education to desegregate fraternity houses in the 1950s, and was involved in
the movement to create coeducational Greek houses in the 1970s. In the early
first decade of the 21st century, campus-wide debate focused on a Board of
Trustees recommendation that Greek organizations become "substantially
coeducational"; this attempt to the change the Greek system eventually failed.
The College has an additional classification of social/residential
organizations known as undergraduate societies. The fraternities have an
extensive history of hazing and alcohol abuse, leading to police raids and
accusations of sexual harassment. Athletics. Approximately 20% of students
participate in a varsity sport, and nearly 80% participate in some form of
club, varsity, intramural, or other athletics. In 2007, Dartmouth College
fielded 34 intercollegiate varsity teams: 16 for men, 16 for women, and
coeducational sailing and equestrian programs. Dartmouth's athletic teams
compete in the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I
eight-member Ivy League conference; some teams also participate in the Eastern
College Athletic Conference (ECAC). As is mandatory for the members of the Ivy
League, Dartmouth College does not offer athletic scholarships. In addition to
the traditional American team sports (football, basketball, baseball, and ice
hockey), Dartmouth competes at the varsity level in many other sports including
track and field, sailing, tennis, rowing, soccer, skiing, and lacrosse. The
College also offers 26 club and intramural sports such as rugby, water polo,
figure skating, boxing, volleyball, ultimate frisbee, and cricket, leading to a
75% participation rate in athletics among the undergraduate student body. The
Dartmouth Men's Rugby Team, founded in 1951, has also been ranked among the
best collegiate teams in that sport over many years. The figure skating team
won the national championship five straight times from 2004 through 2008. In
addition to the academic requirements for graduation, Dartmouth requires every
undergraduate to complete a swim and three terms of physical education.
Technology. Technology plays an important role in student life, as Dartmouth
has been ranked as one of the most technologically advanced colleges in the
world (as in "Newsweek"'s 2004 ranking of "Hottest for the Tech-Savvy" and
Yahoo!'s 1998 "Wired Colleges" list). BlitzMail, the campus e-mail network,
plays a tremendous role in social life, as students tend to use it for
communication in lieu of cellular phones or instant messaging programs. Student
reliance on BlitzMail (known colloquially as "Blitz," which functions as both
noun and verb) is reflected by the presence of about 100 public computer
terminals intended specifically for BlitzMail use. Since 1991, Dartmouth
students have been required to own a personal computer. In 2001, Dartmouth
became the first Ivy League institution to offer entirely ubiquitous wireless
internet access. With over 1,400 access points, the network is available
throughout all College buildings as well as in most public outdoor spaces.
Other technologies being pioneered include College-wide Video-on-Demand and
VoIP rollouts. Native Americans at Dartmouth. It is often pointed out that the
charter of Dartmouth College, granted to Eleazar Wheelock in 1769, proclaims
that the institution was created "for the education and instruction of Youth of
the Indian Tribes in this Land in reading, writing and all parts of Learning
... as well as in all liberal Arts and Sciences; and also of English Youth and
any others." However, Wheelock primarily intended the College to educate white
youth and the few Native students that attended Dartmouth experienced much
difficulty in an institution ostensibly dedicated to their education. The funds
for the Charity School for Native Americans that preceded Dartmouth College
were raised primarily by the efforts of a Native American named Samson Occom,
and at least some of those funds were used to help found the College. The
College graduated only 19 Native Americans during its first two hundred years.
In 1970, the College established Native American academic and social programs
as part of a "new dedication to increasing Native American enrollment." Since
then, Dartmouth has graduated over 700 Native American students from over 200
different tribes, more than the other seven Ivy League universities combined.
Traditions. Dartmouth is well known for its fierce school spirit and many
traditions. The College functions on a quarter system, and one weekend each
term is set aside as a traditional celebratory event, known on campus as "big
weekends" or "party weekends". In the fall term, Homecoming (officially called
Dartmouth Night) is marked by a bonfire on the Green constructed by the
freshman class. Winter term is celebrated by Winter Carnival, a tradition
started in 1911 by the Dartmouth Outing Club to promote winter sports. In the
spring, Green Key is a weekend mostly devoted to campus parties and
celebration. The summer term was formerly marked by Tubestock, an unofficial
tradition in which the students used wooden rafts and inner tubes to float on
the Connecticut River. Begun in 1986, Tubestock met its demise in 2006 when
Hanover town ordinances and a lack of coherent student protest conspired to
defeat the popular tradition. The class of 2008, during their summer term on
campus in 2006, replaced the defunct Tubestock with Fieldstock. This new
celebration includes a barbecue, live music, and the revival of the 1970s and
1980s tradition of racing homemade chariots around the Green. Unlike Tubestock,
Fieldstock is funded and supported by the College. Another longstanding
tradition is four-day, student-run Dartmouth Outing Club trips for incoming
freshmen, begun in 1935. Each trip concludes at the Moosilauke Ravine Lodge. In
2011, over 96% of freshmen elected to participate. Insignia and other
representations. Motto and song. Dartmouth's motto, chosen by Eleazar Wheelock,
is "Vox clamantis in deserto". The Latin motto is literally translated as "The
voice of one crying in the wilderness", but is more often rendered as "A voice
crying in the wilderness", which attempts to translate the synecdoche of the
phrase. The phrase appears five times in the Bible and is a reference to the
college's location on what was once the frontier of European settlement.
Richard Hovey's "Men of Dartmouth" was elected as the best of Dartmouth's songs
in 1896, and became the school's official song in 1926. The song was retitled
to "Alma Mater" in the 1980s when its lyrics were changed to refer to women as
well as men. Seal. On October 28, 1926, the trustees affirmed the charter's
reservation of the seal for official corporate documents alone. The College
Publications Committee commissioned noted typographer W. A. Dwiggins to create
a line drawing version of the seal in 1940 that saw widespread use. Dwiggins'
design was modified during 1957 to change the date from "1770" to "1769," to
accord with the date of the College Charter. The trustees commissioned a new
set of dies with a date of "1769" to replace the old dies, now badly worn after
almost two hundred years of use. The 1957 design continues to be used under
trademark number 2305032. Shield. On October 28, 1926, the Trustees approved a
"Dartmouth College Shield" for general use. Artist and engraver W. Parke
Johnson designed this emblem on the basis of the shield that is depicted at the
center of the original seal. This design does not survive. On June 9, 1944 the
trustees approved another coat of arms based on the shield part of the seal,
this one by Canadian artist and designer Thoreau MacDonald. That design was
used widely and, like Dwiggins' seal, had its date changed from "1770" to
"1769" around 1958. That version continues to be used under trademark
registration number 3112676 and others. College designer John Scotford made a
stylized version of the shield during the 1960s, but it did not see the success
of MacDonald's design. The shield appears to have been used as the basis of the
shield of Dartmouth Medical School, and it has been reproduced in sizes as
small as 20 micrometers across. The design has appeared on Rudolph Ruzicka's
Bicentennial Medal (Philadelphia Mint, 1969) and elsewhere. Nickname, symbol,
and mascot. Dartmouth has never had an official mascot. The nickname "The Big
Green," originating in the 1860s, is based on students' adoption of a shade of
forest green ("Dartmouth Green") as the school's official color in 1866.
Beginning in the 1920s, the Dartmouth College athletic teams were known by
their unofficial nickname "the Indians," a moniker that probably originated
among sports journalists. This unofficial mascot and team name was used until
the early 1970s, when its use came under criticism. In 1974, the Trustees
declared the "use of the symbol in any form to be inconsistent with present
institutional and academic objectives of the College in advancing Native
American education." Some alumni and students, as well as the conservative
student newspaper, "The Dartmouth Review", have sought to return the Indian
symbol to prominence, but no team has worn the symbol on its uniform in
decades. Various student initiatives have been undertaken to adopt a new
mascot, but none has become "official." One proposal devised by the College
humor magazine the "Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern" was Keggy the Keg, an
anthropomorphic beer keg who makes occasional appearances at College sporting
events. Despite student enthusiasm for Keggy, the mascot has only received
approval from the student government. In November 2006, student government
attempted to revive the "Dartmoose" as a potential replacement amid renewed
controversy surrounding the former Indian mascot. Alumni. Dartmouth's alumni
are known for their devotion to the College. Most start by giving to the Senior
Class Gift. According to a 2008 article in "The Wall Street Journal", Dartmouth
graduates also earn higher median salaries at least 10Â years after graduation
than alumni of any other American university surveyed. By 2008, Dartmouth had
graduated 238 classes of students and has over 60,000 living alumni in a
variety of fields. Nelson A. Rockefeller, 41st Vice President of the United
States and 49th Governor of New York, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth with a
degree in economics in 1930. Over 164 Dartmouth graduates have served in the
United States Senate and United States House of Representatives, such as
Massachusetts statesman Daniel Webster. Cabinet members of American presidents
include Attorney General Amos T. Akerman, Secretary of Defense James V.
Forrestal, Secretary of Labor Robert Reich, former Secretary of the Treasury
Henry Paulson, and the current Secretary of the Treasury Timothy Geithner. C.
Everett Koop was the Surgeon General of the United States under President
Ronald Reagan. Two Dartmouth alumni have served as justices on the Supreme
Court of the United States: Salmon P. Chase and Levi Woodbury. Eugene Norman
Veasey (class of 1954) served as the Chief Justice of Delaware. In literature
and journalism, Dartmouth has produced nine Pulitzer Prize winners: Thomas M.
Burton, Richard Eberhart, Robert Frost, Paul Gigot, Jake Hooker, Nigel Jaquiss,
Martin J. Sherwin, David K. Shipler, and Joseph Rago. Other authors and media
personalities include ABC Senior White House correspondent Jake Tapper,
novelist/screenwriter Budd Schulberg, political analyst Dinesh D'Souza, radio
talk show host Laura Ingraham, commentator Mort Kondracke, and journalist James
Panero. Norman Maclean, a former professor at the University of Chicago and
author of "A River Runs Through It and Other Stories", graduated from Dartmouth
in 1924. Theodor Geisel, better known as children's author Dr. Seuss, was a
member of the class of 1925. In the area of religion and theology, Dartmouth
alumni include priests and ministers Ebenezer Porter, Jonathan Clarkson Gibbs,
Caleb Sprague Henry, Arthur Whipple Jenks, Solomon Spalding, and Joseph Tracy;
and rabbis Marshall Meyer, Arnold Resnicoff, and David E. Stern. Hyrum Smith,
brother of Mormon Prophet Joseph Smith also attended the college in his teens.
He was Patriarch of the LDS Church. Dartmouth alumni in academia include Stuart
Kauffman and Jeffrey Weeks, both recipients of MacArthur Fellowships (commonly
called "genius grants"). Dartmouth has also graduated three Nobel Prize
winners: Owen Chamberlain (Physics, 1959), K. Barry Sharpless (Chemistry,
2001), and George Davis Snell (Physiology or Medicine, 1980). Educators include
the current chancellor of the University of California, San Diego Marye Anne
Fox (PhD. in Chemistry, 1974), founding president of Vassar College Milo Parker
Jewett, founder and first president of Bates College Oren B. Cheney, founder
and first president of Kenyon College Philander Chase, first professor of
Wabash College Caleb Mills, and former president of Union College Charles
Augustus Aiken. Nine of Dartmouth's 17 presidents were alumni of the College.
Dartmouth alumni serving as CEOs or company presidents include Charles Alfred
Pillsbury, founder of Pillsbury Company and patriarch of Pillsbury family,
Sandy Alderson (San Diego Padres), John Donahoe (eBay), Louis V. Gerstner, Jr.
(IBM), Charles E. Haldeman (Putnam Investments), Donald J. Hall, Sr. (Hallmark
Cards), Jeffrey R. Immelt (General Electric), Gail Koziara Boudreaux (United
Health Care), Grant Tinker (NBC), and Brian Goldner (Hasbro). In film,
entertainment, and television, Dartmouth is represented by Budd Schulberg,
Academy Award winning screenwriter of "On the Waterfront", Michael Phillips,
who won the Academy Award for best picture as co-producer of "The Sting",
Rachel Dratch, a cast member of "Saturday Night Live", Shonda Rhimes creator of
"Grey's Anatomy, Private Practice and Scandal", film director and producer
Jethro Rothe-Kushel ("The Oscars"), VP of Fox Searchlight, Zola Mashariki,
Chris Meledandri Executive Producer of "Ice Age", "Horton Hears a Who!", and
"Despicable Me", and the titular character of "Mister Rogers' Neighborhood",
Fred Rogers. Other notable film and television figures include Sarah Wayne
Callies ("Prison Break"), Mindy Kaling ("The Office"), Emmy Award winner
Michael Moriarty, Andrew Shue of "Melrose Place", Aisha Tyler of "Friends" and
"24", Dan Rush the director of "Everything Must Go" and Connie Britton of "Spin
City", "The West Wing" and "Friday Night Lights". A number of Dartmouth alumni
have found success in professional sports. In baseball, Dartmouth alumni
include All-Star and three-time Gold Glove winner Brad Ausmus and All-Star Mike
Remlinger. Professional football players include former Miami Dolphins
quarterback Jay Fiedler, linebacker Reggie Williams, three-time Pro Bowler Nick
Lowery, quarterback Jeff Kemp, and Tennessee Titans tight end Casey Cramer.
Dartmouth has also produced a number of Olympic competitors. Adam Nelson has
won silver medals in the shotput in the 2000 Sydney Olympics and the 2004
Athens Olympics to go along with his gold medal in the 2005 World Championships
in Athletics in Helsinki. Kristin King and Sarah Parsons were members of the
United States' 2006 bronze medal-winning ice hockey team. Cherie Piper, Gillian
Apps, and Katie Weatherston were among Canada's ice hockey gold medalists in
2006. Dick Durrance and Tim Caldwell competed for the United States in skiing
in the 1936 and 1976 Winter Olympics, respectively. Arthur Shaw, Earl Thompson,
Edwin Myers, Marc Wright, Adam Nelson, Gerry Ashworth, and VilhjÃ¡lmur
Einarsson have all won medals in track and field events. Former heavyweight
rower Dominic Seiterle is a member of the Canadian national rowing team and won
a gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics in the men's 8+ event. Alumni income.
According to Payscale, Dartmouth College alums have among the highest average
starting salaries ($58,200) in the United States, as well as the second highest
average income ten years after graduation ($123,000), placing after Harvey Mudd
College and tying with Princeton University. Most recently in 2010, Payscale
also ranked Dartmouth first in producing CEOs of for-profit companies, out of
all undergraduate programs at United States universities. In popular culture.
Dartmouth College has appeared in or been referenced by a number of popular
media. Most notably, the 1978 comedy film "National Lampoon's Animal House" was
co-written by Chris Miller '63, and is based loosely on a series of stories he
wrote about his fraternity days at Dartmouth. In a CNN interview, John Landis
said the movie was "based on Chris Miller's real fraternity at Dartmouth",
Alpha Delta Phi. Dartmouth College has been mentioned three times on the FOX
animated sitcom, "The Simpsons", with two of the three occurring on season 11
episodes and associating Dartmouth College with alcoholic consumption. On
"Alone Again, Natura-Diddily", a Christian rock singer named Rachel Jordan
(played by singer-songwriter Shawn Colvin) sings that she "was drinking like a
Dartmouth boy." In "Pygmoelian", during the Duff Days festival, Duffman
introduces the trick-pouring contest by saying that it counts as course credit
at Dartmouth College. Dartmouth's Winter Carnival tradition was the subject of
the 1939 film "Winter Carnival" starring Ann Sheridan and written by Budd
Schulberg '36 and F. Scott Fitzgerald. In the 1969 movie "Goodbye, Columbus",
Richard Benjamin finds out all the men at a party are from Dartmouth. The
Association, a popular rock group at the time, recorded the soundtrack and
performed an instrumental during the scene entitled "Dartmouth? Dartmouth!".
