Deadweight loss In economics, a deadweight loss (also known as excess burden or
allocative inefficiency) is a loss of economic efficiency that can occur when
equilibrium for a good or service is not Pareto optimal. In other words, either
people who would have more marginal benefit than marginal cost are not buying
the product, or people who have more marginal cost than marginal benefit are
buying the product. Causes of deadweight loss can include monopoly pricing (in
the case of artificial scarcity), externalities, taxes or subsidies, and
binding price ceilings or floors (including minimum wages). The term deadweight
loss may also be referred to as the "excess burden" of monopoly or taxation.
Examples. For example, consider a market for nails where the cost of each nail
is 10 cents and the demand will decrease linearly from a high demand for free
nails to zero demand for nails at $1.10. In a perfectly competitive market,
producers would have to charge a price of 10 cents and every customer whose
marginal benefit exceeds 10 cents would have a nail. However if there is one
producer who has a monopoly on the product, then they will charge whatever
price will yield the greatest profit. For this market, the producer would
charge 60 cents and thus exclude every customer who had less than 60 cents of
marginal benefit. The deadweight loss is then the economic benefit foregone by
these customers due to the monopoly pricing. Conversely, deadweight loss can
also come from consumers buying a product even if it costs more than it
benefits them. To describe this, let's use the same nail market, but instead it
will be perfectly competitive, with the government giving a 3 cent subsidy to
every nail produced. This 3 cent subsidy will push the market price of each
nail down to 7 cents. Some consumers then buy nails even though the benefit to
them is less than the real cost of 10 cents. This unneeded expense then creates
the deadweight loss: resources are not being used efficiently. If the price of
a glass of beer is $3.00 and the price of a glass of wine is $3.00, a consumer
might prefer to drink beer. If the government decides to levy a beer tax of
$3.00 per glass, the consumer might prefer to drink wine. The excess burden of
taxation is the loss of utility to the consumer for drinking wine instead of
beer, since everything else remains unchanged. Hicks vs. Marshall. An important
distinction should be made between Hicksian (per John Hicks) and Marshallian
(per Alfred Marshall) deadweight loss. The latter is related to the concept of
consumer surplus, such that it can be shown that the Marshallian deadweight
loss is zero where demand is perfectly elastic or supply is perfectly
inelastic. However, Hicks analyzed the situation through indifference curves
and noted that when the Marshallian Demand Curve exhibits perfect inelasticity,
the policy or economic situation which caused a distortion in relative prices
will have a substitution effect and that this substitution effect is a
deadweight loss. In modern economic literature, the most common measure of a
taxpayerâ€™s loss of a from a distortionary tax, such as a tax on bicycles, is
the equivalent variation. The equivalent variation is the difference between
the amount of money raised by the distortionary and the maximum amount that the
taxpayer would be willing to pay to in a lump sum to avoid the distortionary
tax. However, this is not the only interpretation and Lind & Granqvist (2010)
point out that Pigou did not use a lump sum tax as the point of reference when
discussing deadweight loss (excess burden). External Links. Worthwhile Canadian
Initiative "Too much stuff: the deadweight loss from overconsumption"
