Dead cat bounce In economics, a dead cat bounce is a small, brief recovery in
the price of a declining stock. Derived from the idea that "even a dead cat
will bounce if it falls from a great height", the phrase, which originated on
Wall Street, is also popularly applied to any case where a subject experiences
a brief resurgence during or following a severe decline. History. The term
"dead cat bounce" is derived from the idea that "even a dead cat will bounce if
it falls from a great height." The phrase has been used on Wall Street for many
years. The earliest use of the phrase dates from 1985 when the Singaporean and
Malaysian stock markets bounced back after a hard fall during the recession of
that year. Journalists Horace Brag and Wong Sulong of the "Financial Times"
were reported as saying the market rise was a "dead cat bounce." A similar
expression in Cantonese has an older history and this may be the origin of the
term. Variations and usage. The standard usage of the term is: A short rise in
price of a stock which already suffered a fall. In other instances the term is
used exclusively to refer to securities or stocks that are considered to be of
low value. First, the securities have poor past performance. Second, the
decline is "correct" in that the underlying business is weak (e.g. declining
sales or shaky financials). Along with this, it is doubtful that the security
will recover with better conditions (overall market or economy). Technical
analysis. A "dead cat bounce" price pattern may be considered part of the
technical analysis method of stock trading. Price patterns such as the dead cat
bounce are recognized only with hindsight. Technical analysis describes a dead
cat bounce as a continuation pattern that looks in the beginning like a
reversal pattern. It begins with a downward move followed by a significant
price retracement. The price fails to continue upward and instead falls again
downwards, and surpasses the prior low.
