Declarationism Declarationism is a legal philosophy that incorporates the
United States Declaration of Independence into the body of case law on level
with the United States Constitution. It holds that the Declaration is a natural
law document and so that natural law has a place within American jurisprudence.
Its main proponents include Harry V. Jaffa and other members of the Claremont
Institute. Some proponents claim that Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas is
a follower of this school of thought; however, Thomas is more widely considered
a member of the strict constructionist school. Proponents claim that the
concept is derived from the philosophical structure contained in the
Declaration of Independence and assertion that it was the Declaration that
created the nation, the Constitution creating only the federal government.
According to this view, the authority to create the Constitution derives from
the prior act of nation-creation accomplished by the Declaration. The
Declaration declares that the people have a right to alter or abolish any
government once it becomes destructive of their natural rights. The turn away
from the Articles of Confederation with the ratification of the Constitution
was an action of this sort and so the Constitution's authority exists within
the legal framework established by the Declaration. The Constitution cannot,
then, be interpreted as though it were the foundation of constitutional law, in
the absence of principles derived from the Declaration. Though philosophically
conservative, Declarationists such as Jaffa have been outspoken critics of
originalist construction jurists including Robert Bork, Antonin Scalia, and
William Rehnquist, likening them to legal positivists. Bork and legal scholar
Lino Graglia have, in turn, critiqued the Declarationist position, retorting
that it is single-mindedly obsessive over the Dred Scott decision and resembles
a theology rather than a legal doctrine.
