Deductive reasoning Deductive reasoning, also called deductive logic, is the
process of reasoning from one or more general statements regarding what is
known to reach a logically certain conclusion. Deductive reasoning involves
using given true premises to reach a conclusion that is also true. Deductive
reasoning contrasts with inductive reasoning in that a specific conclusion is
arrived at from a general principle. If the rules and logic of deduction are
followed, this procedure ensures an accurate conclusion. The first premise
states that all objects classified as "men" have the attribute "mortal". The
second premise states that "John" is classified as a "man"Â â€“ a member of the
set "men". The conclusion then states that "John" must be "mortal" because he
inherits this attribute from his classification as a "man". Deductive reasoning
(also known as logical deduction) links premises with conclusions. If both
premises are true, the terms are clear and the rules of deductive logic are
followed, then the conclusion of the argument follows by logical necessity. Law
of Detachment. In deductive reasoning, we can conclude Q from P by using the
law of detachment. However, if the conclusion (Q) is given instead of the
hypothesis (P) then there is no valid conclusion. Since the measurement of
angle A is greater than 90Â°, we can deduce that A is an obtuse angle. Law of
Syllogism. We deduced the final statement by combining the hypothesis of the
first statement with the conclusion of the second statement. We also conclude
that this could be a false statement. Deductive Logic: Validity and Soundness.
Deductive arguments are evaluated in terms of their "validity" and "soundness".
It is possible to have a deductive argument that is logically valid but is not
sound. An argument is valid if it is impossible for its premises to be true
while its conclusion is false. In other words, the conclusion must be true if
the premises, whatever they may be, are true. An argument can be valid even
though the premises are false. An argument is sound if it is valid and the
premises are true. The example's first premise is falseÂ â€“ there are people
who eat steak and are not quarterbacksÂ â€“ but the conclusion must be true, so
long as the premises are true (i.e. it is impossible for the premises to be
true and the conclusion false). Therefore the argument is valid, but not sound.
In this example, the first statement uses categorical reasoning, saying that
all steak-eaters are definitely quarterbacks. This theory of deductive
reasoningÂ â€“ also known as term logicÂ â€“ was developed by Aristotle, but
was superseded by propositional (sentential) logic and predicate logic.
Deductive reasoning can be contrasted with inductive reasoning, in regards to
validity and soundness. In cases of inductive reasoning, even though the
premises are true and the argument is "valid", it is possible for the
conclusion to be false (determined to be false with a counterexample or other
means). Hume's Skepticism. Philosopher David Hume presented grounds to doubt
deduction by questioning induction. Hume's problem of induction starts by
suggesting that the use of even the simplest forms of "induction" simply cannot
be justified by inductive reasoning itself. Moreover, induction cannot be
justified by deduction either. Therefore, induction cannot be justified
rationally. Consequently, if induction is not yet justified, then deduction
seems to be left to rationally justify itselfÂ â€“ an objectionable conclusion
to Hume. Deductive reasoning and Education. Deductive reasoning is generally
thought of as a skill that develops without any formal teaching or training. As
a result of this belief, deductive reasoning skills are not taught in secondary
schools, where students are expected to use reasoning more often and at a
higher level. It is in high school, for example, that students have an abrupt
introduction to mathematical proofsÂ â€“ which rely heavily on deductive
reasoning.
