Deliberative democracy Deliberative democracy or discursive democracy is a form
of democracy in which deliberation is central to decision making. It adopts
elements of both consensus decision-making and majority rule. Deliberative
democracy differs from traditional democratic theory in that authentic
deliberation, not mere voting, is the primary source of legitimacy for the
lawmaking processes. Deliberative democracy is compatible with both
representative democracy and direct democracy. Some practitioners and theorists
use the term to encompass representative bodies whose members authentically
deliberate on legislation without unequal distributions of power, while others
use the term exclusively to refer to decision-making directly by lay citizens,
as in direct democracy. The term "deliberative democracy" was originally coined
by Joseph M. Bessette in his 1980 work "Deliberative Democracy: The Majority
Principle in Republican Government." Overview. Deliberative democracy holds
that, for a democratic decision to be legitimate, it must be preceded by
authentic deliberation, not merely the aggregration of preferences that occurs
in voting. "Authentic deliberation" is deliberation among decision-makers that
is free from distortions of unequal political power, such as power a decision-
maker obtained through economic wealth or the support of interest groups. If
the decision-makers cannot reach consensus after authentically deliberating on
a proposal, then they vote on the proposal using a form of majority rule.
Deliberative democracy can be practiced by decision-makers in both
representative democracies and direct democracies. In "elitist deliberative
democracy," principles of deliberative democracy apply to elite societal
decision-making bodies, such as legislatures and courts; in "populist
deliberative democracy," principles of deliberative democracy apply to groups
of lay citizens who are empowered to make decisions. One purpose of populist
deliberative democracy can be to use deliberation among a group of lay citizens
to distill a more authentic public opinion about societal issues but not
directly create binding law; methods such as the deliberative opinion poll have
been designed to achieve this goal. Another purpose of populist deliberative
democracy can be to serve as a form of direct democracy, where deliberation
among a group of lay citizens forms a "public will" and directly creates
binding law. If political decisions are made by deliberation but not by the
people themselves or their elected representatives, then there is no democratic
element; this deliberative process is called "elite deliberation".
Characteristics. Fishkin's model of deliberation. In Fishkin's definition of
deliberative democracy, lay citizens must participate in the decision-making
process, thus making it a subtype of direct democracy. (1) Informed (and thus
informative). Arguments should be supported by appropriate and reasonably
accurate factual claims. (2) Balanced. Arguments should be met by contrary
arguments. (3) Conscientious. The participants should be willing to talk and
listen, with civility and respect. (4) Substantive. Arguments should be
considered sincerely on their merits, not how they are made of who is making
them. and (5) Comprehensive. All points of view held by significant portions of
the population should receive attention. Cohen's outline. In "Democracy and
Liberty", an essay published in 1998, Cohen reiterated many of these points,
also emphasizing the concept of "reasonable pluralism" â€“ the acceptance of
different, incompatible worldviews and the importance of good faith
deliberative efforts to ensure that as far as possible the holders of these
views can live together on terms acceptable to all. Strengths and weaknesses.
According to proponents such as James Fearon, another strength of deliberative
democratic models is that they tend, more than any other model, to generate
ideal conditions of impartiality, rationality and knowledge of the relevant
facts. The more these conditions are fulfilled, the greater the likelihood that
the decisions reached are morally correct. Deliberative democracy has thus an
"epistemic" value: it allows participants to deduce what is morally correct.
This view has been prominently held by Carlos Nino. Studies by James Fishkin
and others have found that deliberative democracy tends to produce outcomes
which are superior to those in other forms of democracy. Deliberative democracy
produces less partisanship and more sympathy with opposing views; more respect
for evidence based reasoning rather than opinion; a greater commitment to the
decisions taken by those involved; and a greater chance for widely shared
consensus to emerge, thus promoting social cohesion between people from
different backgrounds. Fishkin cites extensive empirical support for the
increase in public spiritedness that is often caused by participation in
deliberation, and says theoretical support can be traced back to foundational
democratic thinkers such as John Stuart Mill and Alexis de Tocqueville. Former
diplomat Carne Ross writes that in 2011 that the debates arising from
deliberative democracy are also much more civil, collaborative, and evidence-
based than the debates in traditional town hall meetings or in internet forums.
For Ross, the key reason for this is that in deliberative democracy citizens
are empowered by knowledge that their debates will have a measurable impact on
society. A claimed failure of most theories of deliberative democracy is that
they do not address the problems of voting. James Fishkin's 1991 work,
"Democracy and Deliberation", introduced a way to apply the theory of
deliberative democracy to real-world decision making, by way of what he calls
the deliberative opinion poll. In the deliberative opinion poll, a
statistically representative sample of the nation or a community is gathered to
discuss an issue in conditions that further deliberation. The group is then
polled, and the results of the poll and the actual deliberation can be used
both as a recommending force and in certain circumstances, to replace a vote.
Dozens of deliberative opinion polls have been conducted across the United
States since his book was published. The political philosopher Charles
Blattberg has criticized deliberative democracy on four grounds: (i) the rules
for deliberation that deliberative theorists affirm interfere with, rather than
facilitate, good practical reasoning; (ii) deliberative democracy is
ideologically biased in favor of liberalism as well as republican over
parliamentary democratic systems; (iii) deliberative democrats assert a too-
sharp division between just and rational deliberation on the one hand and self-
interested and coercive bargaining or negotiation on the other; and (iv)
deliberative democrats encourage an adversarial relationship between state and
society, one that undermines solidarity between citizens. A criticism of
deliberation is that potentially it allows those most skilled in rhetoric to
sway the decision in their favour. This criticism has been made since
deliberative democracy first arose in Ancient Athens. History. Consensus-based
decision making similar to deliberative democracy is characteristic of the
hunter gather band societies thought to predominate in pre-historical times. As
some of these societies became more complex with developments like division of
labour, community-based decision making was displaced by various forms of
authoritarian rule. The first example of democracy arose in Greece as Athenian
democracy during the sixth century BC. Athenian democracy was both
"deliberative" and largely "direct": some decisions were made by
representatives but most were made by the people directly. Athenian democracy
came to an end in 322BC. When democracy was revived as a political system about
2000 years later, decisions were made by representatives rather than directly
by the people. In a sense, this revived version was deliberative from its
beginnings; for example, in 1774 Edmund Burke made a famous speech where he
called Great Britain's parliament a deliberative assembly. Similarly, the
Founding Fathers of the United States considered deliberation an essential part
of the government they created in the late 18th century. The deliberative
element of democracy was not widely studied by academics until the late 20th
century. Although some of the seminal work was done in the 1970s and 80s, it
was only in 1990 that deliberative democracy began to attract substantial
attention from political scientists. According to Professor John Dryzek, early
work on Deliberative Democracy was part of efforts to develop a theory of
Democratic legitimacy. In the US one of the results was calls to make
traditional representative democracy more deliberative, though efforts in this
area are not widely considered to have been successful, with the 2010 Supreme
Court Judement allowing an enhanced role for money in US politics at the
exspense of deliberation. A different and more fruitful result has come from
efforts to revive direct deliberative democracy by promoting projects where lay
citizens participate in political decision-making. Theorists such as Carne Ross
advocate deliberative democracy as a complete alternative to representative
democracy. The more common view, held by contributors such as James Fishkin, is
that direct deliberative democracy can be complementary to traditional
representative democracy. Since 1994, hundreds of implementations of direct
deliberative democracy have taken place throughout the world. For example, lay
citizens have used deliberative democracy to determine local budget allocations
in various cities and to undertake major public projects, such as the
rebuilding of New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. Association with political
movements. Deliberative democracy recognizes a conflict of interest between the
citizen participating, those affected or victimized by the process being
undertaken, and the group-entity that organizes the decision. Thus it usually
involves an extensive outreach effort to include marginalized, isolated,
ignored groups in decisions, and to extensively document dissent, grounds for
dissent, and future predictions of consequences of actions. It focuses as much
on the process as the results. In this form it is a complete theory of civics.
On the other hand, many practitioners of deliberative democracy attempt to be
as neutral and open-ended as possible, inviting (or even randomly selecting)
people who represent a wide range of views and providing them with balanced
materials to guide their discussions. Examples include National Issues Forums,
Choices for the 21st Century, study circles, deliberative opinion polls, and
the 21st-century town meetings convened by AmericaSpeaks, among others. In
these cases, deliberative democracy is not connected to left-wing politics but
is intended to create a conversation among people of different philosophies and
beliefs. In Canada, there have been two prominent applications of deliberative
democratic models. In 2004, the British Columbia Citizensâ€™ Assembly on
Electoral Reform convened a policy jury to consider alternatives to the first-
past-the-post electoral systems. In 2007, the Ontario Citizensâ€™ Assembly on
Electoral Reform convened to consider alternative electoral systems in that
province. Similarly, three of Ontarioâ€™s Local Health Integration Networks
(LHIN) have referred their budget priorities to a policy jury for advice and
refinement. The Green Party of the United States refers to its particular
proposals for grassroots democracy and electoral reform by this name. Although
not always the case, participation in deliberation has often been found to
shift participants opinions in favour of Green positions, and can even cause a
favourable change of voting intention. For example with "Europolis" 2009, at
the time one of the largest deliberative assemblies ever held, which set out to
assess the publics view on a wide range of issues and included representatives
from all 27 EU member nations, the share of citizens intending to vote for the
Greens increased from 8% to 18%. Academic contributors. According to Professor
Stephen Tierney, perhaps the earliest notable example of academic interest in
the deliberative aspects of democracy occurred in John Rawls 1971 work A Theory
of Justice. Joseph M. Bessette coined the term "deliberative democracy" in his
1980 work "Deliberative Democracy: The Majority Principle in Republican
Government", and went on to elaborate and defend the notion in "The Mild Voice
of Reason" (1994). Others contributing to the notion of deliberative democracy
include David A. Crocker, Jon Elster, JÃ¼rgen Habermas, David Held, Joshua
Cohen, John Rawls, Amy Gutmann, NoÃ«lle McAfee, John Dryzek, Rense Bos, James
S. Fishkin, Jane Mansbridge, Dennis Thompson, Benny Hjern, Hal Koch, Seyla
Benhabib, Ethan Leib, Jeffrey K. Tulis David Estlund and Robert B. Talisse.
Although political theorists took the lead in the study of deliberative
democracy, political scientists have in recent years begun to investigate its
processes. One of the main challenges currently is to discover more about the
actual conditions under which the ideals of deliberative democracy are more or
less likely to be realized.
