Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee The Democratic Socialist Organizing
Committee (DSOC) was founded in 1973 by Michael Harrington, who had led a
minority caucus in the Socialist Party of America. Harrington's caucus
supported George McGovern's call for a cease-fire and immediate withdrawal of
U.S. forces from Vietnam. In contrast to the traditional emphasis on
strengthening the working class by organizing labor unions, Harrington reduced
the emphasis on labor of previous socialist organizations. Instead, while
continuing to work with unionists, Harrington placed more emphasis on middle-
class political activists, especially those drawn to activism through the
McGovern campaign. Developing a "realignment" strategy common to Socialists
since the 1960s, DSOC (pronounced "DEE-sock") tried to help to build a
democratic-socialist ("democratic left") movement from the political movements
participating in the Democratic Party. In 1982 the DSOC merged with the New
American Movement to form the Democratic Socialists of America. Organizational
history. Origins. After nearly a decade of internal acrimony, the Socialist
Party of America-Social Democratic Federation was clearly headed for a split as
the decade of the 1970s opened. The organization, while sharing a common
antipathy to the worldwide communist movement, was divided over two primary
issues 1972 Convention of the Socialist Party. In its 1972 Convention, the
Socialist Party had two Co-Chairmen, Bayard Rustin and CharlesÂ S. Zimmerman
(of the International Ladies GarmentÂ Workers' Union, ILGWU) and a First
National Vice Chairman, JamesÂ S. Glaser, who were re-elected by acclamation.
In his opening speech to the Convention, Co-Chairman Bayard Rustin called for
SDUSA to organize against the "reactionary policies of the Nixon
Administration"; Rustin also criticized the "irresponsibility and Ã©litism of
the 'New Politics' liberals". The Party changed its name to "Social
Democrats,Â USA" by a vote of 73 toÂ 34. Renaming the Party as SDUSA was meant
to be "realistic". "The New York Times" observed that the Socialist Party had
last sponsored a candidate for President in 1956, who received only 2,121
votes, which were cast in only 6 states. Because the Party no longer sponsored
candidates in Presidential Elections, the name "Party" had been "misleading";
"Party" had hindered the recruiting of activists who participated in the
Democratic Party, according the majority report. The name "Socialist" was
replaced by "Social Democrats" because many American associated the word
"socialism" with Soviet communism. Also, the Party wished to distinguish itself
from two small Marxist parties, the Socialist Workers Party and the Socialist
Labor Party. During the convention, the majority ("unity Caucus") won every
vote, by a ratio of two to one. The Convention elected a national committee of
33 members, with 22 seats for the majority caucus, 8 seats for the "coalition
caucus" of Michael Harrington, 2 for "a Debs caucus", and one for the
"independent" SamuelÂ H. Friedman. Friedman and the minority caucuses had
opposed the name change. The convention voted on and adopted proposals for its
program by a two-one vote. On foreign policy, the program called for "firmness
toward Communist aggression". However, on the Vietnam War, the program opposed
"any efforts to bomb Hanoi into submission"; instead, it endorsed negotiating a
peace agreement, which should protect Communist political cadres in South
Vietnam from further military or police reprisals. Harrington's proposal for a
ceasefire and immediate withdrawal of U.S. forces was defeated. Harrington
complained that, after its convention, the Socialist Party had endorsed George
McGovern only with a statement loaded with "constructive criticism" and that it
had not mobilized enough support for McGovern. The majority caucus's Arch
Puddington replied that the California branch was especially active in
supporting McGovern, while the New York branch were focusing on a congressional
race. Harrington founds DSOC. Harrington, "Fragments of the Century," pp. 212-
213. Harrington's caucus in the Socialist Party endorsed the "New Politics"
movement and sought to expand that tendency into a viable left-wing pressure-
group within the Democratic Party, advancing an explicitly socialist agenda and
attempting to win influence over elected officials for that program. Harrington
led many members of this caucus and from his networks to establish the
Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee (DSOC) in 1973. The writer Michael
Harrington, a former editor of the Socialist Party's weekly newspaper, "New
America," was the most important figure in the establishment of DSOC.
Harrington had resigned as National Co-Chairman of the Socialist Party, many of
whose leaders criticized McGovern, when Harrington focused his efforts on
electing McGovern in October 1972. "But in their derogatory comparison of this
movement with the trade unionists, my comrades failed to notice two of its
historic aspects. First, the anti-war young were right: Vietnam was not only an
immoral conflict, it was counterproductive from all points of view, including
that of progressive anti-communism. Secondly, the new strata of the issue-
oriented and college-educated who provided the mass bass for this phenomenon
were, and are, extremely important to the creation of a new majority for change
in this country." And so DSOC was founded. At its start, DSOC had 840 members,
of which 2 percent served on its national board; approximately 200 had
previously had membership in SocialÂ Democrats,Â USA or its predecessors in
1973 when SDUSA stated its membership at 1,800, according to a 1973 profile of
Harrington. Publications. "Liberalism is in transition. Important ideologists
announce their 'deradicalization.' * * * "On the other wing, many trade
unionists and middle-class liberals have become aware of the need for
structural change in our society. In the McGovern campaign, for instance, the
frankly redistributionist principle that revenue should be raised by levies on
unearned incomes was a major step forward. "On the campus there is a decline of
activism, a revival of private concerns. The New Left is dead. But a large and
serious constituency of the Left remains, even if unorganized and uncertain. If
presented with a clear and reasoned perspective for basic change, it might be
won to a lifetime commitment, even in the Nixon years; if not, it could vanish.
* * * "The Left, more than ever before, needs thought, self-criticism, candor,
and communication. We hope this "Newsletter" will make a modest contribution to
that end." "Democratic Left" continues today as the publication of DSA, the
organizational successor to DSOC. The organization also published a number of
issues of an internal discussion bulletin, containing typewritten content
submitted by its members about various issues of concern. Formal establishment.
The June 1973 issue of "Newsletter of the Democratic Left," the fourth monthly
magazine off the press, announced to its subscribers that the never-before-
mentioned "National Board" of the "Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee"
had issued a call for the launch of "a new, nationwide socialist organization."
The founding convention of DSOC was initially slated to begin on October 12,
1973, in New York City. For the first time, membership dues were solicited,
with rates of $3.50 for Students and $7.00 for Regular membership accepted
until January 1, 1974. The Founding Convention was to be a three day long
affair, beginning at 8 pm at the Eisner and Lubin Auditorium of New York
University. The convention was not composed of elected delegates, but was
rather open to a general admission, and about 500 people were in attendance.
The keynote speaker chosen by the organizers of DSOC to address this gathering
was David Lewis, one of the key architects of the New Democratic Party, the
social democratic parliamentary opposition party of Canada. The following day,
October 13, the convention moved to the McAlpin Hotel, located at the corner of
Broadway and 34th Street in New York City and began in earnest. Harrington
delivered an address to those attending the gathering, which was undelegated
and open to all desiring to attend from the general public, and then the
attendees broke up into various small workshops. Small group subjects included
"the unions," "feminism," "racial equality," "Democratic Party," "equality,"
and "detente." Workshop chairs were appointed in advance and included Michael
Walzer, Bogdan Denitch, Christopher Lasch, and others. A panel discussion on
"Socialism and the Welfare State" was also held, featuring prominently
Harrington's close political associate, the historian and magazine editor
Irving Howe, an individual who would become one of the organization's leading
faces. The final day saw the election of a governing National Board and
ratification of a constitution for the new organization. Membership size and
structure. According to the group's founder, Michael Harrington, DSOC began
with a core of about 250 members. The group's first paid staffer was Jack
Clark, a 23 year old from Boston who received $50 a month and use of a spare
bed in the home of Debbie Meier, herself a second generation socialist and
important figure in the DSOC inner circle. Meier's home served as the group's
base of operations up to the October 1973 convention, at which time DSOC rented
a tiny basement office. Ideology and strategy. "In 1968, the Center-Right of
Nixon and Wallace received almost 58% of the votes; in 1972, in a two-way race,
Nixon got over 61%. In 1968, the American unions were a major, and sometimes
sole, force behind Hubert Humphrey, proving that the organized workers are the
most cohesive element that can be mobilized for social change. But the '68
election also proved that labor by itself cannot come close to winning... In
1968 many McCarthyites did not understand that Humphrey was infinitely
preferable to Nixon; in 1972, the Meanyites did not understand that McGovern
was infinitely preferable to Nixon. "If this split continues, the Republicans
will hold the Presidency for the foreseeable future. Therefore, the only way to
build a new majority for social change is for labor and the new politics to
come together." DSOC proposed winning power through the tactic of "realignment"
â uniting of forces within the Democratic Party around a democratic-socialist
program. Its members ran for political office almost always within the
Democratic Party. In addition, DSOC publicized and promoted the individual
efforts of its dues payers and supporters, many of whom wer active in labor
unions or other political organizations. There were members of DSOC who were
elected to the Congress (Berkley, California Rep. Ron Dellums) and the New York
City Council (Ruth Messinger). DSOC had public support from union leaders as
Victor Reuther of the United Auto Workers, William W. Winpisinger of the
International Association of Machinists, and various officials of the
Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America. From DSOC to the Democratic Socialists
of America (DSA). DSOC ceased to exist in 1982 when it merged with the New
American Movement (NAM) to form the Democratic Socialists of America (DSA).
Discussions with representatives of NAM, a successor organization to Students
for a Democratic Society, began as early as 1977. The move was favored by
DSOC's left wing, led by historian Jim Chapin, which sought to bring into DSOC
many former participants in the New Left of the 1960s who were in search of a
new home. DSOC formally endorsed the idea of merger with NAM at its 1979
Houston convention. The proposal for merger generated vocal opposition,
however. Forces on the organization's right wing, led by Howe and calling
themselves the Committee Against the NAM Merger (CATNAM), urged that instead of
courting New Left survivors that DSOC should instead continue to place its
emphasis on outreach to larger forces in the labor movement and the Democratic
Party. In addition to noting NAM's deep distrust of the Democratic Party, many
adherents of CATNAM had grave misgivings about NAM's position towards Israel,
with DSOC maintaining belief in a two state solution in the Middle East,
guaranteeing the existence of Israel, while many in NAM saw the Palestine
Liberation Organization as engaged in an anti-colonial liberation struggle.
Ultimately a careful statement was worked out on the Middle East based upon a
two-state solution and merger talks moved forward. The 1981 DSOC national
convention was marked by a very heated debate on the question of merger with
NAM, which was ultimately resolved by a vote of approximately 80% of the
delegates in favor, none against, with the 20% or so supporting the CATNAM
position abstaining. "Our opponents wanted to indicate they were unhappy â
and that they were staying," Harrington later noted. The unity convention
joining NAM and DSOC was held in Detroit in 1982, and the Democratic Socialists
of America was thereby established. The gathering was addressed by George
Crockett, a member of the Congressional Black Caucus in the U.S. House of
Representatives, with Harrington delivering the keynote address. The new
organization claimed a membership of 6,000 at the time of its formation.
