Democratic transhumanism Democratic transhumanism, a term coined by Dr. James
Hughes in 2002, refers to the stance of transhumanists (advocates for the
development and use of human enhancement technologies) who espouse liberal,
social and/or radical democratic political views. According to Hughes, the
ideology "stems from the assertion that human beings will generally be happier
when they take rational control of the natural and social forces that control
their lives." The ethical foundation of democratic transhumanism rests upon
rule utilitarianism and non-anthropocentric personhood theory. While raising
objections both to right-wing and left-wing bioconservatism, and libertarian
transhumanism, Hughes aims to encourage democratic transhumanists and their
potential progressive allies to unite as a new social movement and influence
biopolitical public policy. An attempt to expand the middle ground between
technorealism and techno-utopianism, democratic transhumanism can be seen as a
radical form of techno-progressivism. Appearing several times in Hughes' work,
the term "radical" (from Latin "r훮d카x, r훮d카c-", root) is used as an
adjective meaning "of or pertaining to the root" or "going to the root". His
central thesis is that emerging technologies and radical democracy can help
citizens overcome some of the "root causes" of inequalities of power.
Criticism. Science journalist Ronald Bailey wrote a review of "Citizen Cyborg"
in his online column for "Reason" magazine in which he offered a critique of
democratic transhumanism and a defense of libertarian transhumanism. Critical
theorist Dale Carrico defended democratic transhumanism from Bailey's
criticism. However, he would later criticize democratic transhumanism himself
on technoprogressive grounds.
