Democratic Socialists of America Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) is a
democratic socialist and social-democratic organization in the United States
and the U.S. affiliate of the Socialist International, an international
federation of social-democratic, democratic socialist and labor political
parties and organizations. DSA was formed in 1982 by a merger of the Democratic
Socialist Organizing Committee (DSOC) and the New American Movement (NAM).
Under the leadership of Michael Harrington, DSOC had become America's largest
democratic socialist organization, despite having started, in Harrington's
words, as "the remnant of a remnant"â€”with Harrington having been the leader
of a minority caucus of the Socialist Party of America in 1972. At that time
the SPA split three ways, The left group remained with the Socialist Party, the
center group would become the Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee and the
right group would become the Social Democrats,Â USA (SDUSA).. NAM was a
coalition of writers and intellectuals with roots in both the New Left
movements of the 1960s and the former members of socialist and communist
parties of the Old Left. Initially the DSA consisted of approximately 5,000 ex-
DSOC members and 1,000 ex-NAM members. Upon the DSA's founding, Michael
Harrington and socialist-feminist author Barbara Ehrenreich were elected as co-
chairs of the organization. According to Maria Svart, then national director of
the DSA, the group has its roots in the Socialist Party of Eugene Debs and
Norman Thomas. However, others argue that the DSA's strategy of primarily
working within the Democratic Party has been unsuccessful. Organizational
history. The DSA was formed in 1982 after a merger between the Democratic
Socialist Organizing Committee (DSOC) and the New American Movement (NAM). At
the time of the merger of these two organizations, the DSA was said to consist
of approximately 5,000 former members of DSOC, along with 1,000 from NAM. At
its start, DSOC had 840 members, of which 2 percent served on its national
board; approximately 200 had previously had membership in
SocialÂ Democrats,Â USA or its predecessors in 1973 when SDUSA stated its
membership at 1,800, according to a 1973 profile of Harrington. In electoral
politics, DSA, like DSOC before it, was very strongly associated with Michael
Harrington's position that "the left wing of realism is found today in the
Democratic Party." In its early years DSA opposed Republican presidential
candidates by giving critical support to DemocraticÂ Party nominees like Walter
Mondale in 1984. In 1988, DSA enthusiastically supported Jackson's second
presidential campaign. DSA's position on US electoral politics states that
"democratic socialists reject an eitherâ€“or approach to electoralÂ coalition
building, focused solely on a new party or on realignment within the Democratic
Party." During the 1990s, DSA gave the Clinton administration an overall rating
of C-, "less than satisfactory." The DSA's leadership believes working within
the Democratic Party is necessary because of the nature of the American
political system, which rarely gives third parties a chance politically. That
said, DSA is very critical of the corporate-funded Democratic Party leadership.
The organization believes that "Where We Stand â€” The Political Perspective of
the Democratic Socialists of America." dsausa.org Retrieved November 3, 2008.
Electoral positions. In 2000, DSA took no official position on the presidential
election, with several prominent DSA members backing Green Party presidential
candidate Ralph Nader. "DSA PAC Statement on Kerry Campaign," "Democratic
Left," vol. 32, no. 4 (Fall 2004), pg. 8. The only resolution on upcoming
elections at the DSA's 2005 convention focused on Bernie Sanders' independent
campaign for the U.S. Senate. The organization's 2007 convention in Atlanta,
Georgia featured record-breaking attendance and more participation by the
organization's youth wing. The convention was highlighted by a keynote address
from Senator Sanders. In 2008, the DSA supported Democratic presidential
candidate Barack Obama in his race against Republican candidate John McCain.
Following Obama's election, many on the right, began to allege that the
policies of his administration may be "socialistic," a claim rejected by DSA
and the Obama administration alike. The widespread use of the word "socialism"
as a political epithet against the Obama government by its opponents caused
National Director Frank Llewellyn to declare that "over the past 12 months, the
Democratic Socialists of America has received more media attention than it has
over the past 12 years." Membership size. Membership in DSA is obtained through
the payment of annual dues, which in 2010 range from a "low income and student"
rate of $20 to a "sustainer" rate of $130, with a basic rate of $45. Every
member receives a paid subscription to the organization's quarterly newsletter,
"Democratic Left" (commonly known as "DL"). The organization also offers
"family memberships" at the rate of $80, which include only one subscription to
"DL," and sells subscriptions to the publication to non-members for $10 per
year. When formed, the estimated membership was 5,000, after the merger with
the Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee (DSOC), the membership had grown
to an estimate 7,000 in 1987. In 2002, Fox News claimed there were 8,000
members in the organization, and three years later the DSA announced on its
website that its membership had increased by some 13% since July 2003 as the
result of a recent direct mail campaign. DSA does not release annual membership
numbers, nor do officials of the organization state them with precision in the
press. It does, however, publish annually its sworn declaration of "Statement
of Ownership, Management, and Circulation" in its official magazine so as to
qualify for subsidized postage rates from the United States Postal Service. In
the 12 months previous to its 2009 declaration, the group indicates that
"Democratic Left" had an average "Total Paid Distribution" of 5707 copies.
Structure. DSA is organized at the local level, and works with labor unions,
community organizations, and campus activists on issues of common interest.
Nationwide campaigns are coordinated by the organization's national office in
New York City. , the DSA website lists 24 chartered locals. Governance of the
DSA is by the group's National Political Committee, which, since 2001, has been
a 16-person body. The organization's constitution states that at least eight of
the NPC's members shall be women and at least four members of "racial or
national" minority groups. A seventeenth vote is cast by the representative of
the DSA's youth affiliate, the Young Democratic Socialists, who elect one male
and one female delegate who split the vote. The NPC meets four times a year.
The NPC elects an inner committee of six, including five of its own members and
one representative of the youth section, called the "Steering Committee." At
least two of these are constitutionally required to be women and at least one a
"person of color," with the National Director and the Youth Section Organizer
also participating as ex-officio members. This Steering Committee meets
bimonthly, either in person or by conference call. The DSA has a Religion and
Socialism Commission, in which Cornel West has played a leading role. John Cort
was a founding editor of the Commission's magazine, "Religious Socialism". DSA
publishes "Democratic Left", a quarterly newsletter of news and analysis. This
publication continues in an uninterrupted run from the original "Newsletter of
the Democratic Left" published by DSA forerunner the Democratic Socialist
Organizing Committee since its establishment in 1973. In 2008, DSA members
active in the U.S. labor movement founded "Talking Union", a blog that focuses
on labor politics, working class struggles and strategies. Young Democratic
Socialists (YDS) is the official youth section of Democratic Socialists of
America. The YDS publishes a quarterly newsletter called "The Red Letter" and
maintains an online blog called "The Activist". Ideology. The DSA's ideas are
greatly influenced by those of writer Michael Harrington, Chairman of the
League for Industrial Democracy (1964) and member of the National Executive
Board of the Socialist Party of America (1960â€“68). Opposed to capitalism and
communism alike as cruel and anti-libertarian social systems, Harrington
advocated working for a realignment of the U.S. Democratic Party, away from an
amorphous amalgam of often contradictory ideas towards making it a principled
party of the left. "Put it this way. Marx was a democrat with a small d. The
Democratic Socialists envision a humane social order based on popular control
of resources and production, economic planning...and racial equality. I share
an immediate program with liberals in this country because the best liberalism
leads toward socialism... I want to be on the left wing of the possible."
Harrington made it clear that, even if the traditional Marxist vision of a
marketless, stateless society was not possible, he did not understand why this
needed to "result in the social consequence of some people eating while others
starve." "The aim of democrats and socialists should be...to help the chances
of successful reform in the Soviet bloc... While supporting liberalization and
economic reforms from above, socialists should be particularly active in
contacting and encouraging the tender shoots of democracy from below". Today,
the organization issues few statements about overriding principles while
frequently commenting on matters of public policy. One primary leaflet
detailing the group's official ideas, "What is Democratic Socialism? Questions
and Answers from the Democratic Socialists of America," states that while "no
country has fully instituted democratic socialism," nonetheless there are
lessons to be learned from "the comprehensive welfare state maintained by the
Swedes, from Canadaâ€™s national health care system, Franceâ€™s nationwide
childcare program, and Nicaraguaâ€™s literacy programs". The "tremendous
prosperity and relative economic equality" established by the Social Democratic
Parties of the countries of Scandinavia and Western Europe is lauded.
