Democratic socialism Democratic socialism is a variant of socialism that
rejects centralized, elitist or authoritarian means of transitioning from
capitalism to socialism. Democratic socialism advocates for the immediate
creation of decentralised economic democracy from the grassroots level,
undertaken by and for the working class itself. The term is often used by
socialists who favour spontaneous revolution from below or gradualist reformism
over organised revolutionary socialism, in effort to distinguish themselves
from Leninist socialists, who seek to organise a revolutionary movement by a
vanguard party based on principles of democratic centralism. Democratic
socialists endorse a post-capitalist, socialist economic system as an
alternative to capitalism. Some democratic socialists advocate market socialism
based on workplace self-management, while others support a non-market system
based on decentralized-participatory planning. Many contemporary democratic
socialists reject centralized planning as a basis for democratic socialism.
Definition. Democratic socialism is difficult to define, and groups of scholars
have radically different definitions for the term. Some definitions simply
refer to all forms of socialism that follow an electoral, reformist or
evolutionary path to socialism, rather than a revolutionary one. Often, this
definition is invoked to distinguish democratic socialism from Stalinist
socialism, as in Donald Busky's "Democratic Socialism: A Global Survey", Jim
Tomlinson's "Democratic Socialism and Economic Policy: The Attlee Years, 1945-
1951", Norman Thomas "Democratic Socialism: a new appraisal" or Roy
Hattersley's "Choose Freedom: The Future of Democratic Socialism". Robert M
Page, "Without a Song in their Heart: New Labour, the Welfare State and the
Retreat from Democratic Socialism," "Jnl Soc. Pol.", 36, 1, 19â€“37 2007.
Indeed, some proponents of market socialism see the latter as a form of
democratic socialism. A variant of this set of definitions is Joseph
Schumpeter's argument, set out in "Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy" (1941),
that liberal democracies were evolving from "liberal capitalism" into
democratic socialism, with the growth of workers' self-management, industrial
democracy and regulatory institutions. In contrast, other definitions of
democratic socialism sharply distinguish it from social democracy. For example,
Peter Hain classifies democratic socialism, along with libertarian socialism,
as a form of anti-authoritarian "socialism from below" (using the term
popularised by Hal Draper), in contrast to Stalinism and social democracy,
variants of authoritarian state socialism. For Hain, this democratic/
authoritarian divide is more important than the revolutionary/reformist divide.
In this definition, it is the active participation of the population as a
whole, and workers in particular, in the management of economy that
characterises democratic socialism, while nationalisation and economic planning
(whether controlled by an elected government or not) are characteristic of
state socialism. A similar, but more complex, argument is made by Nicos
Poulantzas. Draper himself uses the term "revolutionary-democratic socialism"
as a type of socialism from below in his "The Two Souls of Socialism". He
writes: "the leading spokesman in the Second International of a revolutionary-
democratic Socialism-from-Below Rosa Luxemburg, who so emphatically put her
faith and hope in the spontaneous struggle of a free working class that the
myth-makers invented for her a 'theory of spontaneity. Similarly, about Eugene
Debs, he writes: Debsian socialism' evoked a tremendous response from the heart
of the people, but Debs had no successor as a tribune of revolutionary-
democratic socialism." Other definitions fall between the first and second set,
seeing democratic socialism as a specific political tradition closely related
to and overlapping with social democracy. For example, Bogdan Denitch, in
"Democratic Socialism", defines it as proposing a radical reorganization of the
socio-economic order through public ownership, workers' control of the labor
process and redistributive tax policies. Robert G. Picard similarly describes a
democratic socialist tradition of thought including Eduard Bernstein, Karl
Kautsky, Evan Durbin and Michael Harrington. The term "democratic socialism"
can be used in a third way, to refer to a version of the Soviet model that was
reformed in a democratic way. For example, Mikhail Gorbachev described
perestroika as building a "new, humane and democratic socialism." Consequently,
some former Communist parties have rebranded themselves as democratic
socialist, as with the Party of Democratic Socialism in Germany. Justification
of democratic socialism can be found in the works of social philosophers like
Charles Taylor and Axel Honneth, among others. Honneth has put forward the view
that political and economic ideologies have a social basis, that is, they
originate from intersubjective communication between members of a society.
Honneth criticises the liberal state because it assumes that principles of
individual liberty and private property are ahistorical and abstract, when, in
fact, they evolved from a specific social discourse on human activity. Contra
liberal individualism, Honneth has emphasised the inter-subjective dependence
between humans; that is, our well-being depends on recognising others and being
recognised by them. Democratic socialism, with its emphasis on social
collectivism, could be seen as a way of safeguarding this dependency. In recent
years, some have suggested replacing "democratic" with "participatory" upon
seeing the reduction of the former to parliamentarism. History. Forerunners and
formative influences. Quoted in Peter Hain "Ayes to the Left" Lawrence and
Wishart, p.12. The tradition of the Diggers and the Levellers was continued in
the period described by EP Thompson in "The Making of the English Working
Class" by Jacobin groups like the London Corresponding Society and by
polemicists such as Thomas Paine. Their concern for both democracy and social
justice marks them out as key precursors of democratic socialism. The term
"socialist" was first used in English in the British "Cooperative Magazine" in
1827 and came to be associated with the followers of the Welsh reformer Robert
Owen, such as the Rochdale Pioneers who founded the co-operative movement.
Owen's followers again stressed both participatory democracy and economic
socialisation, in the form of consumer co-operatives, credit unions and mutual
aid societies. The Chartists similarly combined a working class politics with a
call for greater democracy. Many countries have this. The British moral
philosopher John Stuart Mill also came to advocate a form of economic socialism
within a liberal context. In later editions of his "Principles of Political
Economy" (1848), Mill would argue that "as far as economic theory was
concerned, there is nothing in principle in economic theory that precludes an
economic order based on socialist policies." In North America, Henry George
promoted the Single Tax Movement, which sought a form of democratic socialism
via progressive taxation, with tax only on natural resources. George remained
an advocate of the free market for the allocation of all other goods and
services. Modern democratic socialism. Democratic socialism became a prominent
movement at the end of the 19th century. In Australia, the Labour and Socialist
movements were gaining traction and the Australian Labor Party (ALP) was formed
in Barcaldine, Queensland in 1891 by striking pastoral workers. A minority
government led by the party was formed in Queensland in 1899 with Anderson
Dawson as the Premier of Queensland where it was founded and was in power for
one week, the world's first democratic socialist party led government. The ALP
has been the main driving force for workers' rights in Australia, backed by
Australian Trade Unions, in particular the Australian Workers Union. Since the
Whitlam Government, the ALP has moved towards Social Democratic and Third Way
ideals which are found among many of the ALP's Right Faction members.
Democratic Socialist, Christian Socialist, Libertarian Marxist and Agrarian
Socialist ideologies lie within Labor's Left Faction. In the US, Eugene V.
Debs, one of the most famous American socialists, led a movement centered
around democratic socialism and made five bids for President, once in 1900 as
candidate of the Social Democratic Party and then four more times on the ticket
of the Socialist Party of America. The socialist industrial unionism of Daniel
DeLeon in the United States represented another strain of early democratic
socialism in this period. It favored a form of government based on industrial
unions, but which also sought to establish this government after winning at the
ballot box. The tradition continued to flourish in the Socialist Party of
America, especially under the leadership of Norman Thomas. Senator Bernie
Sanders from Vermont is a self-described democratic socialist, and is the only
self-described socialist to ever be elected to the United States Senate. In
Britain, the democratic socialist tradition was represented in particular by
the William Morris' Socialist League, and in the 1880s by the Fabian Society,
and later the Independent Labour Party (ILP) founded by Keir Hardie in the
1890s, of which George Orwell would later be a prominent member. In the early
1920s, the guild socialism of G. D. H. Cole attempted to envision a socialist
alternative to Soviet-style authoritarianism, while council communism
articulated democratic socialist positions in several respects, notably through
renouncing the vanguard role of the revolutionary party and holding that the
system of the Soviet Union was not authentically socialist. In other parts of
Europe, many democratic socialist parties were united in the International
Working Union of Socialist Parties (the "Two and a Half International") in the
early 1920s and in the London Bureau (the "Three and a Half International") in
the 1930s. These internationals sought to steer a course between the social
democrats of the Second International, who were seen as insufficiently
socialist (and had been compromised by their support for World War I), and the
perceived anti-democratic Third International. The key movements within the Two
and a Half International were the ILP and the Austromarxists, and the main
forces in the Three and a Half International were the ILP and the Workers'
Party of Marxist Unification (POUM) of Spain. In Italy, the Italian Democratic
Socialist Party broke away from the Italian Socialist Party in 1947, when this
latter joined the Soviet-funded Italian Communist Party to prepare the decisive
general election of 1948. Despite remaining a minor party in Italian Parliament
for fifty years, its leader Giuseppe Saragat became President of Italy in 1964.
During India's freedom movement, many figures on the left of the Indian
National Congress organized themselves as the Congress Socialist Party. Their
politics, and those of the early and intermediate periods of Jayaprakash
Narayan's career, combined a commitment to the socialist transformation of
society with a principled opposition to the one-party authoritarianism they
perceived in the Stalinist revolutionary model. This political current
continued in the Praja Socialist Party, the later Janata Party and the current
Samajwadi Party. In Pakistan, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto introduced the concept of
democratic socialism, and the Pakistan Peoples Party remained one of the
prominent supporter for the socialist democratic policies in the country.
Pakistan Socialist Party and Pakistan Social Democratic Party, together with
PPP, committed to the socialist transformations and reforms with an opposition
to one-party dictatorship and authoritarianism. In the Middle East, the biggest
democratic socialist party is the Organization of Iranian People's Fedaian
(Majority). The "folkesocialisme" or people's socialism that emerged as a vital
current of the left in Scandinavia beginning in the 1950s could be
characterized as a democratic socialism in the same vein. Former Swedish prime
minister Olof Palme is an important proponent of democratic socialism.
