Diaspora politics Diaspora politics is the political behavior of transnational
ethnic diasporas, their relationship with their ethnic homelands and their host
states, as well as their prominent role in ethnic conflicts. The study of
diaspora politics is part of the broader field of diaspora studies. To
understand a diaspora's politics, one must first understand its historical
context and attachments: A diaspora is a transnational community that defined
itself as a singular ethnic group based upon its shared identity. Diasporas
result from historical emigration from an original homeland. In modern cases,
this migration can be historically documented, and the diaspora associated with
a certain territory. Whether this territory is in fact the homeland of a
specific ethnic group, is a political matter. The older the migration, the less
evidence there is for the event: in the case of the Roma people the migration,
the homeland, and the migration route have not yet been accurately determined.
A claim to a homeland always has political connotations, and is often disputed.
Self-identified diasporas place great importance on their homeland, because of
their ethnic and cultural association with it - especially if it has been
'lost' or 'conquered'. This has led ethnic nationalist movements within several
diasporas, often resulting in the establishment of a sovereign homeland. But
even when these are established, it is rare for the complete diaspora
population to return to the homeland, and the remaining diaspora community
typically retains significant emotional attachment to the homeland, and the co-
ethnic population there. Diasporas are thus perceived as transnational
political entities, operating on "behalf of their entire people", and capable
of acting independently from any individual state (be it their homeland or host
states.)
