DIY ethic The DIY ethic refers to the ethic of self-sufficiency through
completing tasks without the aid of a paid expert. Literally meaning "do it
yourself," the DIY ethic promotes the idea that anyone is capable of performing
a variety of tasks rather than relying on paid specialists. The DIY ethic
requires that the adherent seeks out the knowledge required to complete a given
task. The term can refer to a variety of disciplines, including home
improvement, first aid or creative works. Rather than belittling or showing
disdain for those who engage in manual labor or skilled crafts, DIY champions
the average individual seeking such knowledge and expertise. Central to the
ethic is the empowerment of individuals and communities, encouraging the
employment of alternative approaches when faced with bureaucratic or societal
obstacles to achieving their objectives. Punk culture. In the punk subculture,
the DIY ethic is tied to punk ideology and anticonsumerism, as a rejection of
the need to purchase items or use existing systems or processes that would
foster dependence on established societal structures. According to the punk
aesthetic, one can express oneself and produce moving and serious works with
limited means. Arguably since the 1970s; emerging punk bands began to record
their music, produce albums and merchandise, distribute their works and often
performed basement shows in residential homes rather than at traditional venue,
to avoid corporate sponsorship or to secure freedom in performance. Since many
venues tend to shy away from more experimental music, houses and other private
venues are often the only places at which these bands can play. Riot Grrrl,
associated with third wave feminism, also undertook the core values of punk in
terms of the DIY ethic by utilizing creative ways of communicating through
zines and other projects. Adherents of the DIY punk ethic can also work
collectively. For example, punk impresario David Ferguson's CD Presents was a
DIY concert production, recording studio, and record label network. The German
punk band Mono fÃ¼r Alle! perfected the massproduction of an selfmade DIY album
including a tinkered wooden cover and sold over 6000 pieces from their website
and other alternative sources. The DIY punk ethic also applies to simple
everyday living, such as learning bicycle repair rather than taking a bike to a
mechanic's shop, sewing/repairing/modifying clothing rather than buying new
clothes, starting vegetable gardens, and reclaiming recyclable products by
dumpster diving. Some educators also engage in DIY teaching techniques,
sometimes referred to as Edupunk. Around the world. United Kingdom. Having
originated in the late 1960s and early 1970s in the form of the free festival
movement, mutating through protest camps (thus incorporating elements of
earlier radical tendencies such as the beat and peace movements) and into punk
through bands such as Crass, DIY culture became something of a recognised
movement in the 1990s in the UK, where the protest (the direct action) and
party (the festival) converged. The prime example of this movement was the
Exodus Collective. This development constituted a significant cross-pollination
of pleasure and politics resembling the anti-disciplinary politics of the
1960s. During the 1990s, demonstrating the desire for an economy of mutual aid
and co-operation, the commitment to the non-commodification of art, the
appropriation of digital and communication technologies for free community
purposes, and the commitment to alternative technologies such as biodiesel.
From 1991â€“1997 the Conservative government cracked down on squatting, animal
rights activists, greens, travellers, as well as , parties and dance culture.
In 1994, the United Kingdom passed the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act
1994 which contained several sections designed to curtail the growing free
party and anti-road protest movements (sometimes embodied by ravers and
travellers). It empowered police to arrest citizens who appeared to be
preparing to hold a rave, waiting for a rave to start, or attending a rave.
United States. DIY culture in the United States can be linked to many of the
same philosophies of the Arts and Crafts movement of the 1900s, which sought to
reconnect people with hands-on activities and the aesthetics associated with
them. This was in direct opposition to the prevailing industrialization and
modernization which was moving many aspects of the culture's aesthetics away
from the hand-made artisan-created styles of the past and toward a mass-
produced sleek modern vision of the future. DIY culture in the US arguably
evolved from a simple cost-saving activity of the 1940s and 1950s to an
increasingly radical political activity which stood against the increasingly
visible trends of mass-production, conspicuous consumerism, waste, and the
industrial corporate philosophy of planned obsolescence. DIY culture in the US
is a current and evolving loose coalition of various individuals. There are
many members of DIY culture with distinct and activist philosophies and goals,
such as Betsy Greer who coined the term Craftivism in 2003. There are also many
people with a staunch neutrality of political and social issues adopted by
other members of the DIY movement. The largest group fall into an area
somewhere between these two opposites, as varied in the spectrum of political
and social philosophy as members of any large and thriving subculture.
Isaacson, John: "Do-It-Yourself Screenprinting" Microcosm Publishing, 2007.
ISBN 978-0-9770557-4-6 Page 173. In modern society, it is uncommon for people
to go more than a part of a day without interacting with computers or other
modern technology. This leads to disconnect between the person and the physical
world world around them - including other people - and is a secondary
significant motivating force in leading people to embrace DIY culture. Carla
Sinclair, Editor in Chief of "Craft" attempts to describe the DIY community:
"This DIY renaissance embraces crafts while pushing them beyond traditional
boundaries, either through technology, irony, irreverence, and creative
recycling, or by using innovating materials and processes...the new craft
movement encourages people to make things themselves rather than buy what
thousands of others already own. It provides new venues for crafters to show
and sell their wares, and it offers original, unusual, alternative, and better-
made goods to consumers who choose not to fall in step with mainstream
commerce." Ellen Lupton embellishes these thoughts in her book D.I.Y. Design It
Yourself: "Around the world, people are making things themselves in order to
save money, to customize goods to suit their exact needs and interests, and to
feel less dependent on the corporations that manufacture and distribute most of
the products and media we consume. On top of these practical and political
motivations is the pleasure that comes from developing an idea, making it
physically real, and sharing it with other people." The articulation of both
Isaacson and Lupton is that DIY activities and culture not only are unique in a
modern world of consumerism, they give pleasure to its members simply due to
the lack of corporate control or thoughts of profit and marketability which are
often assigned to the act of creation outside the world of fine art. These
views are not universal or without variation, however. In Tsia Carson's
introduction to her book 'Craftivity: 40 Projects for the DIY Lifestyle,' she
muses that "the kind of agency one gains over their life by making their things
is certainly powerful, heady stuff. But I can't honestly say that is "why" I
make things. Do I make things for spiritual reasons? I wonder if I'm ready to
speak of crafting as a form of meditation when I compare the crochet hats I
make for my daughter's stuffed monkey to venerable practices like making
Tibetan sand mandalas. We make things for two reasons: pleasure and because we
can." While some ascribe political or social context to their DIY activities,
others ascribe personal or spiritual dimensions. Matt Maranian, author of 'Pad:
The Guide to Ultra-Living,' a guide to making your own home decor specifically
intended not to look like it was purchased in any store, illustrates another
aspect of DIY culture: "Pad is not a book for the helpless, the aimless, or the
clueless, Pad is a book for the empowered, the inspired, and the creative. It's
a book for people who forge their own trail, and who know how to make the very
most of what they have at handÂ â€” or can find cheaply. Pad is the guerrilla
approach to home decorating." Matt articulates the sense of community and
subculture present in DIY culture, perhaps even hinting at a kind of
intellectual succession from a society deemed "helpless...aimless...clueless."
The first lines of Amy Spencer's 'DIY: The Rise of Lo-Fi Culture' sum up the
juxtaposition of DIY culture's aspects by pointing out "the DIY movement is
about using anything you can get your hands on to shape your own cultural
entity: your own version of whatever you think is missing in mainstream
culture. You can produce your own zine, record an album, publish your own
bookÂ â€” the enduring appeal of this movement is that anyone can be an artist
or creator. The point is to get involved." Internet. Technological
developments, new internet platforms, applications and innovations in the last
ten years have made it easier for artists, makers and creators of all types to
circumvent professional studios and create high-quality work themselves.
Developments in media software and the proliferation of high-speed internet
access have given artists of all ages and abilities from across the globe, the
opportunity to make their own films, records, or other creative content, and
distribute it over the web. Such works were usually displayed on a private
homepage, and gained popularity through word-of-mouth recommendations or being
attached to chain letters (known as viral distribution). Sites like Newgrounds
and DeviantArt allow users to post their art and receive community critique,
while Instructables allows DIYers to exhibit their works in an instructional
how-to format. It is becoming common for content creators to share and receive
compensation for their work online. Musicians can distribute their wares over
the internet, independently of commercial funding, using the same computer they
used to record.
