Downhill Battle Downhill Battle is a non-profit organization based in
Worcester, Massachusetts. It launched in August 2003 and argues that the four
major recording labels have an oligopoly that is bad for both musicians and
music culture. They believe that there is an opportunity to change that.
Downhill Battle also believe that filesharing can strengthen the role of
independent record labels in the music industry, and they help produce software
that helps independent artists and journalists reach a wider audience. The
group supports what they call "participatory culture" where everyone is a part
of creating and sharing art and music. Downhill Battle are also known for their
projects such as Grey Tuesday, Eyes on the Screen, Banned Music, Peer-to-Peer
Legal Defense Fund, and more. Downhill Battle made Spin Magazine's Top 100
moments that rocked the world at #81 for the moment when Downhill Battle
launched Grey Tuesday and the Grey Album went viral. The Downhill Battle team
also founded the Participatory Culture Foundation (PCF), which is building an
independent Internet video platform. PCF also has a set of Participatory
Politics projects, including a politics news site and a messageboard service
that has been a gathering space for self-organizing. Downhillbattle.org has
been down for an extended period of time. It is unclear why or how long this
has been its status. The Internet Archive last stored a functional copy of the
website in November 2007, as can be seen here. As of Tuesday March 3, 2009
Downhillbattle.org had been reactivated. As of Tuesday, May 24, 2011 or
earlier, Downhillbattle.org seems to be offline again. As of Sunday, October
16, 2011 or earlier, Downhillbattle.org had been reactivated.
