Dual loyalty In politics, dual loyalty is loyalty to two separate interests
that potentially conflict with each other. Inherently controversial. While
nearly all examples of alleged "dual loyalty" are considered highly
controversial, these examples point to the inherent difficulty in
distinguishing between what constitutes a "danger" of dual loyalty – i.e.,
that there exists a pair of "misaligned" interests – versus what might be
more simply a pair of "partially aligned" or even, according to the party being
accused, a pair of "fully aligned" interests. For example, immigrants who still
have feelings of loyalty to their country of origin will often insist that
their two (or more) loyalties do not conflict. As Stanley A. Renshon at The
Center for Immigration Studies notes, Transnationalist interpretations. Some
scholars refer to a growing trend of transnationalism and suggest that as
societies become more heterogeneous and multi-cultural, the term "dual loyalty"
increasingly becomes a meaningless bromide. According to the theory of
transnationalism, migration (as well as other factors including improved global
communication) produces new forms of identity that transcend traditional
notions of physical and cultural space. Nina Glick Schiller, Linda Basch, and
Cristina Blanc-Szanton define a process by which immigrants "link together"
their country of origin and their country of settlement. The transnationalist
view is that "dual loyalty" is a potentially "positive" expression of multi-
culturalism, and can contribute to the diversity and strength of civil society.
While this view is popular in many academic circles, others are skeptical of
this idea. As one paper describes it,
