Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
modeling (abbreviated DSGE or sometimes SDGE or DGE) is a branch of applied
general equilibrium theory that is influential in contemporary macroeconomics.
The DSGE methodology attempts to explain aggregate economic phenomena, such as
economic growth, business cycles, and the effects of monetary and fiscal
policy, on the basis of macroeconomic models derived from microeconomic
principles. One of the main reasons macroeconomists seek to build microfounded
models is that, unlike more traditional macroeconometric forecasting models,
microfounded models should not, in principle, be vulnerable to the Lucas
critique. Furthermore, since the microfoundations are based on the preferences
of the decision-makers in the model, DSGE models feature a natural benchmark
for evaluating the welfare effects of policy changes (for discussion of both
points, see Woodford, 2003, pp.Â 11â€“12 and Tovar, 2008, pp.Â 15â€“16).
Structure of DSGE models. Like other general equilibrium models, DSGE models
aim to describe the behavior of the economy as a whole by analyzing the
interaction of many microeconomic decisions. The decisions considered in most
DSGE models correspond to some of the main quantities studied in
macroeconomics, such as consumption, saving, investment, and labor supply and
labor demand. The decision-makers in the model, often called 'agents', may
include households, business firms, and possibly others, such as governments or
central banks. Furthermore, as their name indicates, DSGE models are dynamic,
studying how the economy evolves over time. They are also stochastic, taking
into account the fact that the economy is affected by random shocks such as
technological change, fluctuations in the price of oil, or changes in
macroeconomic policy-making. This contrasts with the static models studied in
Walrasian general equilibrium theory, applied general equilibrium models and
some computable general equilibrium models. For a coherent description of the
macroeconomy, DSGE models must spell out the following economic 'ingredients'.
Traditional macroeconometric forecasting models used by central banks in the
1970s, and even today, estimated the dynamic correlations between prices and
quantities in different sectors of the economy, and often included thousands of
variables. Since DSGE models start from microeconomic principles of constrained
decision-making, instead of just taking as given observed correlations, they
are technically more difficult to solve and analyze. Therefore they usually
abstract from so many sectoral details, and include far fewer variables: just a
few variables in theoretical DSGE papers, or on the order of a hundred
variables in the experimental DSGE forecasting models now being constructed by
central banks. What DSGE models give up in sectoral detail, they attempt to
make up in logical consistency. Advantages and disadvantages of DSGE modeling.
By specifying preferences (what the agents want), technology (what the agents
can produce), and institutions (the way they interact), it is possible (in
principle, though challenging in practice) to solve the DSGE model to predict
what is actually produced, traded, and consumed, and how these variables evolve
over time in response to various shocks. In principle, it is also possible to
make predictions about the effects of changing the institutional framework. In
contrast, as Robert Lucas pointed out, such a prediction is unlikely to be
valid in traditional macroeconometric forecasting models, since those models
are based on observed past correlations between macroeconomic variables. These
correlations can be expected to change when new policies are introduced,
invalidating predictions based on past observations. Given the difficulty of
constructing accurate DSGE models, most central banks still rely on traditional
macroeconometric models for short-term forecasting. However, the effects of
alternative policies are increasingly studied using DSGE methods. Since DSGE
models are constructed on the basis of assumptions about agents' preferences,
it is possible to ask whether the policies considered are Pareto optimal, or
how well they satisfy some other social welfare criterion derived from
preferences (Woodford, 2003, p.Â 12). Schools of DSGE modeling. At present two
competing schools of thought form the bulk of DSGE modeling. Example. The
European Central Bank (ECB) has developed a DSGE model, often called the Smets-
Wouters model, which it uses to analyze the economy of the Eurozone as a whole
(in other words, the model does not analyze individual European countries
separately). The model is intended as an alternative to the "Area-Wide Model
(AWM)", a more traditional empirical forecasting model which the ECB has been
using for several years. The ECB webpage that describes the Smets-Wouters model
also discusses the advantages of building a DSGE model instead of relying on
more traditional methods. The equations in the Smets-Wouters model describe the
choices of three types of decision makers: households, who made an optimal
trade-off between consumption and worked hours, under a budget contraint;
firms, who optimize theirs labor and capital to employ; and the central bank,
which controls monetary policy. The parameters in the equations were estimated
using Bayesian statistical techniques so that the model approximately describes
the dynamics of GDP, consumption, investment, prices, wages, employment, and
interest rates in the Eurozone economy. In order to accurately reproduce the
sluggish behavior of some of these variables, the model incorporates several
types of frictions that slow down adjustment to shocks, including sticky prices
and wages, and adjustment costs in investment. Controversy. Willem Buiter of
the London School of Economics has argued that DSGE models rely excessively on
an assumption of complete markets, and are unable to describe the highly
nonlinear dynamics of economic fluctuations, making training in 'state-of-the-
art' macroeconomic modeling "a privately and socially costly waste of time and
resources". N. Gregory Mankiw, regarded as one of the founders of New Keynesian
DSGE modeling, has also argued that Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, acknowledges that DSGE models were not
very useful for analyzing the financial crisis of 2007-2010. Nonetheless, he
argues that the applicability of these models is improving, and that there is
growing consensus among macroeconomists that DSGE models need to incorporate
both price stickiness and financial market frictions. Chari also argued that
current DSGE models frequently incorporate frictional unemployment, financial
market imperfections, and sticky prices and wages, and therefore imply that the
macroeconomy behaves in a suboptimal way which monetary and fiscal policy may
be able to improve. Commenting on the Congressional session, The Economist
asked whether agent-based models might better predict financial crises than
DSGE models.
