Earthlings (film) Earthlings is a 2005 movie about humanity's use of animals as
pets, food, clothing, entertainment, and for scientific research. The film is
narrated by Joaquin Phoenix, features music by Moby, was directed by Shaun
Monson, and was co-produced by Maggie Q, all of whom are practicing vegans.
Synopsis. Covering pet stores, puppy mills and animal shelters, as well as
factory farms, the leather and fur trades, sports and entertainment industries,
and finally the medical and scientific profession, "Earthlings" includes
footage obtained through the use of hidden cameras to chronicle the day-to-day
practices of some of the largest industries in the world, all of which rely on
animals. It draws parallels between racism, sexism, and speciesism. Promotion.
Joaquin Phoenix commented on the documentary that, "Of all the films I have
ever made, this is the one that gets people talking the most. For every one
person who sees "Earthlings", they will tell three." Peter Singer, best known
for his book "Animal Liberation" states, "If I could make everyone in the world
see one film, I'd make them see "Earthlings"" and Tom Regan, "For those who
watch Earthlings, the world will never be the same." Awards. In 2005,
"Earthlings" premiered at the Artivist Film Festival, (where it won Best
Documentary Feature), followed by the Boston International Film Festival,
(where it won the Best Content Award), and at the San Diego Film Festival,
(where it won Best Documentary Film, as well as the Humanitarian Award to
Joaquin Phoenix for his work on the film).
