Economy An economy consists of the economic systems of a country or other area;
the labor, capital, and land resources; and the manufacturing, production,
trade, distribution, and consumption of goods and services of that area. A
given economy is the result of a process that involves its technological
evolution, history and social organization, as well as its geography, natural
resource endowment, and ecology, as main factors. These factors give context,
content, and set the conditions and parameters in which an economy functions. A
market based economy may be described as a spatially limited social network
where goods and services are freely produced and exchanged according to demand
and supply between participants (economic agents) by barter or a medium of
exchange with a credit or debit value accepted within the network. Capital and
labor can move freely across places, industries and firms in search of higher
profits, dividends, interest, compensations and benefits. Rent on land
allocates this generally fixed resource among competing users. Contemporary
Capitalism is a market economy in which most of the production capacity is
owned and directed by the private sector. Government role is limited to provide
for defense and internal security; administer justice and prisons; make laws
and regulations; enforce contracts, laws and regulations; correct market
imperfections and failures; ensure full employment without inflation; promote
balance economic growth and development; provide for the poor, children, and
elderly; protect and assist in emergencies and natural disasters; provide basic
opportunities to all members of society; prevent future calamities and
disasters; and, pursue national goals established by society at large such as
protection of the environment and natural resources. On the other hand,
traditional socialism is a command-based economy in which markets and the free
exchange of goods and services, as well as manufacturing, production, trade and
distribution are replaced or done by government central planning and state
owned enterprises. In this economy all private owners of capital (called
capitalist) and of land (called landowners) are not allowed or banned; and the
only permitted private ownership is of consumption goods. Capital and land are
assigned by the state and movement of labor is severely restricted. There are
no profits, dividends, interest or rent. Labor compensation and benefits are
decided by central planners. Finally, a mixed economy contains elements of both
capitalism and socialism which means a market based economy with a varied
degree of government central planning and state owned enterprises. Range. Today
the range of fields of study examining the economy revolve around the social
science of economics, but may include sociology (economic sociology), history
(economic history), anthropology (economic anthropology), and geography
(economic geography). Practical fields directly related to the human activities
involving production, distribution, exchange, and consumption of goods and
services as a whole, are engineering, management, business administration,
applied science, and finance. All professions, occupations, economic agents or
economic activities, contribute to the economy. Consumption, saving, and
investment are variable components in the economy that determine macroeconomic
equilibrium. There are three main sectors of economic activity: primary,
secondary, and tertiary. Due to the growing importance of the financial sector
in modern times, the term real economy is used by analysts as well as
politicians to denote the part of the economy that is concerned with actually
producing goods and services, as ostensibly contrasted with the paper economy,
or the financial side of the economy, which is concerned with buying and
selling on the financial markets. Alternate and long-standing terminology
distinguishes measures of an economy expressed in real values (adjusted for
inflation), such as real GDP, or in nominal values (unadjusted for
inflation).Â Â  â€¢ R. O'Donnell (1987). "real and nominal quantities," "", v.
4, pp. 97-98. Etymology. The English words "economy" and "economics" can be
traced back to the Greek words Î¿á¼°ÎºÎ¿Î½ÏŒÎ¼Î¿Ï‚ (i.e. "one who manages a
household", a composite word derived from Î¿á¼´ÎºÎ¿Ï‚ ("house") and Î½Î­Î¼Ï‰
("manage; distribute")) and Î¿á¼°ÎºÎ¿Î½Î¿Î¼Î¯Î± ("household management"). The
first recorded sense of the word "Å“conomy" is in the phrase "the management of
Å“conomic affairs", found in a work possibly composed in a monastery in 1440.
"Economy" is later recorded in more general senses, including "thrift" and
"administration". The most frequently used current sense, denoting "the
economic system of a country or an area", seems not to have developed until the
19th or 20th century. History. Ancient times. As long as someone has been
making, supplying and distributing goods or services, there has been some sort
of economy; economies grew larger as societies grew and became more complex.
Sumer developed a large scale economy based on commodity money, while the
Babylonians and their neighboring city states later developed the earliest
system of economics as we think of, in terms of rules/laws on debt, legal
contracts and law codes relating to business practices, and private property.
The Babylonians and their city state neighbors developed forms of economics
comparable to currently used civil society (law) concepts. They developed the
first known codified legal and administrative systems, complete with courts,
jails, and government records. Several centuries after the invention of
cuneiform, the use of writing expanded beyond debt/payment certificates and
inventory lists to be applied for the first time, about 2600 BC, to messages
and mail delivery, history, legend, mathematics, astronomical records and other
pursuits. Ways to divide private property, when it is contended... amounts of
interest on debt... rules as to property and monetary compensation concerning
property damage or physical damage to a person... fines for 'wrongdoing'... and
compensation in money for various infractions of formalized law were
standardized for the first time in history. The ancient economy was mainly
based on subsistence farming. The Shekel referred to an ancient unit of weight
and currency. The first usage of the term came from Mesopotamia circa 3000 BC.
and referred to a specific mass of barley which related other values in a
metric such as silver, bronze, copper etc. A barley/shekel was originally both
a unit of currency and a unit of weight... just as the British Pound was
originally a unit denominating a one pound mass of silver. For most people the
exchange of goods occurred through social relationships. There were also
traders who bartered in the marketplaces. In Ancient Greece, where the present
English word 'economy' originated, many people were bond slaves of the
freeholders. Economic discussion was driven by scarcity. Middle ages. In
Medieval times, what we now call economy was not far from the subsistence
level. Most exchange occurred within social groups. On top of this, the great
conquerors raised venture capital (from "ventura", ital.; "risk") to finance
their captures. The capital should be refunded by the goods they would bring up
in the New World. Merchants such as Jakob Fugger (1459â€“1525) and Giovanni di
Bicci de' Medici (1360â€“1428) founded the first banks. The discoveries of
Marco Polo (1254â€“1324), Christopher Columbus (1451â€“1506) and Vasco da Gama
(1469â€“1524) led to a first global economy. The first enterprises were trading
establishments. In 1513 the first stock exchange was founded in Antwerpen.
Economy at the time meant primarily trade. Early modern times. The European
captures became branches of the European states, the so-called colonies. The
rising nation-states Spain, Portugal, France, Great Britain and the Netherlands
tried to control the trade through custom duties and taxes in order to protect
their national economy. The so-called mercantilism (from "mercator", lat.:
merchant) was a first approach to intermediate between private wealth and
public interest. The secularization in Europe allowed states to use the immense
property of the church for the development of towns. The influence of the
nobles decreased. The first Secretaries of State for economy started their
work. Bankers like Amschel Mayer Rothschild (1773â€“1855) started to finance
national projects such as wars and infrastructure. Economy from then on meant
national economy as a topic for the economic activities of the citizens of a
state. The industrial revolution. The first economist in the true meaning of
the word was the Scotsman Adam Smith (1723â€“1790). He defined the elements of
a national economy: products are offered at a natural price generated by the
use of competition - supply and demand - and the division of labour. He
maintained that the basic motive for free trade is human self-interest. The so-
called self-interest hypothesis became the anthropological basis for economics.
Thomas Malthus (1766â€“1834) transferred the idea of supply and demand to the
problem of overpopulation. The United States of America became the place where
millions of expatriates from all European countries were searching for free
economic evolvement. The Industrial Revolution was a period from the 18th to
the 19th century where major changes in agriculture, manufacturing, mining, and
transport had a profound effect on the socioeconomic and cultural conditions
starting in the United Kingdom, then subsequently spreading throughout Europe,
North America, and eventually the world. The onset of the Industrial Revolution
marked a major turning point in human history; almost every aspect of daily
life was eventually influenced in some way. In Europe wild capitalism started
to replace the system of mercantilism (today: protectionism) and led to
economic growth. The period today is called industrial revolution because the
system of Production, production and division of labour enabled the mass
production of goods. After World War II. After the chaos of two World Wars and
the devastating Great Depression, policymakers searched for new ways of
controlling the course of the economy. This was explored and discussed by
Friedrich August von Hayek (1899â€“1992) and Milton Friedman (1912â€“2006) who
pleaded for a global free trade and are supposed to be the fathers of the so-
called neoliberalism. However, the prevailing view was that held by John
Maynard Keynes (1883â€“1946), who argued for a stronger control of the markets
by the state. The theory that the state can alleviate economic problems and
instigate economic growth through state manipulation of aggregate demand is
called Keynesianism in his honor. In the late 1950s the economic growth in
America and Europeâ€”often called Wirtschaftswunder (ger: "economic miracle")
â€”brought up a new form of economy: mass consumption economy. In 1958 John
Kenneth Galbraith (1908â€“2006) was the first to speak of an affluent society.
In most of the countries the economic system is called a social market economy.
Late 20th - beginning of 21th century. With the fall of the Iron curtain and
the transition of the countries of the Eastern Block towards democratic
government and market economies the idea of the post-industrial society is
brought into importance as its role is to mark together the significance that
the service sector receives at the place of the industrialization, as well as
the growing need and valuation of knowledge and creativity for the businesses.
In fact the idea of the post-industrial society has its beginning in the 70s
but the term came to common usage to describe the growth of economies like the
Chinese at the period (the term is specifically used by Bill Clinton in a
speech about Republic of China in 1998). With the spread of Internet as a mass
media and communication medium especially after 2000-2001 the idea for the
Internet and information economy is given place because of the growing
importance of ecommerce and electronic businesses, also the term for a global
information society as understanding of a new type of "all-connected" society
is created. In the late 00s the new type of economies and economic expansions
of countries like China, Brazil and India bring attention and interest to
different from the usually dominating Western type economies and economic
models. Economic phases of precedence. The economy may be considered as having
developed through the following Phases or Degrees of Precedence. In modern
economies, these phase precedences are somewhat differently expressed by
degrees of activity. Economic measures. GDP. The GDP - Gross domestic product
of a country is a measure of the size of its economy. The most conventional
economic analysis of a country relies heavily on economic indicators like the
GDP and GDP per capita. While often useful, it should be noted that GDP only
includes economic activity for which money is exchanged. Informal economy. An
informal economy is economic activity that is neither taxed nor monitored by a
government, contrasted with a formal economy. The informal economy is thus not
included in that government's Gross National Product (GNP). Although the
informal economy is often associated with developing countries, all economic
systems contain an informal economy in some proportion. Informal economic
activity is a dynamic process which includes many aspects of economic and
social theory including exchange, regulation, and enforcement. By its nature,
it is necessarily difficult to observe, study, define, and measure. No single
source readily or authoritatively defines informal economy as a unit of study.
The terms "under the table" and "off the books" typically refer to this type of
economy. The term black market refers to a specific subset of the informal
economy. The term "informal sector" was used in many earlier studies, and has
been mostly replaced in more recent studies which use the newer term. Micro
economics are focused on an individual person in a given economic society and
Macro economics is looking at an economy as a whole. (town, city, region)
