Economies of scope Economies of scope are conceptually similar to economies of
scale. Whereas 'economies of scale' for a firm primarily refers to reductions
in average cost (cost per unit) associated with increasing the scale of
production for a "single product type", 'economies of scope' refers to lowering
average cost for a firm in producing "two or more" products. The term and
concept development are due to Panzar and Willig (1977, 1981).Â Â  â€¢ _____
(1981). "Economies of Scope," "American Economic Review", 71(2), 71(2), pp.
268-272. The 1981 paper gave a precise definition. Here, economies of scope
make product diversification efficient if they are based on the common and
recurrent use of proprietary know-how or on an indivisible physical asset. For
example as the number of products promoted is increased, more people can be
reached per dollar spent. At some point, additional advertising expenditure on
new products may start to be less effective (an example of diseconomies of
scope). Related examples include distribution of different types of products,
product bundling, product lining, and family branding. If a sales force is
selling several products they can often do so more efficiently than if they are
selling only one product. The cost of their travel time is distributed over a
greater revenue base, so cost efficiency improves. There can also be synergies
between products such that offering a complete range of products gives the
consumer a more desirable product offering than a single product would.
Economies of scope can also operate through distribution efficiencies. It can
be more efficient to ship a range of products to any given location than to
ship a single type of product to that location. Further economies of scope
occur when there are cost-savings arising from by-products in the production
process. An example would be the benefits of heating from energy production
having a positive effect on agricultural yields. A company which sells many
product lines, sells the same product in many countries, or sells many product
lines in many countries will benefit from reduced risk levels as a result of
its economies of scope. If one of its product lines falls out of fashion or one
country has an economic slowdown, the company will, most likely, be able to
continue trading. Not all economists agree on the importance of economies of
scope. Some argue that it only applies to certain industries, and then only
rarely. Natural monopolies. While in the single-output case, economies of scale
are a sufficient condition for the verification of a natural monopoly, in the
multi-output case, they are neither necessary nor sufficient. Economies of
scope are, however, a necessary condition. As a matter of simplification, it is
generally accepted that, should economies of scale and of scope both apply, as
well as sunk costs or other entry barriers, then markets may have monopoly
features.
