Economies of scale In microeconomics, economies of scale are the cost
advantages that an enterprise obtains due to expansion. There are factors that
cause a producerâ€™s average cost per unit to fall as the scale of output is
increased. "Economies of scale" is a long run concept and refers to reductions
in unit cost as the size of a facility and the usage levels of other inputs
increase. Diseconomies of scale is the opposite. Overview. The simple meaning
of economies of scale is doing things efficiently. The common sources of
economies of scale are purchasing (bulk buying of materials through long-term
contracts), managerial (increasing the specialization of managers), financial
(obtaining lower-interest charges when borrowing from banks and having access
to a greater range of financial instruments), marketing (spreading the cost of
advertising over a greater range of output in media markets), and technological
(taking advantage of returns to scale in the production function). Each of
these factors reduces the long run average costs (LRAC) of production by
shifting the short-run average total cost (SRATC) curve down and to the right.
Economies of scale are also derived partially from learning by doing. Economies
of scale is a practical concept that may explain real world phenomena such as
patterns of international trade or the number of firms in a market. The
exploitation of economies of scale helps explain why companies grow large in
some industries. It is also a justification for free trade policies, since some
economies of scale may require a larger market than is possible within a
particular countryÂ â€” for example, it would not be efficient for
Liechtenstein to have its own car maker, if they would only sell to their local
market. A lone car maker may be profitable, however, if they export cars to
global markets in addition to selling to the local market. Economies of scale
also play a role in a "natural monopoly." The management thinker and translator
of the Toyota Production System for service, Professor John Seddon argues that
attempting to create economies by increasing scale is powered by myth, in the
service sector. Instead, he believes that economies will come from improving
the flow of a service, from first receipt of a customerâ€™s demand to the
eventual satisfaction of that demand. In trying to manage and reduce unit
costs, firms often raise total costs by creating failure demand. Seddon claims
that arguments for economy of scale are a mix of a) the plausibly obvious and
b) a little hard data, brought together to produce two broad assertions, for
which there is little hard factual evidence. Economies of scale and returns to
scale. Economies of scale is related to and can easily be confused with the
theoretical economic notion of returns to scale. Where economies of scale refer
to a firm's costs, returns to scale describe the relationship between inputs
and outputs in a long-run (all inputs variable) production function. A
production function has "constant" returns to scale if increasing all inputs by
some proportion results in output increasing by that same proportion. Returns
are "decreasing" if, say, doubling inputs results in less than double the
output, and "increasing" if more than double the output. If a mathematical
function is used to represent the production function, and if that production
function is homogeneous, returns to scale are represented by the degree of
homogeneity of the function. Homegeneous production functions with constant
returns to scale are first degree homogeneous, increasing returns to scale are
represented by degrees of homogeneity greater than one, and decreasing returns
to scale by degrees of homogeneity less than one. If the firm is a perfect
competitor in all input markets, and thus the per-unit prices of all its inputs
are unaffected by how much of the inputs the firm purchases, then it can be
shown that at a particular level of output, the firm has economies of scale if
and only if it has increasing returns to scale, has diseconomies of scale if
and only if it has decreasing returns to scale, and has neither economies nor
diseconomies of scale if it has constant returns to scale. In this case, with
perfect competition in the output market the long-run equilibrium will involve
all firms operating at the minimum point of their long-run average cost curves
(i.e., at the borderline between economies and diseconomies of scale). If,
however, the firm is not a perfect competitor in the input markets, then the
above conclusions are modified. For example, if there are increasing returns to
scale in some range of output levels, but the firm is so big in one or more
input markets that increasing its purchases of an input drives up the input's
per-unit cost, then the firm could have diseconomies of scale in that range of
output levels. Conversely, if the firm is able to get bulk discounts of an
input, then it could have economies of scale in some range of output levels
even if it has decreasing returns in production in that output range. The
literature assumed that due to the competitive nature of reverse auction, and
in order to compensate for lower prices and lower margins, suppliers seek
higher volumes to maintain or increase the total revenue. Buyers, in turn,
benefit from the lower transaction costs and economies of scale that result
from larger volumes. In part as a result, numerous studies have indicated that
the procurement volume must be sufficiently high to provide sufficient profits
to attract enough suppliers, and provide buyers with enough savings to cover
their additional costs. However, surprisingly enough, Shalev and Asbjornsen
found, in their research based on 139 reverse auctions conducted in the public
sector by public sector buyers, that the higher auction volume, or economies of
scale, did not lead to better success of the auction. They found that Auction
volume did not correlate with competition, nor with the number of bidder,
suggesting that auction volume does not promote additional competition. They
noted, however, that their data included a wide range of products, and the
degree of competition in each market varied significantly, and offer that
further research on this issue should be conducted to determine whether these
findings remain the same when purchasing the same product for both small and
high volumes. Keeping competitive factors constant, increasing auction volume
may further increase competition.
