Economic rent Economic rent is technical terminology used by economists to
define one aspect of the price of goods and services. Generally, it designates
the difference between the raw costs of everything needed to produce the goods
or service and the price. In the analysis, economic rent is determined for each
of the factors of production that are used to produce the good or service.
Usually economic rent is due to some exclusivity. For example, for labor, it
could be due to celebrity or skill (e.g., higher pay for skilled workers, in a
region where there is a scarcity of such skilled workers); for a good, it may
be due to the power of a patent; for real estate, it may be due to a favorable
location. By contrast, if there is no exclusivity and there is perfect
competition, there are no economic rents, as competition drives prices down to
their floor. A recipient of economic rent is a rentier. Economic rent is
different from other unearned and passive income, including contract rent. This
distinction has important implications for public revenue and tax policy. As
long as there is sufficient accounting profit, governments can collect a
portion of economic rent for the purpose of public finance with minimal adverse
effect on production or consumption. For example, economic rent can be
collected by a government as royalties or extraction fees in the case of
resources such as minerals and oil and gas. Definitions. According to Robert
Tollison (1982), economic rents are "excess returns" above "normal levels" that
take place in competitive markets. More specifically, it is "a return in excess
of the resource owner's opportunity cost". Henry George, best known for his
proposal for a single tax on land, defined "rent" as "the part of the produce
that accrues to the owners of land (or other natural capabilities) by virtue of
ownership" and as "the share of wealth given to landowners because they have an
exclusive right to the use of those natural capabilities." Professors of law
Lucian Bebchuk and Jesse Fried define the term "to refer to extra returns that
firms or individuals obtain due to their positional advantages." Classical
factor rent. Classical factor rent is primarily concerned with the fee paid for
the use of fixed (e.g. natural) resources. The classical definition is
expressed as any excess payment above that required to induce or provide for
production. Neoclassical Paretian rent. Neoclassical economics extends the
concept of rent to include factors other than natural resource rents. But the
labeling of this version of "rent" may be somewhat opportunistic or simply
incorrect in that Vilfredo Pareto, the economist for whom this kind of rent was
named, may or may not have proffered any conceptual formulation of rent.
Monopoly rent. Some returns are associated with legally enforced monopolies
like patents or copyrights. In addition, companies like Microsoft and Intel
have important de facto monopolies that can be quite valuable. The American
Medical Association has traditionally regulated the number of students each US
medical school can graduate, and by restricting the supply of doctors has been
accused of thus increasing the income of doctors. Some businesses like public
utilities are by their very nature monopolies. George Stigler estimated the
impact of monopoly rent on the US economy to be fairly low, but he specially
excluded labor monopolies from his studies. Land rent. In political economy
including physiocracy, classical economics, and other schools of economic
thought excepting neoclassical economics, land is recognized as an inelastic
factor of production. Rent is the distribution paid to freeholders for
"allowing" production on the land they control. David Ricardo is credited with
the first clear and comprehensive analysis of differential land rent and the
associated economic relationships (Law of Rent). Johann Heinrich von Th√ºnen
was especially influential in developing the spatial analysis of rents, which
highlighted the importance of centrality and transport. Simply put, it was
density of population increasing the profitability of commerce and providing
for the division and specialization of labor that commanded higher municipal
rents. And the high rents determined that land in a central city would not be
allocated to farming, but would be allocated instead to more profitable
residential or commercial uses. Observing that a tax on the unearned rent of
land would not distort economic activities, Henry George proposed that publicly
collected land rents (land value taxation) should be the primary (or only)
source of public revenue; though he also advocated public ownership, taxation
and regulation of natural monopolies and monopolies of scale that cannot be
eliminated by regulation. Hypothetical example. The generalization of the
concept of rent to include opportunity cost has served to highlight the role of
political barriers in creating and privatizing rents. For example, a person
seeking to become a member of a medieval guild makes a huge investment in
training and education, which has limited potential application outside of that
guild. In a competitive market, the wages of a member of the guild would be set
where the expected net return on the investment in training would be just
enough to justify making the investment. In a sense, the required investment is
a natural barrier to entry, discouraging some would-be members from making the
necessary investment in training to enter the competitive market for the
services of the guild. This is a natural "free market" self-limiting control on
the number of guild members and/or the cost of training necessitated by
certification. Some of those who would have opted for a particular guild may
well decide to choose a different guild or occupation. However, a political
restriction on the numbers of people entering into the competitive market for
services of the guild has the effect of raising the return on investments in
the guilds training, especially for those already practising, by creating an
artificial scarcity of guild members. To the extent that a constraint on
entrants to the medieval guild actually increases the returns to guild members
as opposed to ensuring competence, then to that extent the practice of limiting
entrants to the field is a rent seeking activity, and the excess return
realized by the guild members is economic rent as defined.
