Education policy Education policy refers to the collection of laws and rules
that govern the operation of education systems. Education occurs in many forms
for many purposes through many institutions. Examples include early childhood
education, kindergarten through to 12th grade, two and four year colleges or
universities, graduate and professional education, adult education and job
training. Therefore, education policy can directly affect the education people
engage in at all ages. Examples of areas subject to debate in education policy,
specifically from the field of schools, include school size, class size, school
choice, school privatization, tracking, teacher education and certification,
teacher pay, teaching methods, curricular content, graduation requirements,
school infrastructure investment, and the values that schools are expected to
uphold and model. Education policy analysis is the scholarly study of education
policy. It seeks to answer questions about the purpose of education, the
objectives (societal and personal) that it is designed to attain, the methods
for attaining them and the tools for measuring their success or failure.
Research intended to inform education policy is carried out in a wide variety
of institutions and in many academic disciplines. Important researchers are
affiliated with departments of psychology, economics, sociology, and human
development, in addition to schools and departments of education or public
policy. Examples of education policy analysis may be found in such academic
journals as "Education Policy Analysis Archives".
