Education Otherwise Education Otherwise (EO) is a registered charity based in
England for families whose children are being educated otherwise than at
school, and for those who wish to uphold the freedom of families to take
responsibility for the education of their children. It provides support and
information online, by telephone and through a bi-monthly newsletter to members
throughout the UK and overseas. Established in the mid 1970s, it took its name
from the (then current) 1944 Education Act (Section 36) which stated that
parents are responsible for the education of their children, "either by regular
attendance at school or otherwise". This clause has been retained in subsequent
Education Acts (currently section 7 of the 1996 Education Act) and remains a
clear acceptance of the parity and validity afforded an education otherwise
than by schooling. Origins. In 1972 Royston Lambert, head of Dartington Hall
School asked Dick Kitto, who had been working there since 1955, to set up a
project in conjunction with Northcliffe School to provide education for a group
of non-academic students who would have to take another year in school due to
the pending raising of the school leaving age. Kitto established a free school
or democratic school model for the running of the project and was impressed by
the qualities of the students even though they had effectively unschooled
themselves within the school system, where they were perceived as trouble
makers. Kitto's "school" caught the attention of Stan Windlass, who had been
working for a children's rights centre in London, through which he had become
aware of several families who were educating their own children. Windlass had
just taken the lease of Lower Shaw Farm and wanted to establish it as a centre
to explore ideas for an alternative society. Windlass asked Kitto to become the
warden at Lower Shaw Farm after the Northcliffe School project ended. Kitto was
familiar with ideas about unschooled education through reading John Holt and
Joy Baker's "Children in Chancery" along with his experiences at the
Northcliffe School project. He and Windlass were able to contact several
families who were educating otherwise and arranged an informal network, and
occasional meetings, between them throughout 1975 and 1976. During 1976 Granada
television made a programme about the group which resulted in around 200
enquiries and expanded the membership to over 50. The informal nature of the
group could not handle such a level of interest and so, at a meeting in
September 1976 which included five deschooling families, a more formal
structure for the group was established with stated aims and a regular
newsletter. In 1977 Kitto presented a BBC TV "Open Door" programme about the
ideas behind the organisation. This resulted in over 2000 enquiries and
increased the membership to around 250. The original logo (based on a UK
traffic sign) had what many perceived to be goose-stepping children breaking
out of the triangle. The logo was therefore redesigned without any militaristic
overtones. Conflict and development. With the steady growth in numbers of
members, around 1500 in 1986 (tenth anniversary) rising to 2,278 in 1992, it
was recognised that a trend away from the original ethos of EO was developing.
There was much debate about its structure. The April/May 1993 newsletter (Issue
91) featured an EO Restructuring Supplement presenting various options for "the
way forward". By the mid-1990s it was being recognised that people were joining
EO due to a "crisis" and wanted to get their child out of the school system,
rather than coming to it with an interest in exploring alternative education
provision. There was disaffection with the way the organisation was run via
national gatherings which were seen as alienating the majority of members. The
debate broadly split into those that wanted to follow a structured style of
education with a "managed" organisation and those who valued an informal
approach and rejecting the status of charitable trust and company limited by
guarantee. As far as I'm concerned, E.O. does not have a particular kind of
education to which it is committed. It is committed to the right of families to
do what they want to do. It is a humans (sic) rights organisation. I don't feel
we must do this, or we must do that. It is up to the members. To me it is not a
specific thing where children have to run wild in the country, or have to pay
visits to Winchester Cathedral, or anything else. There is this huge variation.
Some people join EO in order to give their children a good classical education
which they cannot get at school. I have a fundamental belief in the freedom of
choice. We must all be allowed to make our own mistakes. We don't want to be
dictated to by a curriculum from central government. Parent's Charter. In 1991
the government introduced a Parent's Charter (subtitled: You and Your Child's
Education) which promised parents reports about their children and their
schools. In 1994 a revised version of the Parent's Charter (subtitled: Our
Children's Education) was issued. Page 9 included the sentence - "You have a
duty to make sure that your child goes to school until he or she is 16." EO
members were concerned that this misinformation should be corrected as it was
being delivered to every household. They appointed solicitor Peter Liell who
sent "Letters Before Action" notices to the Department for Education and to the
Welsh Office. A reply by Eric Forth (9 July 1994) for the DfE claimed that the
Parent's Charter could not be taken as a definitive guide to the law - the
Charter "cannot take in every exception or reflect all points of detail". The
department stated that there were no plans to issue a corrigendum. The Welsh
Office response was a confirmation that the Charter for Parents in Wales had
been revised and would reflect the fact that not all children were educated in
schools. The matter was raised by Don Foster in a Parliamentary Question which
was responded to by Robin Squire stating that John Patten, the Secretary of
State for Education, saw no need to issue a correction or to make a statement
about the mistake. As English and Welsh education law are identical there were
no grounds for the variation in the responses of the two bodies. The solicitor
notified the DfE that he had been instructed to prepare an application for
leave to apply for Judicial review of the decision as stated in Forth's letter.
This threat caused an immediate response from the department that they "would
want to find a different - in your eyes more satisfactory - wording for any
further editions". The solicitor responded seeking confirmation, by 31 August
1994, that a future edition would include reference to the fact that children
do not have to go to school. Forth once again responded accepting the need for
a revised text: "I am, however, happy to confirm, in the light of your client's
concerns, our intention that any future edition of the Parent's Charter in
England will include a reference, be it explicit or implicit, to a parent's
lawful right to ensure that his child is suitably educated otherwise than at
school." It was felt that this was as far as EO could go with the matter and
the application for judicial review was withdrawn. The whole process had cost
EO almost Â£4000 but had generated a lot of publicity and raised awareness of
the issue as many members had raised their concerns with their own MP. Current
status. Education Otherwise Association Limited (By Guarantee) Charitable trust
Registration number 292029 Incorporated 28 May 1985 HEAS launched 1995. A 1998
camp beside the sea would grow into HESFES. Registered charity 2 May 1996. By
2007 Education Otherwise had grown to over 4000 member families.
