Electoral Reform Society The Electoral Reform Society is a political pressure
group based in the United Kingdom which promotes electoral reform. It is
believed to be the oldest operating organisation concerned with electoral
systems in the world. History. The ERS was founded in January 1884 as the
Proportional Representation Society by the Victorian naturalist, archaeologist
and polymath John Lubbock. The founding members included academics, barristers,
and an equal number of Conservative and Liberal MPs. Famous early members
included Charles Dodgson (better known as Lewis Caroll), C.P. Scott, editor of
the "Manchester Guardian" and Thomas Hare, the inventor of STV. The Society
campaigned for the introduction of STV until 1888. It then became inactive
until 1904. It resumed campaigning for STV, succeeding in getting it introduced
in local elections in Ireland, and in numerous religious, educational and
professional organisations. After World War II the Society suffered from
financial problems and a lack of public interest in electoral reform. It was
kept going for many decades by its Director, Enid Lakeman, an inveterate
pamphleteer, public speaker and writer of letters to newspapers about STV. When
Fianna FÃ¡il twice (1959 and 1968) put to a referendum a proposal to abolish
STV in Ireland and revert to first-past-the-post, Lakeman led a successful ERS
campaign to keep STV there. In 1973 STV was introduced in Northern Ireland for
elections to local councils and to the new Northern Ireland Assembly, and the
Society and its staff were called upon to advise in the programme of education
set up by the government to train returning officers in the new techniques and
raise public awareness in the Province of the implications of the newly
introduced voting method. Interest in proportional representation revived
sharply in Britain in 1974, and from then on the Society was able to secure a
higher public profile for its campaign. In 1983 the Society was recognised by
the United Nations Economic and Social Council as a Non-Governmental
Organisation with Consultative Status. Post 2010 activities. The Society has
campaigned successfully for the introduction of STV for local elections in
Scotland and led the call for a referendum on the voting system in the wake of
the United Kingdom parliamentary expenses scandal as part of the Vote for a
Change campaign. The Society was later a principal funder of the YES! To Fairer
Votes campaign in its unsuccessful bid for a Yes vote in the 2011 referendum on
the Alternative Vote, its Chief Executive Katie Ghose serving as the campaign's
chair.
