Election Day (United Kingdom) Election Day in the United Kingdom is by
tradition a Thursday. Under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011, all future
General Elections shall take place on the first Thursday in May every five
years, barring special circumstances. Most other European countries hold all
Elections on Sundays. Polls in the United Kingdom open at 7:00 and close at 22:
00. UK General Elections. A General Election in the UK follows the dissolution
of Parliament by the Queen on the advice of the Prime Minister of the day. The
Prime Minister thus has the power to choose the date of the election. Thursday
has been the customary day to hold elections since the 1930s. Other UK
elections. Local elections in England and Wales are by statute held on the
first Thursday in May. This has been changed in recent years: in 2001 they were
delayed while an outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease was dealt with, and in 2004
and 2009 they were delayed to coincide with elections for the European
Parliament. But they were eventually held on Thursdays. By-elections and other
UK elections are also traditionally held on Thursdays though they can be held
on other days - in particular when they would otherwise clash with bank
holidays. The last Parliamentary by-election not to be held on a Thursday was
the Hamilton by-election of 31 May 1978. This was held on a Wednesday as the
returning officer wished to avoid a clash with the opening game of the 1978
FIFA World Cup. In 2010, the local elections were held on the same day as the
general elections (Thursday, 6 May).
