Environmental economics Environmental economics is distinguished from
Ecological economics that emphasizes the economy as a subsystem of the
ecosystem with its focus upon preserving natural capital. One survey of German
economists found that ecological and environmental economics are different
schools of economic thought, with ecological economists emphasizing "strong"
sustainability and rejecting the proposition that natural capital can be
substituted by human-made capital. For an overview of international policy
relating to environmental economics, see Runnals (2011). Topics and concepts.
Central to environmental economics is the concept of market failure. Market
failure means that markets fail to allocate resources efficiently. As stated by
Hanley, Shogren, and White (2007) in their textbook "Environmental Economics":
"A market failure occurs when the market does not allocate scarce resources to
generate the greatest social welfare. A wedge exists between what a private
person does given market prices and what society might want him or her to do to
protect the environment. Such a wedge implies wastefulness or economic
inefficiency; resources can be reallocated to make at least one person better
off without making anyone else worse off." Common forms of market failure
include externalities, non-excludability and non-rivalry. Externality: the
basic idea is that an externality exists when a person makes a choice that
affects other people that are not accounted for in the market price. For
instance, a firm emitting pollution will typically not take into account the
costs that its pollution imposes on others. As a result, pollution in excess of
the 'socially efficient' level may occur. A classic definition influenced by
Kenneth Arrow and James Meade is provided by Heller and Starrett (1976), who
define an externality as “a situation in which the private economy lacks
sufficient incentives to create a potential market in some good and the
nonexistence of this market results in losses of Pareto efficiency.” In
economic terminology, externalities are examples of market failures, in which
the unfettered market does not lead to an efficient outcome. Common property
and non-exclusion: When it is too costly to exclude people from access to an
environmental resource for which there is rivalry, market allocation is likely
to be inefficient. The challenges related with common property and non-
exclusion have long been recognized. Hardin's (1968) concept of the tragedy of
the commons popularized the challenges involved in non-exclusion and common
property. "Commons" refers to the environmental asset itself, "common property
resource" or "common pool resource" refers to a property right regime that
allows for some collective body to devise schemes to exclude others, thereby
allowing the capture of future benefit streams; and "open-access" implies no
ownership in the sense that property everyone owns nobody owns. The basic
problem is that if people ignore the scarcity value of the commons, they can
end up expending too much effort, over harvesting a resource (e.g., a fishery).
Hardin theorizes that in the absence of restrictions, users of an open-access
resource will use it more than if they had to pay for it and had exclusive
rights, leading to environmental degradation. See, however, Ostrom's (1990)
work on how people using real common property resources have worked to
establish self-governing rules to reduce the risk of the tragedy of the
commons. Public goods and non-rivalry: Public goods are another type of market
failure, in which the market price does not capture the social benefits of its
provision. For example, efforts to mitigate climate change would be a public
good since the risks of climate change are both non-rival and non-excludable.
Such efforts are non-rival since climate mitigation provided to one does not
reduce the level of mitigation that anyone else enjoys. They are non-excludable
actions by one will have global consequences from which no one can be excluded.
A country's incentive to invest in carbon abatement is reduced because it can
"free ride" off the efforts of other countries. Over a century ago, Swedish
economist Knut Wicksell (1896) first discussed how public goods can be under-
provided by the market because people might conceal their preferences for the
good, but still enjoy the benefits without paying for them. Valuation.
Assessing the economic value of the environment is a major topic within the
field. Use and indirect use are tangible benefits accruing from natural
resources or ecosystem services (see the nature section of ecological
economics). Non-use values include existence, option, and bequest values. For
example, some people may value the existence of a diverse set of species,
regardless of the effect of the loss of a species on ecosystem services. The
existence of these species may have an option value, as there may be
possibility of using it for some human purpose (certain plants may be
researched for drugs). Individuals may value the ability to leave a pristine
environment to their children. Use and indirect use values can often be
inferred from revealed behavior, such as the cost of taking recreational trips
or using hedonic methods in which values are estimated based on observed
prices. Non-use values are usually estimated using stated preference methods
such as contingent valuation or choice modelling. Contingent valuation
typically takes the form of surveys in which people are asked how much they
would pay to observe and recreate in the environment (willingness to pay) or
their willingness to accept (WTA) compensation for the destruction of the
environmental good. Hedonic pricing examines the effect the environment has on
economic decisions through housing prices, traveling expenses, and payments to
visit parks. Relationship to other fields. Environmental economics is related
to ecological economics but there are differences. Most environmental
economists have been trained as economists. They apply the tools of economics
to address environmental problems, many of which are related to so-called
market failures—circumstances wherein the "invisible hand" of economics is
unreliable. Most ecological economists have been trained as ecologists, but
have expanded the scope of their work to consider the impacts of humans and
their economic activity on ecological systems and services, and vice-versa.
This field takes as its premise that economics is a strict subfield of ecology.
Ecological economics is sometimes described as taking a more pluralistic
approach to environmental problems and focuses more explicitly on long-term
environmental sustainability and issues of scale. Environmental economics is
viewed as more pragmatic in a price system; ecological economics as more
idealistic in its attempts not to use money as a primary arbiter of decisions.
These two groups of specialists sometimes have conflicting views which may be
traced to the different philosophical underpinnings. Another context in which
externalities apply is when globalization permits one player in a market who is
unconcerned with biodiversity to undercut prices of another who is - creating a
race to the bottom in regulations and conservation. This in turn may cause loss
of natural capital with consequent erosion, water purity problems, diseases,
desertification, and other outcomes which are not efficient in an economic
sense. This concern is related to the subfield of sustainable development and
its political relation, the anti-globalization movement. Image:Sustainable
development.svg|right|The three pillars of sustainability.
Clickable.|300px|thumb poly 138 194 148 219 164 240 182 257 219 277 263 291 261
311 264 331 272 351 283 366 300 383 316 394 287 408 261 417 224 424 182 426 154
423 119 415 87 403 58 385 40 368 24 347 17 328 13 309 16 286 26 263 43 240 64
224 84 212 107 202 Environment poly 324 219 334 226 343 234 351 242 359 251 366
263 371 276 375 287 400 279 417 272 438 263 453 252 466 241 477 229 488 214 497
193 482 189 463 188 423 188 398 191 376 196 352 204 Equitable poly 319 221 330
229 337 235 347 244 357 258 365 270 371 287 358 289 344 291 321 292 303 292 284
290 268 288 272 275 278 261 287 249 297 239 Sustainable poly 142 192 167 188
185 187 211 187 235 190 263 196 286 203 304 212 316 219 305 227 295 236 285 246
276 259 269 272 264 287 249 284 229 277 208 268 190 256 172 242 158 226 149 212
Bearable (Social ecology) poly 267 291 265 304 267 320 275 345 284 360 293 371
304 381 319 392 332 384 343 374 354 362 364 347 371 332 373 317 374 305 372 292
362 293 344 295 323 296 301 296 286 294 Viable (Environmental economics) poly
501 193 519 197 541 205 561 215 582 228 604 248 616 267 623 286 626 305 623 326
617 343 607 359 596 373 580 386 563 397 538 409 517 417 494 422 468 425 432 426
413 424 396 421 375 416 353 409 335 401 323 394 335 386 349 372 360 359 374 331
377 313 377 299 376 290 388 288 410 280 458 256 481 233 Economic poly 141 188
139 173 143 147 152 126 169 107 191 88 216 75 242 65 280 55 310 53 352 54 379
60 415 71 447 88 461 99 475 112 488 128 496 147 500 162 500 176 500 189 471 185
452 183 410 185 369 194 337 206 319 216 305 208 279 197 257 191 230 185 199 183
199 182 199 183 Social  Environmental economics was once distinct from resource
economics. Natural resource economics as a subfield began when the main concern
of researchers was the optimal commercial exploitation of natural resource
stocks. But resource managers and policy-makers eventually began to pay
attention to the broader importance of natural resources (e.g. values of fish
and trees beyond just their commercial exploitation;, externalities associated
with mining). It is now difficult to distinguish "environmental" and "natural
resource" economics as separate fields as the two became associated with
sustainability. Many of the more radical green economists split off to work on
an alternate political economy. Environmental economics was a major influence
for the theories of natural capitalism and environmental finance, which could
be said to be two sub-branches of environmental economics concerned with
resource conservation in production, and the value of biodiversity to humans,
respectively. The theory of natural capitalism (Hawken, Lovins, Lovins) goes
further than traditional environmental economics by envisioning a world where
natural services are considered on par with physical capital. The more radical
Green economists reject neoclassical economics in favour of a new political
economy beyond capitalism or communism that gives a greater emphasis to the
interaction of the human economy and the natural environment, acknowledging
that "economy is three-fifths of ecology" - Mike Nickerson. These more radical
approaches would imply changes to money supply and likely also a bioregional
democracy so that political, economic, and ecological "environmental limits"
were all aligned, and not subject to the arbitrage normally possible under
capitalism. Professional bodies. The main academic and professional
organizations for the discipline of Environmental Economics are the Association
of Environmental and Resource Economists (AERE) and the European Association
for Environmental and Resource Economics (EAERE). The main academic and
professional organization for the discipline of Ecological Economics is the
International Society for Ecological Economics (ISEE) and The Green Economics
Institute for Green Economics [greeneconomics.org.uk] is its international
Professional body.
