Ethnopluralism Ethnopluralism or ethno-pluralism is a European New Right theory
of multiculturalism which contrasts with liberal multiculturalism. "Cultural
differentialism" is the view that cultures are clearly bound entities with a
specific geographical location. From this perspective, global cultural
diversity takes the form of cultural mosaic with a multiplicity of diverse
cultures clearly delimited and with strict boundaries between them.
Ethnopluralists use the concept of cultural differentialism to assert a "right
to difference" and argue for regional policies of ethnic separatism and racial
separatism, but stress that each ethnic group and racial group should be
considered equal on its own merit. This right-wing view of culture, ethnicity
and race is increasingly popular in the ideological discourse of several right-
wing and far-right groups in Europe since the 1970s, and has penetrated the
discourse of a postmodern Left (i.e., "Telos"). A leading proponent of
ethnopluralism is the French New Right ("Nouvelle Droite") philosopher Alain de
Benoist, who claims that indigenous cultures in Europe are dying out and feels
that pan-European nationalism based on ethnopluralism and "ethnoregionalism"
would be the way to stop this. Political scientist Alberto Spektorowski argues
that cultural differentialism, which the European New Right opposes to racial
superiority, leads precisely to European assertiveness and technological
superiority. He further argues that an ethnoregional strategy contributes to a
right-wing exclusionist vision of a culturally homogeneous, immigrant free and
economically strong Europe.
