Neoclassical growth model The neoclassical growth model, also known as the
Solowâ€“Swan growth model or exogenous growth model, is a class of economic
models of long-run economic growth set within the framework of neoclassical
economics. Neoclassical growth models attempt to explain long run economic
growth by looking at productivity, capital accumulation, population growth, and
technological progress. Development of the model. The neo-classical model was
an extension to the 1946 Harrodâ€“Domar model that included a new term:
productivity growth. Important contributions to the model came from the work
done by Robert Solow and T.W. Swan who independently developed relatively
simple growth models. Solow's model fitted available data on US economic growth
with some success. In 1987, Solow received the Nobel Prize in Economics for his
work. Solow was also the first economist to develop a growth model which
distinguished between vintages of capital. In Solow's model, new capital is
more valuable than old (vintage) capital becauseâ€”since capital is produced
based on known technology, and technology improves with timeâ€”new capital will
be more productive than old capital. Both Paul Romer and Robert Lucas, Jr.
subsequently developed alternatives to Solow's neo-classical growth model.
Today, economists use Solow's sources-of-growth accounting to estimate the
separate effects on economic growth of technological change, capital, and
labor. Long run implications. In neoclassical growth models, the long-run rate
of growth is exogenously determined â€“ in other words, it is determined
outside of the model. A common prediction of these models is that an economy
will always converge towards a steady state rate of growth, which depends only
on the rate of technological progress and the rate of labor force growth. A
country with a higher saving rate will experience faster growth, e.g. Singapore
had a 40% saving rate in the period 1960 to 1996 and annual GDP growth of 5-6%,
compared with Kenya in the same time period which had a 15% saving rate and
annual GDP growth of just 1%. This relationship was anticipated in the earlier
models, and is retained in the Solow model; however, in the very long-run
capital accumulation appears to be less significant than technological
innovation in the Solow model. Assumptions. The key assumption of the
neoclassical growth model is that capital is subject to diminishing returns in
a closed economy. â†’Given a fixed stock of labor, the impact on output of the
last unit of capital accumulated will always be less than the one before.
â†’Assuming for simplicity no technological progress or labor force growth,
diminishing returns implies that at some point the amount of new capital
produced is only just enough to make up for the amount of existing capital lost
due to depreciation. â†’Assuming non-zero rates of labor growth complicates
matters somewhat, but the basic logic still applies â€“ in the short-run the
rate of growth slows as diminishing returns take effect and the economy
converges to a constant "steady-state" rate of growth (that is, "no" economic
growth per-capita). â†’Including non-zero technological progress is very
similar to the assumption of non-zero workforce growth, in terms of "effective
labor": a new steady state is reached with constant output per "worker-hour
required for a unit of output". However, in this case, per-capita output is
growing at the rate of technological progress in the "steady-state" (that is,
the rate of productivity growth). Variations in productivity's effects. In a
growing economy, capital is accumulated faster than people are born, so the
denominator in the growth function under the MFP calculation is growing faster
than in the ALP calculation. Hence, MFP growth is almost always lower than ALP
growth. (Therefore, measuring in ALP terms increases the apparent capital
deepening effect.) MFP is measured by the "Solow residual", not ALP. Graphical
representation of the model. The model starts with a neoclassical production
function Y/L = F(K/L), rearranged to y = f(k), which is the red curve on the
graph. From the production function; output per worker is a function of capital
per worker. The production function assumes diminishing returns to capital in
this model, as denoted by the slope of the production function. n = population
growth rate y = output/income per worker1 for example, the saving per worker is
greater than the amount needed to maintain a steady level of capital, so
capital per worker increases. There is capital deepening from "y"1 to "y"0, and
thus output per worker increases. Right of point A where "sy"Â <Â 
("n"Â +Â "Î´")"k", point "k"2 for example, capital per worker is falling, as
investment is not enough to combat population growth and depreciation.
Therefore output per worker falls from "y"2 to "y"0. The model and changes in
the saving rate. The graph is very similar to the above, however, it now has a
second savings function "s"1y, the blue curve. It demonstrates that an increase
in the saving rate shifts the function up. Saving per worker is now greater
than population growth plus depreciation, so capital accumulation increases,
shifting the steady state from point "A" to "B". As can be seen on the graph,
output per worker correspondingly moves from "y"0 to "y"1. Initially the
economy expands faster, but eventually goes back to the steady state rate of
growth which equalsÂ "n". There is now permanently higher capital and
productivity per worker, but economic growth is the same as before the savings
increase. The model and changes in population. This graph is again very similar
to the first one, however, the population growth rate has now increased from
"n" to "n"1, this introduces a new capital widening line ("n"1Â +Â "Î´") and
results in shifting the steady state from A to B. But this time B is both of
lower output and capital per worker ("y"0 to "y"1 and "k"0 to "k"1).
Mathematical framework. Macro-production function. This is a Cobbâ€“Douglas
function where "Y" represents the total production in an economy. "A"
represents multifactor productivity (often generalized as technology), "K" is
capital, "L" is labor and "Î±" is production elasticity. which is the macro-
production function divided by "L" to give total production per capita "y" and
the capital intensity '"k". Savings function. This function depicts savings,
"I" as a portion "s" of the total production "Y". Change in capital. The d is
depreciation. Change in workforce. 'n' is the rate of growth. e.g. n=0.02 would
mean formula_6 or a 2% rise in formula_7 Empirical evidence. A key prediction
of neoclassical growth models is that the income levels of poor countries will
tend to catch up with or converge towards the income levels of rich countries
as long as they have similar characteristics â€“ for instance saving rates.
Since the 1950s, the opposite empirical result has been observed "on average".
If the average growth rate of countries since, say, 1960 is plotted against
initial GDP per capita (i.e. GDP per capita in 1960), one observes a positive
relationship. In other words, the developed world appears to have grown at a
faster rate than the developing world, the opposite of what is expected
according to a prediction of convergence. However, a few formerly poor
countries, notably Japan, do appear to have converged with rich countries, and
in the case of Japan actually exceeded other countries' productivity, some
theorize that this is what has caused Japan's poor growth recently â€“
"convergent growth rates are still expected, even after convergence has
occurred"; leading to over-optimistic investment, and actual recession.
Evidence for conditional convergence comes from multivariate, cross-country
regressions. If productivity were associated with high technology then the
introduction of information technology should have led to a noticeable
productivity acceleration over the past twenty years; but it has not: "see":
Solow computer paradox. Econometric analysis on Singapore and the other "East
Asian Tigers" has produced the surprising result that although output per
worker has been rising, almost none of their rapid growth had been due to
rising per-capita productivity (they have a low "Solow residual").
