Experimental economics Experimental economics is the application of
experimental methods to study economic questions. Data collected in experiments
are used to estimate effect size, test the validity of economic theories, and
illuminate market mechanisms. Economic experiments usually use cash to motivate
subjects, in order to mimic real-world incentives. Experiments are used to help
understand how and why markets and other exchange systems function as they do.
A fundamental aspect of the subject is design of experiments. Experiments may
be conducted in the field or in laboratory settings, whether of individual or
group behavior.Â Â  â€¢ _____, 2008b. "experimental economics," "The New
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics", 2nd Edition. Abstract.Â Â  â€¢ Relevant
subcategories are found at the "Journal of Economic Literature" classification
codes at . Variants of the subject outside such formal confines include natural
and quasi-natural experiments. Experimental topics. One can loosely classify
economic experiments using the following topics: Within economics education,
one application involves experiments used in the teaching of economics. An
alternative approach with experimental dimensions is agent-based computational
modeling. Coordination games. Coordination games are games with multiple pure
strategy Nash equilibria. There are two general sets of questions that
experimental economists typically ask when examining such games: (1) Can
laboratory subjects coordinate, or learn to coordinate, on one of multiple
equilibria, and if so are there general principles that can help predict which
equilibrium is likely to be chosen? (2) Can laboratory subjects coordinate, or
learn to coordinate, on the Pareto best equilibrium and if not, are there
conditions or mechanisms which would help subjects coordinate on the Pareto
best equilibrium? Deductive selection principles are those that allow
predictions based on the properties of the game alone. Inductive selection
principles are those that allow predictions based on characterizations of
dynamics. Learning experiments. In games of two players or more, the subjects
often form beliefs about what actions the other subjects are taking and these
beliefs are updated over time. This is known as belief learning. Subjects also
tend to make the same decisions that have rewarded them with high payoffs in
the past. This is known as reinforcement learning. Until the 1990s, simple
adaptive models, such as Cournot competition or fictitious play, were generally
used. In the mid-1990s, Alvin E. Roth and Ido Erev demonstrated that
reinforcement learning can make useful predictions in experimental games. In
1999, Colin Camerer and Teck Ho introduced Experience Weighted Attraction
(EWA), a general model that incorporated reinforcement and belief learning, and
shows that fictitious play is mathematically equivalent to generalized
reinforcement, provided weights are placed on past history. Criticisms of EWA
include overfitting due to many parameters, lack of generality over games, and
the possibility that the interpretation of EWA parameters may be difficult.
Overfitting is addressed by estimating parameters on some of the experimental
periods or experimental subjects and forecasting behavior in the remaining
sample (if models are overfitting, these out-of-sample validation forecasts
will be much less accurate than in-sample fits, which they generally are not).
Generality in games is addressed by replacing fixed parameters with "self-
tuning" functions of experience, allowing pseudo-parameters to change over the
course of a game and to also vary systematically across games. Modern
experimental economists have done much notable work recently. Roberto Weber has
raised issues of learning without feedback. David Cooper and John Kagel have
investigated types of learning over similar strategies. Ido Erev and Greg
Barron have looked at learning in cognitive strategies. Dale Stahl has
characterized learning over decision making rules. Charles A. Holt has studied
logit learning in different kinds of games, including games with multiple
equilibria. Wilfred Amaldoss has looked at interesting applications of EWA in
marketing. Amnon Rapoport, Jim Parco and Ryan Murphy have investigated
reinforcement-based adaptive learning models in one of the most celebrated
paradoxes in game theory known as the centipede game. Market games. Edward
Chamberlin is thought to have conducted "not only the first market experiment,
but also the first economic experiment of any kind." Vernon Smith, drawing on
Chamberlin's work, but also modifying it in key respects, conducted pioneering
economics experiments on the convergence of prices and quantities to their
theoretical competitive equilibrium values in experimental markets. Smith
studied the behavior of "buyers" and "sellers", who are told how much they
"value" a fictitious commodity and then are asked to competitively "bid" or
"ask" on these commodities following the rules of various real world market
institutions (e.g., the Double auction as well the English and Dutch auctions).
Smith found that in some forms of centralized trading, prices and quantities
traded in such markets converge on the values that would be predicted by the
economic theory of perfect competition, despite the conditions not meeting many
of the assumptions of perfect competition (large numbers, perfect information).
Over the years, Smith pioneered -along with other collaborators- the use of
controlled laboratory experiments in economics, and established it as a
legitimate tool in economics and other related fields. Charles Plott of the
California Institute of Technology collaborated with Smith in the 1970s and
pioneered experiments in political science, as well as using experiments to
inform economic design or engineering to inform policies. In 2002, Smith was
awarded (jointly with Daniel Kahneman) the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic
Sciences "for having established laboratory experiments as a tool in empirical
economic analysis, especially in the study of alternative market mechanisms".
Finance. Experimental finance studies financial markets with the goals of
establishing different market settings and environments to observe
experimentally and analyze agents' behavior and the resulting characteristics
of trading flows, information diffusion and aggregation, price setting
mechanism and returns processes. Presently, researchers use simulation software
to conduct their research. For instance, experiments have manipulated
information asymmetry about the holding value of a bond or a share on the
pricing for those who don't have enough information, in order to study stock
market bubbles. Social preferences. The term "social preferences" refers to the
concern (or lack thereof) that people have for each other's well-being, and it
encompasses altruism, spitefulness, tastes for equality, and tastes for
reciprocity. Experiments on social preferences generally study economic games
including the dictator game, the ultimatum game, the trust game, the public
goods game, and modifications to these canonical settings. As one example of
results, ultimatum game experiments have shown that people are generally
willing to sacrifice monetary rewards when offered low allocations, thus
behaving inconsistently with simple models of self-interest. Economic
experiments have measured how this deviation varies across cultures. Agent-
based computational modeling. Agent-based computational modeling is a
relatively recent method in economics with experimental dimensions. Here the
focus is on economic processes, including whole economies, as dynamic systems
of interacting agents, an application of the complex adaptive systems paradigm.
The "agent" refers to "computational objects modeled as interacting according
to rules," not real people. Agents can represent social and/or physical
entities. Starting from initial conditions determined by the modeler, an ACE
model develops forward through time driven solely by agent interactions. Issues
include those common to experimental economics in general and by comparison as
well as development of a common framework for empirical validation and
resolving open questions in agent-based modeling.Â Â  â€¢ Akira Namatame and
Takao Terano (2002). "The Hare and the Tortoise: Cumulative Progress in Agent-
based Simulation," in "Agent-based Approaches in Economic and Social Complex
Systems". pp. 3- 14, IOS Press. Description.Â Â  â€¢ Giorgio Fagiolo, Alessio
Moneta, and Paul Windrum, 2007 "A Critical Guide to Empirical Validation of
Agent-Based Models in Economics: Methodologies, Procedures, and Open Problems,"
"Computational Economics", 30(3), pp. 195â€“226.  Methodology. Critiques. The
above guidelines have developed in large part to address two central critiques.
Specifically, economics experiments are often challenged because of concerns
about their "internal validity" and "external validity", for example, that they
are not applicable models for many types of economic behavior, so the
experiments simply aren't good enough to produce useful answers. Interestingly,
however, none of the critiques towards this methodology is specific to it, as
they are immediately applicable to either theoretical or empirical approaches
or both.
