Externality In economics, an externality, or transaction spillover, is a cost
or benefit that is not transmitted through prices or is incurred by a party who
was not involved as either a buyer or seller of the goods or services causing
the cost or benefit. The cost of an externality is a negative externality, or
external cost, while the benefit of an externality is a positive externality,
or external benefit. In the case of both negative and positive externalities,
prices in a competitive market do not reflect the full costs or benefits of
producing or consuming a product or service. Producers and consumers may
neither bear all of the costs nor reap all of the benefits of the economic
activity, and too much or too little of the goods will be produced or consumed
in terms of overall costs and benefits to society. For example, manufacturing
that causes air pollution imposes costs on the whole society, while fire-
proofing a home improves the fire safety of neighbors. If there exist external
costs such as pollution, the good will be overproduced by a competitive market,
as the producer does not take into account the external costs when producing
the good. If there are external benefits, such as in areas of education or
public safety, too little of the good would be produced by private markets as
producers and buyers do not take into account the external benefits to others.
Here, overall cost and benefit to society is defined as the sum of the economic
benefits and costs for all parties involved. The term "externalities" is
regularly misunderstood by some critics of economics, who allege that it is an
attempt to relabel the socially disruptive consequences of corporate activity,
and frame them as inevitable and acceptable. However, this does not reflect the
actual meaning of the term. In fact, economists often use externalities as a
justification for government intervention in the economy. Implications.
Standard economic theory states that any voluntary exchange is mutually
beneficial to both parties involved in the trade. This is because buyers or
sellers would not trade if either thought it not beneficial to themselves.
However, an exchange can cause additional effects on third parties. From the
perspective of those affected, these effects may be negative (pollution from a
factory), or positive (honey bees kept for honey that also pollinate crops).
Welfare economics has shown that the existence of externalities results in
outcomes that are not socially optimal. Those who suffer from external costs do
so involuntarily, while those who enjoy external benefits do so at no cost. A
voluntary exchange may reduce societal welfare if external costs exist. The
person who is affected by the negative externalities in the case of air
pollution will see it as lowered utility: either subjective displeasure or
potentially explicit costs, such as higher medical expenses. The externality
may even be seen as a trespass on their lungs, violating their property rights.
Thus, an external cost may pose an ethical or political problem. Alternatively,
it might be seen as a case of poorly defined property rights, as with, for
example, pollution of bodies of water that may belong to no-one (either
figuratively, in the case of publicly owned, or literally, in some countries
and/or legal traditions). On the other hand, a positive externality would
increase the utility of third parties at no cost to them. Since collective
societal welfare is improved, but the providers have no way of monetizing the
benefit, less of the good will be produced than would be optimal for society as
a whole. Goods with positive externalities include education (believed to
increase societal productivity and well-being; but controversial, as these
benefits are generally internalized, e.g., in the form of higher wages), public
health initiatives (which may reduce the health risks and costs for third
parties for such things as transmittable diseases) and law enforcement.
Positive externalities are often associated with the free rider problem. For
example, individuals who are vaccinated reduce the risk of contracting the
relevant disease for all others around them, and at high levels of vaccination,
society may receive large health and welfare benefits; but any one individual
can refuse vaccination, still avoiding the disease by "free riding" on the
costs borne by others. There are a number of potential means of improving
overall social utility when externalities are involved. The market-driven
approach to correcting externalities is to ""internalize"" third party costs
and benefits, for example, by requiring a polluter to repair any damage caused.
But, in many cases internalizing costs or benefits is not feasible, especially
if the true monetary values cannot be determined. Laissez-faire economists such
as Friedrich Hayek and Milton Friedman sometimes refer to externalities as
"neighborhood effects" or "spillovers", although externalities are not
necessarily minor or localized. Similarly, Ludwig Heinrich Edler von Mises
argues that externalities arise from lack of "clear personal property
definition." Examples. Negative. A negative externality (also called "external
cost" or "external diseconomy") is an action of a product on consumers that
imposes a negative side effect on a third party; it is "social cost". Many
negative externalities are related to the environmental consequences of
production and use. The article on environmental economics also addresses
externalities and how they may be addressed in the context of environmental
issues. Positive. As noted, externalities (or proposed solutions to
externalities) may also imply political conflicts, rancorous lawsuits, and the
like. This may make the problem of externalities too complex for the concept of
Pareto optimality to handle. Similarly, if too many positive externalities fall
outside the participants in a transaction, there will be too little incentive
on parties to participate in activities that lead to the positive
externalities. A common solution to providing positive externalities is
taxation. A tax requires everyone to pay for a beneficial service, such as
police and fire protection, which eliminates the free rider problem. A second
way is an Individual mandate, a legal requirement that people purchase a
beneficial product, such as insurance. In the United States, the 2010 Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act included a requirement that all citizens
purchase health insurance to eliminate the free rider problem. Positional.
Positional externalities refer to a special type of externality that depends on
the relative rankings of actors in a situation. Because every actor is
attempting to "one up" other actors, the consequences are unintended and
economically inefficient. One example is the phenomenon of "over-education"
(referring to post-secondary education) in the North American labour market. In
the 1960s, many young middle-class North Americans prepared for their careers
by completing a bachelor's degree. However, by the 1990s, many people from the
same social milieu were completing master's degrees, hoping to "one up" the
other competitors in the job market by signalling their higher quality as
potential employees. By the 2000s, some jobs which had previously only demanded
bachelor's degrees, such as policy analysis posts, were requiring master's
degrees. Some economists argue that this increase in educational requirements
was above that which was efficient, and that it was a misuse of the societal
and personal resources that go into the completion of these master's degrees.
Another example is the buying of jewelry as a gift for another person, e.g. a
spouse. For Husband A to show that he values Wife A more than Husband B values
Wife B, Husband A must buy more expensive jewelry than Husband B. As in the
first example, the cycle continues to get worse, because every actor positions
him or herself in relation to the other actors. This is sometimes called
keeping up with the Joneses. One solution to such externalities is regulations
imposed by an outside authority. For the first example, the government might
pass a law against firms requiring master's degrees unless the job actually
required these advanced skills. Inframarginal. Inframarginal externalities are
externalities in which there is no benefit or loss to the marginal consumer. In
other words, people neither gain nor lose anything at the margin, but benefits
and costs do exist for those consumers within the given inframarginal range.
Technological. Technological externalities directly affect a firm's production
and therefore, indirectly influence an individual's consumption. Supply and
demand diagram. The usual economic analysis of externalities can be illustrated
using a standard supply and demand diagram if the externality can be valued in
terms of money. An extra supply or demand curve is added, as in the diagrams
below. One of the curves is the "private cost" that consumers pay as
individuals for additional quantities of the good, which in competitive
markets, is the marginal private cost. The other curve is the "true" cost that
society as a whole pays for production and consumption of increased production
the good, or the marginal social cost. Similarly there might be two curves for
the demand or benefit of the good. The social demand curve would reflect the
benefit to society as a whole, while the normal demand curve reflects the
benefit to consumers as individuals and is reflected as effective demand in the
market. External costs. The graph below shows the effects of a negative
externality. For example, the steel industry is assumed to be selling in a
competitive market â€“ before pollution-control laws were imposed and enforced
(e.g. under laissez-faire). The marginal private cost is less than the marginal
social or public cost by the amount of the external cost, i.e., the cost of air
pollution and water pollution. This is represented by the vertical distance
between the two supply curves. It is assumed that there are no external
benefits, so that social benefit "equals" individual benefit. If the consumers
only take into account their own private cost, they will end up at price Pp and
quantity Qp, instead of the more efficient price Ps and quantity Qs. These
latter reflect the idea that the marginal social benefit should equal the
marginal social cost, that is that production should be increased "only" as
long as the marginal social benefit exceeds the marginal social cost. The
result is that a free market is "inefficient" since at the quantity Qp, the
social benefit is less than the social cost, so society as a whole would be
better off if the goods between Qp and Qs had not been produced. The problem is
that people are buying and consuming "too much" steel. This discussion implies
that negative externalities (such as pollution) are "more than" merely an
ethical problem. The problem is one of the disjuncture between marginal private
and social costs that is not solved by the free market. It is a problem of
societal communication and coordination to balance costs and benefits. This
also implies that pollution is not something solved by competitive markets.
Some "collective" solution is needed, such as a court system to allow parties
affected by the pollution to be compensated, government intervention banning or
discouraging pollution, or economic incentives such as green taxes. External
benefits. The graph below shows the effects of a positive or beneficial
externality. For example, the industry supplying smallpox vaccinations is
assumed to be selling in a competitive market. The marginal private benefit of
getting the vaccination is less than the marginal social or public benefit by
the amount of the external benefit (for example, society as a whole is
increasingly protected from smallpox by each vaccination, including those who
refuse to participate). This marginal external benefit of getting a smallpox
shot is represented by the vertical distance between the two demand curves.
Assume there are no external costs, so that social cost "equals" individual
cost. If consumers only take into account their own private benefits from
getting vaccinations, the market will end up at price Pp and quantity Qp as
before, instead of the more efficient price Ps and quantity Qs. These latter
again reflect the idea that the marginal social benefit should equal the
marginal social cost, i.e., that production should be increased as long as the
marginal social benefit exceeds the marginal social cost. The result in an
unfettered market is "inefficient" since at the quantity Qp, the social benefit
is greater than the societal cost, so society as a whole would be better off if
more goods had been produced. The problem is that people are buying "too few"
vaccinations. The issue of external benefits is related to that of public
goods, which are goods where it is difficult if not impossible to exclude
people from benefits. The production of a public good has beneficial
externalities for all, or almost all, of the public. As with external costs,
there is a problem here of societal communication and coordination to balance
benefits and costs. This also implies that vaccination is not something solved
by competitive markets. The government may have to step in with a collective
solution, such as subsidizing or legally requiring vaccine use. If the
government does this, the good is called a merit good. Possible solutions. A
Pigovian tax is a tax imposed that is equal in value to the negative
externality. The result is that the market outcome would be reduced to the
efficient amount. A side effect is that revenue is raised for the government,
reducing the amount of distortionary taxes that the government must impose
elsewhere. Economists prefer Pigovian taxes and subsidies as being the least
intrusive and most efficient method to resolve externalities. Governments
justify the use of Pigouvian Taxes saying that these taxes help the market
reach an efficient outcome because this tax bridges the gap between marginal
social costs and marginal private costs. Some counter arguments against
Pigouvian Taxes say that the tax does not account for all the transfers and
regulations involved with an externality. In other words, the tax only
considers the amount of externality produced. Another argument against the tax
is: it does not take private property into consideration. Under the Pigouvian
system, one firm for example, can be taxed more than another firm, when in
reality, the latter firm is producing greater amounts of the negative
externality. However, the most common type of solution is tacit agreement
through the political process. Governments are elected to represent citizens
and to strike political compromises between various interests. Normally
governments pass laws and regulations to address pollution and other types of
environmental harm. These laws and regulations can take the form of "command
and control" regulation (such as setting standards, targets, or process
requirements), or environmental pricing reform (such as ecotaxes or other
pigovian taxes, tradable pollution permits or the creation of markets for
ecological services). The second type of resolution is a purely private
agreement between the parties involved. Government intervention may not always
be needed. Traditional ways of life may have evolved as ways to deal with
external costs and benefits. Alternatively, democratically run communities can
agree to deal with these costs and benefits in an amicable way. Externalities
can sometimes be resolved by agreement between the parties involved. This
resolution may even come about because of the threat of government action.
Ronald Coase argued that if all parties involved can easily organize payments
so as to pay each other for their actions, then an efficient outcome can be
reached without government intervention. Some take this argument further, and
make the political claim that government should restrict its role to
facilitating bargaining among the affected groups or individuals and to
enforcing any contracts that result. This result, often known as the Coase
Theorem, requires that If all of these conditions apply, the private parties
can bargain to solve the problem of externalities. This theorem would not apply
to the steel industry case discussed above. For example, with a steel factory
that trespasses on the lungs of a large number of individuals with pollution,
it is difficult if not impossible for any one person to negotiate with the
producer, and there are large transaction costs. Hence the most common approach
may be to regulate the firm (by imposing limits on the amount of pollution
considered "acceptable") while paying for the regulation and enforcement with
taxes. The case of the vaccinations would also not satisfy the requirements of
the Coase Theorem. Since the potential external beneficiaries of vaccination
are the people themselves, the people would have to self-organize to pay each
other to be vaccinated. But such an organization that involves the entire
populace would be indistinguishable from government action. In some cases, the
Coase theorem is relevant. For example, if a logger is planning to clear-cut a
forest in a way that has a negative impact on a nearby resort, the resort-owner
and the logger could, in theory, get together to agree to a deal. For example,
the resort-owner could pay the logger not to clear-cut â€“ or could buy the
forest. The most problematic situation, from Coase's perspective, occurs when
the forest literally does not belong to anyone; the question of "who" owns the
forest is not important, as any specific owner will have an interest in coming
to an agreement with the resort owner (if such an agreement is mutually
beneficial). However, the Coase Theorem is difficult to implement because Coase
does not offer a negotiation method.Additionally, firms could potentially bribe
each other since there is little to no government interaction under the Coase
Theorem. For example, if one oil firm has a high pollution rate and its
neighboring firm is bothered by the pollution, then the latter firm may move
depending on incentives. Thus, if the oil firm were to bribe the second firm,
the first oil firm would suffer no negative consequences because the government
would not know about the bribing.
