Fantasy Congress Fantasy Congress was an online fantasy simulation sport where
players, called citizens, could draft members of the United States House and
Senate, and keep track of their participation within the U.S. Congress.
Actions, especially within the process of making and amending pieces of
legislation, of a player's drafted congresspersons were recorded and rated as a
cumulative total amount of points against other players. Fantasy Congress,
which ran from 2006 to 2009, was meant to appeal to both recreational and
educational players; it offered a wide range of links and research tools to
help players in choosing their members of Congress whose activity their scores
will derive from. The creators explained that the game could even work to make
the government more accountable. History. The premise of Fantasy Congress was
originally developed by students at Claremont McKenna College in Claremont,
California. They came up with an idea for a game that would blend the trading
and other gameplay of popular fantasy sports games with politics. Gameplay.
Points within Fantasy Congress were calculated based on "Legislative success"
(including co-sponsored legislation and amendments), voting attendance,
"Maverick Score" (the willingness of a member of Congress to cross party lines
in close party votes), and noteworthy news mentions. Legislative success is the
progress of a congressperson's sponsored or cosponsored legislation through the
U.S. legislative process, all the way up to the President's signature or veto.
Also, small legislative actions counted for points, such as amendments and
changes to the legislation.
