Favourite A favourite (British English), or favorite (American English), was
the intimate companion of a ruler or other important person. In medieval and
Early Modern Europe, among other times and places, the term is used of
individuals delegated significant political power by a ruler. It is especially
a phenomenon of the 16th and 17th centuries, when government had become too
complex for many hereditary rulers with no great interest or talent for it, and
political constitutions were still evolving. The period 1600-1660 saw
particular successions of all-powerful minister-favourites in much of Europe,
particularly in Spain, England, France and Sweden. The term is also sometimes
employed by conservative writers who want to avoid terms such as "royal
mistress", or "friend", "companion" or "lover" of either sex. Several
favourites had sexual relations with the monarch (or their spouse), but the
feelings of the monarch for the favourite covered the full gamut from a simple
faith in the favourite's abilities, through various degrees of emotional
affection and dependence, to sexual infatuation. The term has an inbuilt
element of disapproval, and is defined by the "Oxford English Dictionary" as
"One who stands unduly high in the favour of a prince", citing Shakespeare:
"Like favourites/ Made proud by Princes". Rises and falls of favourites.
Favourites inevitably tended to incur the envy and loathing of the rest of the
nobility, and monarchs were sometimes obliged by political pressure to dismiss
or execute them; in the Middle Ages nobles often rebelled in order to seize and
kill a favourite. Too close a relationship between monarch and favourite was
seen as a breach of the natural order and hierarchy of society. Since many
favourites had flamboyant "over-reaching" personalities, they often led the way
to their own downfall with their rash behaviour. As the opinions of the gentry
and bourgeoisie grew in importance, they too often strongly disliked
favourites. Dislike from all classes could be especially intense in the case of
favourites who were elevated from humble, or at least minor, backgrounds by
royal favour. Titles and estates were usually given lavishly to favourites, who
were compared to mushrooms because they sprang up suddenly overnight, from a
bed of excrement. The King's favourite Piers Gaveston is a "night-grown
mushrump" (mushroom) to his enemies in Christopher Marlowe's "Edward II". Their
falls could be even more sudden, although after about 1650, executions tended
to give way to quiet retirement. Favourites who came from the higher nobility,
such as Leicester, Lerma, Olivares, and Oxenstierna, were often less resented
and lasted longer. Successful minister-favourites also usually needed networks
of their own favourites and relatives to help them carry out the work of
government - Richelieu had his "cr√©atures" and Olivares his "hechuras".
Oxenstierna and William Cecil, who both died in office, successfully trained
their sons to succeed them. The favourite can often not be easily distinguished
from the successful royal administrator, who at the top of the tree certainly
needed the favour of the monarch, but the term is generally used of those who
first came into contact with the monarch through the social life of the court,
rather than the business of politics or administration. Figures like Thomas
More, William Cecil and Jean-Baptiste Colbert, whose accelerated rise through
the administrative ranks owed much to their personal relations with the
monarch, but who did not attempt to behave like grandees of the nobility, were
also often successful. Cardinal Wolsey was one figure who rose through the
administrative hierarchy, but then lived extremely ostentatiously, before
falling suddenly from power. In the Middle Ages in particular, many royal
favourites were promoted in the church, English examples including Saints
Dunstan and Thomas Becket; Bishops William Waynflete, Robert Burnell and Walter
Reynolds. Cardinal Granvelle, like his father, was a trusted Habsburg minister
who lived grandly, but not really a favourite, not least because his career was
mostly spent away from the monarch. Some favourites came from very humble
backgrounds: Archibald Armstrong, jester to James I of England infuriated
everyone else at court but managed to retire a wealthy man, unlike Robert
Cochrane, a stonemason (probably a senior one, more like an architect than an
artisan) who became Earl of Mar before the Scottish nobles revolted against
him, and hanged him and other "low-born" favourites of James III of Scotland.
Olivier le Daim, the barber of Louis XI, acquired a title and important
military commands before being executed on vague charges brought by nobles
shortly after his master died, without the knowledge of the new king. It has
been claimed that le Daim's career was the origin of the term, as "favori" (the
French word) first appears around the time of his death in 1484. "Privado" in
Spanish was older, but was later partly replaced by the term "valido"; in
Spanish both terms were less derogatory than in French and English. Such rises
from "menial" positions became progressively harder as the centuries
progressed; one of the last families able to jump the widening chasm between
servants and nobility was that of Louis XIV's valet, Alexandre Bontemps, whose
descendants, holding the office for a further three generations, married into
many great families, even eventually including the extended royal family
itself. Queen Victoria's John Brown came much too late; the devotion of the
monarch and ability to terrorize her household led to hardly any rise in social
or economic position. Decline of the favourite. In England, the scope for
giving political power to a favourite was reduced by the growing importance of
Parliament. After the "mushroom" Buckingham was assassinated by John Felton in
1628, Charles I turned to Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford, who had been
a leader of Parliamentary opposition to Buckingham and the King, but had become
his supporter after Charles made concessions. Strafford can therefore hardly be
called a favourite in the usual sense, even though his relationship with
Charles became very close. He was also from a well-established family, with
powerful relations. After several years in power, Strafford was impeached by a
Parliament now very hostile to him. When this process failed, they passed a
bill of attainder for his execution without trial, and put enough pressure on
Charles that, to his subsequent regret, he signed it, and Strafford was
executed in 1641. There were later minister-favourites in England, but they
knew that the favour of the monarch alone was not sufficient to rule, and most
also had careers in Parliament. In France, the movement was in the opposite
direction. On the death of Cardinal Mazarin in 1661, the 23-year-old Louis XIV
determined that he would rule himself, and not allow the delegation of power to
ministers that had marked the previous 40 years. The absolute monarchy
pioneered by Cardinal Richelieu, Mazarin's predecessor, was to be led by the
monarch himself. Louis had many powerful ministers, notably Colbert heading the
Finances, and Louvois the Armies, but overall direction was never delegated,
and no subsequent French minister ever equaled the power of the two Cardinals.
The Spanish Habsburgs were not capable of so much energy, but when Olivares was
succeeded by his nephew Luis de Haro, the last real "valido", the control of
government into a single pair of hands was already weakened. Favourites in
literature. Favourites were the subject of much contemporary debate, some of it
involving a certain amount of danger for the participants. There were a large
number of English plays on the subject, amongst the best known being Marlowe's
"Edward II", in which Piers Gaveston is a leading character, and "Sejanus His
Fall" (1603), for which Ben Jonson was called before the Privy Council, accused
of "Popery and treason", as the play was claimed by his enemies to contain
allusions to the contemporary court of James I of England. Sejanus, whose
career under Tiberius was vividly described by Tacitus, was the subject of
numerous works all around Europe. Shakespeare was more cautious, and with the
exceptions of Falstaff, badly disappointed in his hopes of becoming a
favourite, and Cardinal Wolsey in "Henry VIII", he gives no major parts to
favourites. or privadoes ... And we see plainly that this hath been done, not
by weak and passionate princes only, but by the wisest and most politic that
ever reigned; who have oftentimes joined to themselves some of their servants;
whom both themselves have called friends, and allowed other likewise to call
them in the same manner; using the word which is received between private men."
Writing of George III's old tutor, the Earl of Bute, who became Prime Minister,
Macaulay wrote in 1844: "He was a favourite; and favourites have always been
odious in this country. No mere favourite had been at the head of the
government since the dagger of Felton had reached the heart of the Duke of
Buckingham".
