FireHollywood FireHollywood, originally named Patriotic Americans Boycotting
Anti-American Hollywood (or PABAAH) was a U.S. nationalist-conservative
organization that called for the boycott of Hollywood films made by film makers
who have made statements deemed by the group to be "unpatriotic," "anti-
American" or treasonous. Though it mainly targeted film makers, it targeted
other pop-culture figures, including musicians. PABAAH was formed by Jon
Alvarez (born circa 1966, deceased 2011) in reaction to the "Not in Our Name"
Internet petition against the 2003 invasion of Iraq, which included many
celebrity signatures. According to Alvarez, these celebrities were
"unpatriotic" for making political stances against current President George W.
Bush, his foreign policy and otherwise "tepping out of their roles as
entertainers." FireHollywood has been criticized for this attitude â€”many who
visit the site, including moderate conservatives, have accused the group of
advocating censorship. Some within the group have advocated views in favor of
certain limited kinds of censorship, but others argue that the main goal of the
group is to deny liberal celebrities a living in the movie business, not the
right to free speech. Regardless of its intentions, the group's boycotting
techniques have been compared to McCarthyism. In addition to its support for
the war in Iraq, FireHollywood also supports other initiatives such as the
repeal of the 22nd Amendment, which prohibits presidents from serving more than
two terms. FireHollywood has also petitioned the Attorney General to try
Michael Moore for treason against the United States. In tow with their
nationalist leanings, some in the group advocate racial profiling when it comes
to the movement of Arab minorities in Western nations. FireHollywood gained
some national and international attention, being covered by some major news
broadcasts, newspaper columnists and "The Daily Show with Jon Stewart". In its
PABAAH days, the group received attention in the indie press by pursuing
college radio stations for playing music by the anti-Bush industrial group
Skinny Puppy. PABAAH's actions, according to the vocalist from the band,
actually increased record sales. PABAAH was best known on this level for its
extensive and frequently-updated website list of those who have made statements
that are considered by the group to be either anti-Bush or "anti-American",
including non-Americans like Canadians Neil Young and Dave Thomas, as well as
British musician Sting. Celebrities who support the Bush administration (or,
presumably, those who have remained neutral on the subject) are posted on a
similar list of "Patriotic Entertainers", which also includes non-Americans
like Canadian comedian Norm Macdonald and British actor Gary Oldman. In 2005,
founder Jon Alvarez, a native of Baldwinsville, New York, left the group to
join the Army Reserve.
