Fractional reserve banking Fractional-reserve banking is the practice whereby
banks retain only a portion of their customers' deposits as readily available
reserves from which to satisfy demands for payment. The remainder of customer-
deposited funds are used as reserves against other liabilities, including new
demand deposits the bank creates when it funds loans it later makes to other
customers. Fractional-reserve banking thus permits the money supply available
for business transactions to grow to a multiple of the banks' underlying
reserves. This practice predates the existence of governmental monetary
authorities and originated many centuries ago in bankers' discovery that
depositors generally do not all demand payment at the same time. Starting in
the late 1600's nations began to establish central banks which were given the
legal power to set reserve requirements and to issue the reserve assets, or
monetary base, in which form such reserves are required to be held. The
reciprocal of the reserve requirement, called the money multiplier, limits the
size to which the transactions money supply may grow for a given level of
reserves in the banking system. Despite such regulation of bank credit
creation, problems may arise when a large proportion of depositors seek
withdrawal of their demand deposits at the same time; this can cause a bank run
or, when problems are extreme and widespread, a systemic crisis. To mitigate
this risk, the governments of most countries (usually acting through the
central bank) regulate and oversee commercial banks, provide deposit insurance
and act as lender of last resort to commercial banks. Fractional-reserve
banking is the current form of banking in all countries worldwide. How it
works. In most legal systems, a deposit at a bank is considered a loan from the
customer to the bank. That is, the funds deposited are no longer the property
of the customer; in other words, a bank deposit is not a bailment. The funds
become the property of the bank, and the customer in turn receives (or
increases his or her balance in) an asset called a deposit account (e.g., a
checking or savings account). That same deposit account is a "liability" of the
bank on the bank's books, and in the bank's financial statements. Because the
bank in turn makes loans to borrowers, paper currency and current coins
(together referred to as "currency") at the bank available to repay customers
with respect to the demand deposit liabilities of the bank are only a fraction
of the amounts owed by the bank to its depositors. In the absence of crises,
fractional-reserve banking usually functions smoothly because at any one time
relatively few depositors will make currency withdrawals simultaneously
compared to the total amount on deposit, and a currency reserve can be
maintained as a buffer to deal with the normal cash demands from depositors
seeking withdrawals. In addition, in a normal economic environment, currency is
steadily being introduced into the economy by the central bank, and new funds
are steadily being deposited into the commercial banks. However, if a bank is
experiencing a financial crisis, and net redemption demands are unusually large
over a period of time, the bank will run low on currency (and other) reserves,
and will be forced to raise additional funds to avoid running out of reserves
and thereby defaulting on its obligations. A bank can raise funds from
additional borrowings (e.g., by borrowing from the money market or from the
central bank), by selling assets, or by calling in short-term loans. If
creditors are afraid that the bank is running out of currency or is insolvent,
they have an incentive to redeem their deposits as soon as possible before
other depositors access the remaining currency reserves. This can exacerbate
the crisis and trigger a bank run. Demand depositors can demand all of their
deposits at any time, even though most of the bank's currency has already been
invested by the bank in interest bearing loans and securities. If all the
depositors of a bank attempted to withdraw their deposits at the same time, a
bank run would occur, and the bank would likely collapse. Due to the practice
of central banking, this is a rare event today, as central banks usually
guarantee the deposit liabilities at commercial banks, and act as lender of
last resort when there is a run on a bank. However, there have been some recent
bank runs: the Northern Rock crisis of 2007 in the United Kingdom is an
example. Economic function. Fractional-reserve banking permits a bank to make
loans against the reserves it takes in as demand deposits. Full reserve banking
would not permit lending from demand deposits. Fractional reserve banks can
thus offer demand accounts, which provide immediate liquidity to depositors,
and also provide longer-term loans to borrowers from the same funds. Less
liquid forms of deposit (such as time deposits) or riskier classes of financial
assets (such as equities or long-term bonds) may lock up a depositor's wealth
for a period of time, making it unavailable for use on demand. This "borrowing
short, lending long," or maturity transformation function of fractional-reserve
banking is a role that many economists consider to be an important function of
the commercial banking system. Additionally, according to macroeconomic theory,
a well-regulated fractional-reserve bank system also benefits the economy by
providing regulators with powerful tools for influencing the money supply and
interest rates. Many economists believe that these should be adjusted by
government to promote various public policy objectives. History. Savers looking
to keep their valuables in safekeeping depositories deposited gold coins and
silver coins at goldsmiths, receiving in turn a note for their deposit ("see
Bank of Amsterdam"). Once these notes became a trusted medium of exchange an
early form of paper money was born, in the form of the goldsmiths' notes. As
the notes were used directly in trade, the goldsmiths observed that people
would not usually redeem all their notes at the same time, and they saw the
opportunity to invest their coin reserves in interest-bearing loans and bills.
This generated income for the goldsmiths but left them with more notes on issue
than reserves with which to pay them. A process was started that altered the
role of the goldsmiths from passive guardians of bullion, charging fees for
safe storage, to interest-paying and interest-earning banks. Thus fractional-
reserve banking was born. However, if creditors (note holders of gold
originally deposited) lost faith in the ability of a bank to their notes, many
would try to redeem their notes at the same time. If in response a bank could
not raise enough funds by calling in loans or selling bills, it either went
into insolvency or defaulted on its notes. Such a situation is called a bank
run and caused the demise of many early banks. While some economists see this
re-lending of customer money as fraud, governments |format=HTML}}, governments
saw an opportunity to license this re-lending while reducing the bank failures
and financial crises it causes by the creation of central banks â€“ public
institutions that have the authority to regulate commercial banks, impose
reserve requirements, and act as lender-of-last-resort if a bank runs low on
liquidity. The emergence of central banks mitigated the dangers associated with
fractional-reserve banking. In the early 1990s, a consensus emerged within
developed economies about the optimum design of monetary policy. In essence,
central bankers gave up attempts to directly control the amount of money in the
economy and instead moved to indirect means by targeting interest rates. This
consensus is criticized by some economists. Money creation process. Modern
central banking allows banks to practice fractional-reserve banking with inter-
bank business transactions with a reduced risk of bankruptcy. The process of
fractional-reserve banking expands the money supply of the economy but also
increases the risk that a bank cannot meet its depositor withdrawals. A number
of central bankers, monetary economists, and textbooks, have claimed that the
size of the money supply depends primarily on the target rate set by the
central bank, and not on the reserve ratio as one may expect. The lower the
interest rate, the more money banks will create through the extension of
credit. While banks may seem limited by their reserve requirements in the
amount of credit they can extend, central bank market operations will provide
base money on demand to meet the banks reserve requirements, after the banks
have begun the lending process and that rather than deposits leading to loans,
causality is reversed, and loans lead to deposits. When a deposit of central
bank money is made at a commercial bank, the central bank money is removed from
circulation and added to the commercial banks' reserves (it is no longer
counted as part of M1 money supply). Simultaneously, an equal amount of new
commercial bank money is created in the form of bank deposits. When a loan is
made by the commercial bank (which keeps only a fraction of the central bank
money as reserves), using the central bank money from the commercial bank's
reserves, the m1 money supply expands by the size of the loan. This process is
called "deposit multiplication". Example of deposit multiplication. The table
below displays the relending model of how loans are funded and how the money
supply is affected. It also shows how central bank money is used to create
commercial bank money from an initial deposit of $100 of central bank money. In
the example, the initial deposit is lent out 10 times with a fractional-reserve
rate of 20% to ultimately create $500 of commercial bank money. Each successive
bank involved in this process creates new commercial bank money on a
diminishing portion of the original deposit of central bank money. This is
because banks only lend out a portion of the central bank money deposited, in
order to fulfill reserve requirements and to ensure that they always have
enough reserves on hand to meet normal transaction demands. The relending model
begins when an initial $100 deposit of central bank money is made into Bank A.
Bank A takes 20 percent of it, or $20, and sets it aside as reserves, and then
loans out the remaining 80 percent, or $80. At this point, the money supply
actually totals $180, not $100, because the bank has loaned out $80 of the
central bank money, kept $20 of central bank money in reserve (not part of the
money supply), and substituted a newly created $100 IOU claim for the depositor
that "acts equivalently to and can be implicitly redeemed for" central bank
money (the depositor can transfer it to another account, write a check on it,
demand his cash back, etc.). These claims by depositors on banks are termed
"demand deposits" or "commercial bank money" and are simply recorded in a
bank's accounts as a liability (specifically, an IOU to the depositor). From a
depositor's perspective, commercial bank money is equivalent to central bank
money â€“ it is impossible to tell the two forms of money apart unless a bank
run occurs. At this point in the relending model, Bank A now only has $20 of
central bank money on its books. The loan recipient is holding $80 in central
bank money, but he soon spends the $80. The receiver of that $80 then deposits
it into Bank B. Bank B is now in the same situation as Bank A started with,
except it has a deposit of $80 of central bank money instead of $100. Similar
to Bank A, Bank B sets aside 20 percent of that $80, or $16, as reserves and
lends out the remaining $64, increasing money supply by $64. As the process
continues, more commercial bank money is created. To simplify the table, a
different bank is used for each deposit. In the real world, the money a bank
lends may end up in the same bank so that it then has more money to lend out.
Although no new money was physically created in addition to the initial $100
deposit, new commercial bank money is created through loans. The 2 boxes marked
in red show the location of the original $100 deposit throughout the entire
process. The total reserves plus the last deposit (or last loan, whichever is
last) will always equal the original amount, which in this case is $100. As
this process continues, more commercial bank money is created. The amounts in
each step decrease towards a limit. If a graph is made showing the accumulation
of deposits, one can see that the graph is curved and approaches a limit. This
limit is the maximum amount of money that can be created with a given reserve
rate. When the reserve rate is 20%, as in the example above, the maximum amount
of total deposits that can be created is $500 and the maximum increase in the
money supply is $400. For an individual bank, the deposit is considered a
"liability" whereas the loan it gives out and the reserves are considered
"assets". Deposits will always be equal to loans plus a bank's reserves, since
loans and reserves are created from deposits. This is the basis for a bank's
"balance sheet". Fractional-reserve banking allows the money supply to expand
or contract. Generally the expansion or contraction of the money supply is
dictated by the balance between the rate of new loans being created and the
rate of existing loans being repaid or defaulted on. The balance between these
two rates can be influenced to some degree by actions of the central bank.
Money supplies around the world. [[File:Components of the United States money
supply2.svg|thumb|400px|Components of US money supply (currency, M1, M2, and
M3) since 1959. In January 2007, the amount of "central bank money" was $750.5
billion while the amount of "commercial bank money" (in the M2 supply) was
$6.33 trillion. M1 is currency plus demand deposits; M2 is M1 plus time
deposits, savings deposits, and some money-market funds; and M3 is M2 plus
large time deposits and other forms of money. The M3 data ends in 2006 because
the federal reserve ceased reporting it.]] Fractional-reserve banking
determines the relationship between the amount of "central bank money" in the
official money supply statistics and the total money supply. Most of the money
in these systems is "commercial bank money". Fractional-reserve banking allows
the creation of commercial bank money, which increases the money supply through
the deposit creation multiplier. The issue of money through the banking system
is a mechanism of monetary transmission, which a central bank can influence
indirectly by raising or lowering interest rates (although banking regulations
may also be adjusted to influence the money supply, depending on the
circumstances). This table gives an outline of the makeup of money supplies
worldwide. Most of the money in any given money supply consists of commercial
bank money. The value of commercial bank money is based on the fact that it can
be exchanged freely at a bank for central bank money. The actual increase in
the money supply through this process may be lower, as (at each step) banks may
choose to hold reserves in excess of the statutory minimum, borrowers may let
some funds sit idle, and some members of the public may choose to hold cash,
and there also may be delays or frictions in the lending process. Government
regulations may also be used to limit the money creation process by preventing
banks from giving out loans even though the reserve requirements have been
fulfilled. Money multiplier. The most common mechanism used to measure this
increase in the money supply is typically called the "money multiplier". It
calculates the maximum amount of money that an initial deposit can be expanded
to with a given reserve ratio. Formula. This number is multiplied by the
initial deposit to show the maximum amount of money it can be expanded to. The
money creation process is also affected by the currency drain ratio (the
propensity of the public to hold banknotes rather than deposit them with a
commercial bank), and the safety reserve ratio (excess reserves beyond the
legal requirement that commercial banks voluntarily hold â€“ usually a small
amount). Data for "excess" reserves and vault cash are published regularly by
the Federal Reserve in the United States. In practice, the actual money
multiplier varies over time, and may be substantially lower than the
theoretical maximum. Confusingly there are many different "money multipliers",
some referring to ratios of rates of change of different money measures and
others referring to ratios of absolute values of money measures. Reserve
requirements. In practice, some central banks do not require reserves to be
held, and in some countries that do, such as the USA and the EU they are not
required to be held during the day when the banks are lending, and banks can
borrow from other banks at near the central bank policy rate to ensure they
have the necessary amount of required reserves by the close of business.
"Required" reserves are therefore considered by some central bankers, monetary
economists and textbooks to only play a very small role in limiting money
creation in these countries. Most commentators agree however, that they help
the banks have sufficient supplies of highly liquid assets, so that the system
operates in an orderly fashion and maintains public confidence. The UK for
example, which does not have required reserves, does have requirements that the
banks keep a certain amount of cash, and in Australia while there are no
reserve requirements, there "are" a variety of requirements to ensure the banks
have a stabilising ratio of liquid assets, such as deposits held with local
banks. Individual countries adhere to varying required reserve ratios which
have changed over time. In addition to reserve requirements, there are other
required financial ratios that affect the amount of loans that a bank can fund.
The capital requirement ratio is perhaps the most important of these other
required ratios. When there are no mandatory reserve requirements, which are
considered by some economists to restrict lending, the capital requirement
ratio acts to prevent an infinite amount of bank lending. Regulation. Because
the nature of fractional-reserve banking involves the possibility of bank runs,
central banks have been created throughout the world to address these problems.
Liquidity and capital management for a bank. As with reserves, other sources of
liquidity are managed with targets. The ability of the bank to borrow money
reliably and economically is crucial, which is why confidence in the bank's
creditworthiness is important to its liquidity. This means that the bank needs
to maintain adequate capitalisation and to effectively control its exposures to
risk in order to continue its operations. If creditors doubt the bank's assets
are worth more than its liabilities, all demand creditors have an incentive to
demand payment immediately, causing a bank run to occur. Contemporary bank
management methods for liquidity are based on maturity analysis of all the
bank's assets and liabilities (off balance sheet exposures may also be
included). Assets and liabilities are put into residual contractual maturity
buckets such as 'on demand', 'less than 1 month', '2â€“3 months' etc. These
residual contractual maturities may be adjusted to account for expected counter
party behaviour such as early loan repayments due to borrowers refinancing and
expected renewals of term deposits to give forecast cash flows. This analysis
highlights any large future net outflows of cash and enables the bank to
respond before they occur. Scenario analysis may also be conducted, depicting
scenarios including stress scenarios such as a bank-specific crisis. Risk and
prudential regulation. In a fractional-reserve banking system, in the event of
a bank run, the demand depositors and note holders would attempt to withdraw
more money than the bank has in reserves, causing the bank to suffer a
liquidity crisis and, ultimately, to perhaps default. In the event of a
default, the bank would need to liquidate assets and the creditors of the bank
would suffer a loss if the proceeds were insufficient to pay its liabilities.
Since public deposits are payable on demand, liquidation may require selling
assets quickly and potentially in large enough quantities to affect the price
of those assets. An otherwise solvent bank (whose assets are worth more than
its liabilities) may be made insolvent by a bank run. This problem potentially
exists for any corporation with debt or liabilities, but is more critical for
banks as they rely upon public deposits (which may be redeemable upon demand).
Although an initial analysis of a bank run and default points to the bank's
inability to liquidate or sell assets (i.e. because the fraction of assets not
held in the form of liquid reserves are held in less liquid investments such as
loans), a more full analysis indicates that depositors will cause a bank run
only when they have a genuine fear of loss of capital, and that banks with a
strong risk adjusted capital ratio should be able to liquidate assets and
obtain other sources of finance to avoid default. For this reason, fractional-
reserve banks have every reason to maintain their liquidity, even at the cost
of selling assets at heavy discounts and obtaining finance at high cost, during
a bank run (to avoid a total loss for the contributors of the bank's capital,
the shareholders). Many governments have enforced or established deposit
insurance systems in order to protect depositors from the event of bank
defaults and to help maintain public confidence in the fractional-reserve
system. Example of a bank balance sheet and financial ratios. In this example
the cash reserves held by the bank is $3010m ($201m currency + $2809m held at
central bank) and the demand liabilities of the bank are $25482m, for a cash
reserve ratio of 11.81%. Other financial ratios. The key financial ratio used
to analyze fractional-reserve banks is the cash reserve ratio, which is the
ratio of cash reserves to demand deposits. However, other important financial
ratios are also used to analyze the bank's liquidity, financial strength,
profitability etc. It is very important how the term 'reserves' is defined for
calculating the reserve ratio, as different definitions give different results.
Other important financial ratios may require analysis of disclosures in other
parts of the bank's financial statements. In particular, for liquidity risk,
disclosures are incorporated into a note to the financial statements that
provides maturity analysis of the bank's assets and liabilities and an
explanation of how the bank manages its liquidity. Criticisms. Criticisms of
fractional-reserve banking have been put forward from a variety of
perspectives, including those advocating monetary reform. Critics have included
economists such as Irving Fisher and Frank Knight. General criticisms. Austrian
School economist Murray Rothbard asserted that the practice of fractional-
reserve banking amounts to a form of fraud, embezzlement or legalized
counterfeiting. Monetary reformer Michael Rowbotham wrote a book entitled "The
Grip of Death" (the title being derived from the literal origin of the word
"mortgage") in which he also identified the practice as legalized
counterfeiting. Ron Paul, Murray Rothbard, and JÃ¶rg Guido HÃ¼lsmann have all
identified fractional-reserve banking, central banking, and fiat currency as
interdependent and destructive features of modern monetary systems. Lew
Rockwell has written that fiat money and the practice of central bank supported
fractional-reserve banking do not impose any real limits on the growth of the
money supply, and that this causes inherently unsustainable bubbles in asset
and capital markets. Inflation. Fractional-reserve banking supports the
creation of money by the commercial banking system. Some economists state that
under certain conditions, expansion of the transactions money supply (demand
deposits, banknotes, and currency) will cause price inflation.
