France France ( or ; ), officially the French Republic ( ), is a unitary semi-
presidential republic in Western Europe with several overseas territories and
islands. Metropolitan France extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English
Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean. From its
shape, it is often referred to in French as "" ("The Hexagon"). France is the
largest country in Western Europe and the third-largest in Europe as a whole.
It possesses the second-largest exclusive economic zone in the world. Over the
past 500 years, France has been a major power with strong cultural, economic,
military, and political influence in Europe and around the world. France has
its main ideals expressed in the 18th-century Declaration of the Rights of Man
and of the Citizen. From the 17th to the early 20th century, France built the
second-largest colonial empire of the time, ruling large portions of first
North America and India and then Northwest and Central Africa; Madagascar;
Indochina and southeast China; and many Caribbean and Pacific Islands. France
is a developed country: it possesses the world's fifth-largest and Europe's
second-largest economy by nominal GDP; it is the world's ninth-largest by GDP
at purchasing power parity. France is the wealthiest nation in Europe â€“ and
the fourth-wealthiest in the world â€“ in aggregate household wealth. French
citizens enjoy a high standard of living, high public education level, and one
of the world's longest life expectancies. France has been listed as the world's
"best overall health care" provider by the World Health Organization. It is the
most-visited country in the world, receiving 79.5Â million foreign tourists
annually. France has the world's fifth-largest nominal military budget, as well
as (in terms of personnel) the largest military in the EU, the third-largest
deployable force in NATO, and the 26th-largest military in the world. France
also possesses the third-largest stockpile of nuclear weapons in the world â€“
with around 300 active warheads â€“ and the world's second-largest diplomatic
corps (behind the United States). France is a founding member of the United
Nations, one of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, and a
member of the Francophonie, the G8, G20, NATO, OECD, WTO, and the Latin Union.
It is also a founding and leading member state of the European Union and the
largest EU state by area. In 2011, France was listed 20th on the Human
Development Index and, in 2010, 24th on the Corruption Perceptions Index.
Etymology. The name "France" comes from the Latin "", which means "country of
the Franks". There are various theories as to the origin of the name of the
Franks. One is that it is derived from the Proto-Germanic word "frankon" which
translates as "javelin" or "lance" as the throwing axe of the Franks was known
as a francisca. Another proposed etymology is that in an ancient Germanic
language, Frank means "free" as opposed to slave. History. Prehistory. The
oldest traces of human life in what is now France date from approximately
1,800,000 years ago. Men were then confronted by a hard and variable climate,
marked by several glacial eras which modified their framework of life and led
them to a nomadic life of hunters-gatherers. France counts a large number of
decorated caves from the upper Paleolithic era, including one of the most
famous and best preserved: Lascaux (Dordogne, approximately 18,000 BC). At the
end of the Last glacial period (10,000 BC), the climate softened and from
approximately 7,000 BC, this part of Western Europe entered the Neolithic era
and its inhabitants became sedentary. After a strong demographic and
agricultural development between the 4th and 3rd millennia, metallurgy appeared
at the end of the 3rd millennium, initially with the work of gold, copper and
bronze, and later with iron. France counts numerous megalithic sites from the
Neolithic period, including the exceptionally dense Carnac stones site
(Morbihan, approximately 3,300 BC). Gaul. In 600 BC, Ionian Greeks, originating
from Phocaea, founded the colony of Massalia (present-day Marseille), on the
shores of the Mediterranean Sea, making it the oldest city of France. At the
same time, some Gallic Celtic tribes penetrated some parts of the current
territory of France, but this occupation spread in the rest of France only
between the 5th and 3rd century BC. The concept of Gaul emerged at that time;
it corresponds to the territories of Celtic settlement ranging between the
Rhine, the Atlantic Ocean, the Pyrenees and the Mediterranean Sea. The borders
of modern France are approximately the same as those of ancient Gaul, which was
inhabited by Celtic "Gauls". Gaul was then a prosperous country, of which the
southernmost part was heavily subject to Greek and Roman influences. However,
around 390 BC, the Gallic chieftain Brennus and his troops made their way to
Italy through the Alps, defeated the Romans in the Battle of the Allia, and
besieged and ransomed Rome. The Gallic invasion left Rome weakened and
encouraged several subdued Italian tribes to rebel. One by one, over the course
of the next 50 years, these tribes were defeated and brought back under Roman
dominion. The Gauls continued to harass the region until 345 BC, when they
entered into a formal peace treaty with Rome. But the Romans and the Gauls
would maintain an adversarial relationship for the next several centuries and
the Gauls would remain a threat in Italia. Around 125 BC, the south of Gaul was
conquered by the Romans, who called this region "" ("Roman Province"), which
over time evolved into the name Provence in French. Brennus' siege of Rome was
still remembered by Romans, when Julius Caesar conquered the remainder of Gaul
and overcame a revolt carried out by the Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix in 52
BC. Gaul was divided by Augustus into Roman provinces, the principal ones being
Gallia Narbonensis in the south, Gallia Aquitania in the south-west, Gallia
Lugdunensis in the center and Gallia Belgica in the north. Many cities were
founded during the Gallo-Roman period, including Lugdunum (present-day Lyon),
which is considered to be the capital of the Gauls. These cities were built in
the traditional Roman style, with a forum, a theatre, a circus, an amphitheatre
and thermal baths. The Gauls mixed with Roman settlers and eventually adopted
Roman speech (Latin, from which the French language evolved) and Roman culture.
The Roman polytheism merged with the Gallic paganism into the same syncretism.
Around the 3rd century AD, Roman Gaul underwent a serious crisis with its
"limes" (fortified borders protecting the Empire) crossed on several occasions
by Barbarians. The weakness of the central imperial power, at this time, led
Gallo-Roman leaders to proclaim the independence of the short-lived Gallic
Empire, which ended with the Battle of ChÃ¢lons in 274, which saw Gaul
reincorporated in the Roman Empire. Nevertheless, the situation improved in the
first half of the 4th century, which was a period of revival and prosperity for
Roman Gaul. In 312, the emperor Constantin I converted to Christianity.
Christians, persecuted until then, multiplied across the entire Roman Empire.
But, from the second half of the 4th century, the Barbarian Invasions started
again, and Germanic tribes, such as the Vandals, Suebi and Alans crossed the
Rhine and settled in Gaul, Spain and other parts of the collapsing Roman
Empire. Francia. At the end of the Antiquity period, ancient Gaul was divided
into several Germanic kingdoms (Early Francia (North), Alamannia (North-East),
Burgundia (East), Septimania (South), Visigothic Aquitania (South East)) and a
remaining Gallo-Roman territory, known as the Kingdom of Syagrius (West).
Simultaneously, Celtic Britons, fleeing the Anglo-Saxon invasion of
"Britannia", settled the western part of Armorica (far West of Gaul). As a
result, the Armorican peninsula was renamed Brittany, Celtic culture was
revived and independent petty kingdoms arose in this region. The pagan Franks,
from whom the ancient name of "Francie" was derived, originally settled the
northern part of Gaul, but under Clovis I conquered most of the other kingdoms
in northern and central Gaul. In 498, Clovis I was the first Germanic conqueror
after the fall of the Roman Empire to convert to Catholic Christianity, rather
than Arianism; thus France was given the title "Eldest daughter of the Church"
(') by the papacy, and the French kings would be called "the Most Christian
Kings of France" ('). The Franks embraced the Christian Gallo-Roman heritage
and ancient Gaul was eventually renamed "Francia" ("Land of the Franks"). The
Germanic Franks adopted Romanic languages, except in northern Gaul where Roman
settlements were less dense and where Germanic languages emerged. Clovis made
Paris his capital and established the Merovingian dynasty, but his kingdom
would not survive his death. The Franks treated land purely as a private
possession and divided it among their heirs, so four kingdoms emerged from
Clovis's: Paris, OrlÃ©ans, Soissons, and Rheims. The last Merovingian kings,
sometimes referred as "Rois fainÃ©ants" ("lazy kings"), effectively lost power
to their mayors of the palace. One mayor of the palace, Charles Martel,
defeated a Muslim invasion force from Hispania at the Battle of Tours (732) and
earned respect and power within the Frankish kingdoms. His son, Pepin the
Short, eventually seized the crown of Francia from the weakened Merovingians
and founded the Carolingian dynasty. Pepin's son, Charlemagne, reunited the
Frankish kingdoms and built a vast empire across Western and Central Europe.
Proclaimed Holy Roman Emperor by Pope Leo III and thus establishing in earnest
the French government's longtime historical association with the Roman Catholic
Church, Charlemagne tried to revive the Western Roman Empire and its cultural
grandeur, from his Palace of Aachen. The efficient administration of this
immense empire was ensured by high-level civil servants, carrying the, then
non-hereditary, titles of counts (in charge of a County), marquis (in charge of
a March), dukes (military commanders), etc. Charlemagne's son, Louis I (emperor
814â€“840), kept the empire united; however, this Carolingian Empire would not
survive his death. In 843, under the Treaty of Verdun, the empire was divided
between Louis' three sons, with East Francia going to Louis the German, Middle
Francia to Lothair I, and West Francia to Charles the Bald. Western Francia
approximated the area occupied by, and was the precursor, to modern France.
During the course of the 9th and 10th centuries, continually threatened by
Viking invasions, France became a very decentralised state: the nobility's
titles and lands became hereditary, and the authority of the king became more
religious than secular and thus was less effective and constantly challenged by
powerful noblemen. Thus was established feudalism in France. Over time, some of
the king's vassals would grow so powerful that they often posed a threat to the
king. For example, after the Battle of Hastings in 1066, the Duke of Normandy
added "King of England" to his titles, becoming both the vassal to (as Duke of
Normandy) and the equal of (as king of England) to the king of France. Kingdom
of France. The Carolingian dynasty ruled France until 987, when Hugh Capet,
Duke of France and Count of Paris, was crowned King of the Franks. His
descendants the Capetians, the House of Valois, and the House of Bourbon
progressively unified the country through wars and dynastic inheritance into
the Kingdom of France, which was fully declared in 1190 by Philip II Augustus.
French knights took an active part in many of the Crusades that were fought
between 1095 and 1291 to restore Christian control over the Holy Land.
Crusaders were so predominately French that the word "crusader" in the Arabic
language is simply known as "" or "The Franks" and Old French became the
"lingua franca" of the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The Albigensian Crusade was
launched in 1209 to eliminate the heretical Cathars in the south-western area
of modern-day France. In the end, the Cathars were exterminated and the
autonomous County of Toulouse was annexed into the kingdom of France. Later
Kings expanded their territory to cover over half of modern continental France,
including most of the North, Centre and West of France. Meanwhile, the royal
authority became more and more assertive, centred around a hierarchically
conceived society distinguishing nobility, clergy, and commoners. Charles IV
(The Fair) died without an heir in 1328. Under the rules of the Salic law
adopted in 1316, the crown of France could not pass to a woman nor could the
line of kinship pass through the female line. Accordingly, the crown passed to
Philip of Valois, a cousin of Charles, rather than through the female line to
Charles' nephew, Edward, who would soon become Edward III of England. During
the reign of Philip of Valois, the French monarchy reached the height of its
medieval power. However, Philip's seat on the throne was contested by Edward
III of England and in 1337, on the eve of the first wave of the Black Death,
England and France went to war in what would become known as the Hundred Years'
War. The exact boundaries changed greatly with time, but French landholdings of
the English Kings remained extensive for decades. With charismatic leaders,
such as Joan of Arc and La Hire, strong French counterattacks won back all
English continental territories, except Calais, which was captured in 1558 by
the French. Like the rest of Europe, France was struck by the Black Death.
Around 1340, France had a population of approximately 17 million, which by the
end of the pandemic had declined by about one-half. The French Renaissance saw
a long set of wars, known as the Great Italian Wars, between the Kingdom of
France and the powerful Holy Roman Empire. It also saw the first
standardization of the French language, which would become the official
language of France and the language of Europe's aristocracy. French explorers,
such as Jacques Cartier or Samuel de Champlain, claimed lands in the Americas
for France, paving the way for the expansion of the First French colonial
empire. The rise of Protestantism in Europe led France to a civil war known as
the French Wars of Religion, where, in the most notorious incident, thousands
of Huguenots were murdered in the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of 1572. The
Wars of Religion were ended by Henry IV's Edict of Nantes, which granted some
freedom of religion to the Huguenots. Henry IV was later murdered by a Catholic
fanatic and Huguenot rebellions persisted until the 18th century. Under Louis
XIII, the energetic actions of Cardinal Richelieu reinforced the centralization
of the state, the royal power and French dominance in Europe, foreshadowing the
reign of Louis XIV. During Louis XIV's minority and the regency of Queen Anne
and Cardinal Mazarin, a period of trouble known as the Fronde occurred in
France, which was at that time at war with Spain. This rebellion was driven by
the great feudal lords and sovereign courts as a reaction to the rise of royal
power in France. The monarchy reached its peak during the 17th century and the
reign of Louis XIV. By turning powerful feudal lords into courtiers at the
Palace of Versailles, Louis XIV's personal power became unchallenged.
Remembered for his numerous wars, he made France the leading European power of
the time. At this time, France possessed the largest population in Europe (see
Demographics of France) and had tremendous influence over European politics,
economy, and culture. French became the most-used language in diplomacy,
science, literature and international affairs, and remained so until the 20th
century. In addition, France obtained many overseas possessions in the
Americas, Africa and Asia. Louis XIV also revoked the Edict of Nantes, forcing
thousands of Huguenots to exile. Under Louis XV, France lost New France and
most of its Indian possessions after its defeat in the Seven Years' War, which
ended in 1763. Its continental territory kept growing, however, with notable
acquisitions such as Lorraine (1766) and Corsica (1770). An unpopular king,
Louis XV's weak rule, his ill-advised financial, political and military
decisions, and his debauchery discredited the monarchy and arguably led to the
French Revolution 15 years after his death. Louis XVI, Louis XV's grandson,
actively supported the Americans, who were seeking their independence from
Great Britain (realized in the 1783 Treaty of Paris). The example of the
American Revolution and the financial crisis which followed France's
involvement in the war were two of the many contributing factors to the French
Revolution. Much of the Enlightenment occurred in French intellectual circles,
and major scientific breakthroughs and inventions, such as the discovery of
oxygen (1778) and the first hot air balloon carrying passengers (1783), were
achieved by French scientists in the 18th century. Famous French explorers,
such as Bougainville and LapÃ©rouse, took part in the voyages of scientific
exploration through maritime expeditions around the globe. The Enlightenment
philosophy, in which reason is advocated as the primary source for legitimacy
and authority, undermined the power of and support for the monarchy and helped
pave the way for the French Revolution. Republics and Empires. After the
storming of the Bastille on 14 July 1789, the absolute monarchy was abolished
and France became a constitutional monarchy. Through the Declaration of the
Rights of Man and of the Citizen, France established fundamental rights for
French citizens and all men without exception. The Declaration affirms "the
natural and imprescriptible rights of man" to "liberty, property, security and
resistance to oppression". It called for the destruction of aristocratic
privileges (such as exemptions from taxation) and proclaimed freedom and equal
rights for all men, as well as access to public office based on talent rather
than birth. The monarchy was restricted, and all citizens were to have the
right to take part in the legislative process. Freedom of speech and press were
declared, and arbitrary arrests outlawed. The Declaration also asserted the
principles of popular sovereignty, in contrast to the divine right of kings
that characterized the French monarchy, and social equality among citizens,
eliminating the privileges of the nobility and clergy. While Louis XVI, as a
constitutional king, enjoyed broad popularity among the population, his
disastrous flight to Varennes seemed to justify the rumors that the king tied
his hopes of political salvation to the dubious prospects of foreign invasion.
The credibility of the king was deeply undermined and the abolition of the
monarchy and the establishment of a republic became an ever increasing
possibility. As European monarchies gathered against the new rÃ©gime, to
restore the French absolute monarchy, the Duke of Brunswick, commanding general
of the Austroâ€“Prussian Army, issued a Manifesto, in which he threatened the
destruction of Paris if any harm should come to the king or his family. The
foreign threat exacerbated France's political turmoil and deepened the passion
and sense of urgency among the various factions and war was declared against
Austria the 20 April 1792. Mob violences occurred during the insurrection of
the 10 August 1792 and the following month. As a result of the spike in public
violence and the political instability of the constitutional monarchy, the
Republic was proclaimed on 22 September 1792. Louis XVI (and later his wife
Marie Antoinette) was convicted of treason and guillotined in 1793. Facing
increasing pressures from European monarchies, internal guerrilla wars and
counterrevolutions (like the War in the VendÃ©e or the Chouannerie), the young
Republic fell into the Reign of Terror. Between 1793 and 1794, 16,000 to 40,000
persons were executed. In Western France, the civil war between the "Bleus"
(the "Blues", supporters of the Revolution) and the "Blancs" (the "Whites",
supporters of the Monarchy) last from 1793 to 1796 and cost around 450,000
lives (200,000 "Patriotes" and 250,000 "VendÃ©ens"). Both foreign armies and
French counterrevolutionnaries were crushed and the French Republic survived.
Furthermore, the French Republic extended greatly its boundaries and
established "Sister Republics" in the surrounding countries. As the threat of a
foreign invasion receded and that France became mostly pacified, the
Thermidorian Reaction put an end to the Terror and to Robespierre's dictature.
The abolition of slavery and the male universal suffrage, enacted during this
radical phase of the revolution, were cancelled by subsequent governments.
After a short-lived governmental scheme, Napoleon Bonaparte seized control of
the Republic in 1799 and was appointed First Consul and later Emperor of the
French Empire (1804â€“1814/1815). As a continuation of the wars sparked by the
European monarchies against the French Republic, changing sets of European
Coalitions declared wars to Napoleon's French Empire. His armies conquered most
of continental Europe, while members of the Bonaparte family were appointed as
monarchs in some of the newly established kingdoms. These victories led to the
worldwide expansion of French revolutionary ideals and reforms, such as the
Metric system, the Napoleonic Code or the Declaration of the Rights of Man and
of the Citizen. After the catastrophic Russian campaign, Napoleon was finally
defeated and the Bourbon monarchy restored. About a million Frenchmen died
during the Napoleonic Wars. After his brief return from exile, Napoleon was
finally defeated in 1815 at the Battle of Waterloo, the monarchy was re-
established (1815â€“1830), with new constitutional limitations. The discredited
Bourbon dynasty was overthrown by the civil uprising of 1830, which established
the constitutional July Monarchy, which lasted until 1848, when the French
Second Republic was proclaimed, in the wake of the 1848 European revolutions.
The abolition of slavery and the male universal suffrage, both briefly enacted
during the French Revolution were finally re-enacted in 1848. In 1852, the
president of the French Republic Louis-NapolÃ©on Bonaparte, Napoleon Iâ€™s
nephew, was proclaimed emperor of the second Empire, as Napoleon III. He
multiplied French interventions abroad, especially in Crimea, in Mexico and
Italy, which resulted in the annexation of Savoy and Nice. Napoleon III was
eventually unseated following defeat in the Franco-Prussian war of 1870 and his
regime was replaced by the Third Republic. France had colonial possessions, in
various forms, since the beginning of the 17th century to the 18th century. But
in the 19th and 20th centuries, its global overseas colonial empire extended
greatly and culminated as the second largest in the world behind the British
Empire. At its peak, between 1919 and 1939, the second French colonial empire
extended over 12,347,000 square kilometres (4,767,000Â sqÂ mi) of land.
Including metropolitan France, the total area of land under French sovereignty
reached 12,898,000 square kilometres (4,980,000Â sqÂ mi) in the 1920s and
1930s, which is 8.6% of the world's land area. France was a member of the
Triple Entente when World War I broke out. A small part of Northern France was
occupied, but France and its allies eventually emerged victorious against the
Central Powers, at a tremendous human and material cost: the First World War
left 1.4Â million French soldiers dead, 4.29% of its population The interbellum
phase was marked by intense international tensions an a variety of social
reforms introduced by the Popular Front government (Annual leave, working time
reduction, women in Government among others). Following the German "Blitzkrieg"
campaign in World War II, metropolitan France was divided in an occupation zone
in the north and Vichy France, a newly established authoritarian regime
collaborating with Germany, in the south. The Allies and the French Resistance
eventually emerged victorious from the Axis powers and French sovereignty was
restored. The Fourth Republic was established after World War II and saw
spectacular economic growth ("les Trente Glorieuses"). Suffrage was extended to
women in 1944. France was one of the founding members of the NATO (1949), which
was the Western counterpart of the Warsaw Pact system of collective defence.
France attempted to regain control of French Indochina but was defeated by the
Viet Minh at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954. Only months later, France
faced a new conflict in Algeria. The debate over whether or not to keep control
of Algeria, then home to over one million European settlers, wracked the
country and nearly led to civil war. In 1958, the weak and unstable Fourth
Republic gave way to the Fifth Republic, which contained a strengthened
Presidency. In the latter role, Charles de Gaulle managed to keep the country
together while taking steps to end the war. The Algerian War was concluded with
peace negotiations in 1962 that led to Algerian independence. France granted
independence progressively to its colonies, the last one being Vanuatu in 1980.
A vestige of the colonial empire are the French overseas departments and
territories. In the wake of a worldwide series of protests, the May 1968
revolt, although a political failure for the protesters, had an enormous social
impact. In France, it is considered to be the watershed moment when a
conservative moral ideal (religion, patriotism, respect for authority) shifted
towards a more liberal moral ideal. France has been at the forefront of the
European Union member states seeking to exploit the momentum of monetary union
to create a more unified and capable European Union political, defence, and
security apparatus. Geography. Metropolitan France is situated mostly between
latitudes 41Â° and 51Â° N (Dunkirk is just north of 51Â°), and longitudes 6Â° W
and 10Â° E, on the western edge of Europe, and thus lies within the northern
temperate zone From southwest to northeast, France shares borders with Spain,
Andorra, Monaco, Italy, Switzerland, Germany, Luxembourg, and Belgium. France
also borders Suriname to its west and Brazil to its east and south, by way of
the overseas region of French Guiana, which is considered an integral part of
the republic (like Alaska and Hawaii are to the United States, or Kaliningrad
is to Russia). Corsica and the French mainland form Metropolitan France;
Guadeloupe, Martinique, RÃ©union, and Mayotte form, with French Guiana, the
overseas regions. These two integral groupings, along with several overseas
collectivities and one territory comprise the French Republic. The collectivity
of Saint Martin borders Sint Maarten, a constituent country of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands; however, since, Saint Martin is significantly autonomous of
the French government, this is not considered an international border. The
European territory of France covers , having the largest area among European
Union members. France possesses a wide variety of landscapes, from coastal
plains in the north and west to mountain ranges of the Alps in the south-east,
the Massif Central in the south-central and Pyrenees in the south-west. At
above sea level, the highest point in Western Europe, Mont Blanc, is situated
in the Alps on the border between France and Italy. France also has extensive
river systems such as the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne, and the Rhone, which
divides the Massif Central from the Alps and flows into the Mediterranean Sea
at the Camargue. Corsica lies off the Mediterranean coast. France's total land
area, with its overseas departments and territories (excluding AdÃ©lie Land),
is , 0.45% of the total land area on Earth. However, France possesses the
second-largest Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) in the world, covering ,
approximately 8% of the total surface of all the EEZs of the world, just behind
the United States () and ahead of Australia ().
