Free good Free goods are needed by the society and are available without
limits. The free good is a term used in economics to describe a good that is
not scarce. A free good is available in as great a quantity as desired with
zero opportunity cost to society. A good that is made available at zero price
is not necessarily a free good. For example, a shop might give away its stock
in its promotion, but producing these goods would still have required the use
of scarce resources. Examples include ideas and works that are reproducible at
zero cost, or almost zero cost. For example, if someone invents a new device,
many people could copy this invention, with no danger of this "resource"
running out. Other examples include computer programs and web pages. Earlier
schools of economic thought proposed a third type of free good: resources that
are so abundant in nature that there is enough for everyone to have as much as
they want. Examples in textbooks included fresh water and the air that we
breathe. However, these are now regarded as common goods because competition
for them is rivalrous. Copyrights and patents have the effect of converting
some goods to scarce goods by law. Although these goods are free goods (in the
economic sense) once they have been produced, they do require scarce resources,
such as skilled labour, to create them in the first place. Thus these laws are
sometimes used to give exclusive rights to the creators of such "intellectual
property" in order to encourage resources to be appropriately allocated to
these activities. Many futurists theorize that advanced nanotechnology with the
ability to automatically turn any kind of material into any other combination
of equal mass, will make all goods essentially free goods, since all raw
materials and manufacturing time will become perfectly interchangeable.
