Free market A free market is a market where the price of a good or service is,
in theory, determined by supply and demand, rather than by governmental
regulation. A free market contrasts with a controlled market or regulated
market, where price, supply or demand are subject to regulation or direct
control by government. An economy composed entirely of free markets is referred
to as a free-market economy. Although in contemporary usage free markets are
commonly associated with capitalism, free markets have been advocated by
socialists and have been included in various different proposals for market
socialism. Overview. In the marketplace, the price of a good or service helps
communicate consumer demand to producers and thus directs the allocation of
resources toward satisfaction of consumers as well as investors. In a free
market, the system of prices is the emergent result of a vast number of
voluntary transactions, rather than of political decrees as in a controlled
market. The freer the market, the more prices will reflect consumer habits and
demands, and the more valuable the information in these prices are to all
players in the economy. Through free competition between vendors for the
provision of products and services, prices tend to decrease, and quality tends
to increase. The meaning of "free market" has varied over time and between
economists, the ambiguous term "free" facilitating a diversity of uses. To
illustrate the ambiguity: classical economists such as Adam Smith believed that
an economy should be free of monopoly rents, while proponents of laissez faire
believe that people should be free to form monopolies. In this article "free
market" is largely identified with laissez faire, and competitive markets,
though alternative senses are discussed in this section and in criticism. The
identification of the "free market" with "laissez faire" was notably used in
the 1962 "Capitalism and Freedom", by economist Milton Friedman, which is
credited with popularizing this usage. Economic systems. Laissez-faire
economics. The laissez faire principle expresses the preference for an absence
of non-market pressures on prices such as those from government taxes,
subsidies, tariffs, regulation (other than protection from coercion and theft),
or government-granted or coercive monopolies. As developed in Hayek's "The Pure
Theory of Capital", the goal is the preservation of the unique information
contained in the price itself. Socialist economics. Various forms of socialism
based on, or which advocate, free markets have existed since the 19th century.
Early notable socialist proponents of free-markets include Pierre-Joseph
Proudhon, Benjamin Tucker and the Ricardian socialists, who believed that
genuinely free markets and voluntary exchange cannot exist within the
exploitative conditions of capitalism. These proposals ranged from various
forms of worker cooperatives coordinated by free markets such as Mutualism
(economic theory), to state-owned enterprises competing with each other in open
and unregulated markets. These models of socialism are not to be confused with
other forms of market socialism (e.g. the Lange model) where publicly owned
enterprises are coordinated by a degree of economic planning in setting prices
for capital goods. LÃ©on Walras, one of the founders of the neoclassical school
of economics who helped formulate the general equilibrium theory, argued that
free competition could only be realized under conditions of state ownership of
natural resources and land. Additionally, income taxes could be eliminated
because the state would receive income to finance public services through
owning such resources and enterprises. Advocates of free-market socialism, such
as Jaroslav Vanek, argue that genuine free markets are not possible under
conditions of private ownership over productive property because the class
differences and inequalities in income and power that ensue from this
arrangement enable interests of the dominant class to skew the market to their
favor, either in the form of monopoly and market power, or by utilizing their
wealth and resources to pass government regulations and policies that benefit
their specific business interests. Additionally, Vanek states that workers in a
socialist economy based on cooperative and self-managed enterprises would have
stronger incentives to maximize productivity because they would receive a share
of the profits (based on the overall performance of their enterprise) in
addition to receiving a fixed wage or salary. Similar outcomes could be
accomplished in a capitalistic free market if the employee were to purchase
stock of the company they work for. Excessive disparities in income
distribution emerging from private ownership are alleged by proponents of this
system to lead to social instability that requires costly corrective measures
in the form of social welfare and redistributive taxation and heavy
administrative costs to administer them while weakening the incentive to work,
inviting dishonesty and increasing the likelihood of tax evasion while reducing
the overall efficiency of the market economy and necessitating government
regulation over markets. Concepts. Supply and demand. Supply and demand are
always equal as they are the two sides of the same set of transactions, and
discussions of "imbalances" are a muddled and indirect way of referring to
price. However, in an unmeasurable qualitative sense, demand for an item (such
as goods or services) refers to the market pressure from people trying to buy
it. They will "bid" money for the item, while in return sellers offer the item
for money. When the bid matches the offer, a transaction can easily occur (even
instantenously, as in a typical stock market). In Western society, most shops
and markets do not resemble the stock market, and there are significant costs
and barriers to "shopping around" (comparison shopping). The model is commonly
applied to wages, in the market for labor. The typical roles of supplier and
consumer are reversed. The suppliers are individuals, who try to sell (supply)
their labor for the highest price. The consumers of labors are businesses,
which try to buy (demand) the type of labor they need at the lowest price. As
population increase wages fall for any given unskilled or skilled labor supply.
Conversely, wages tend to go up with a decrease in population. When demand
exceeds supply, suppliers tend to raise their prices, but when supply exceeds
demand, suppliers will tend to decrease their prices in order to make sales.
Consumers who can afford the higher prices may still buy, but others may forgo
the purchase altogether, demand a better price, buy a similar item, or shop
elsewhere. As the price rises, suppliers may also choose to increase
production, or more suppliers may enter the business. Economic equilibrium.
General equilibrium theory has demonstrated, with varying degrees of
mathematical rigor over time, that under certain conditions of competition, the
law of supply and demand predominates in this ideal free and competitive
market, influencing prices toward an equilibrium that balances the demands for
the products against the supplies. At these equilibrium prices, the market
distributes the products to the purchasers according to each purchaser's
preference (or utility) for each product and within the relative limits of each
buyer's purchasing power. This result is described as market efficiency, or
more specifically a Pareto optimum. This equilibrating behavior of free markets
requires certain assumptions about their agents, collectively known as Perfect
Competition, which therefore cannot be results of the market that they create.
Among these assumptions are several which are impossible to fully achieve in a
real market, such as complete information, interchangeable goods and services,
and lack of market power. The question then is what approximations of these
conditions guarantee approximations of market efficiency, and which failures in
competition generate overall market failures. Several Nobel Prizes in Economics
have been awarded for analyses of market failures due to asymmetric
information. Some models in econophysics have shown that when agents are
allowed to interact locally in a free market (i.e. their decisions depend not
only on utility and purchasing power, but also on their peers' decisions),
prices can become unstable and diverge from the equilibrium, often in an abrupt
manner. The behavior of the free market is thus said to be scale sensitive (a
pair of agents bargaining for a purchase will agree on a different price than
100 identical pairs of agents doing the identical purchase). Speculation
bubbles and the type of herd behavior often observed in stock markets are
quoted as real life examples of non-equilibrium price trends. Some laissez-
faire free-market advocates, like Chicago school economists, often dismiss this
endogenous theory, and blame external influences, such as weather, commodity
prices, technological developments, and government meddling for non-equilibrium
prices. Low barriers to entry. A free market does not require the existence of
competition, however it does require that there are no legal barriers to new
market entrants. Hence, in the lack of coercive barriers, and in markets with
low entry cost it is generally understood that competition flourishes in a
free-market environment. It often suggests the presence of the profit motive,
although neither a profit motive or profit itself are necessary for a free
market. All modern free markets are understood to include entrepreneurs, both
individuals and businesses. Typically, a modern free market economy would
include other features, such as a stock exchange and a financial services
sector, but they do not define it. Spontaneous order. Smith pointed out that
one does not get one's dinner by appealing to the brother-love of the butcher,
the farmer or the baker. Rather one appeals to their self-interest, and pays
them for their labor. Supporters of this view claim that spontaneous order is
superior to any order that does not allow individuals to make their own choices
of what to produce, what to buy, what to sell, and at what prices, due to the
number and complexity of the factors involved. They further believe that any
attempt to implement central planning will result in more disorder, or a less
efficient production and distribution of goods and services. Critics, such as
political economist Karl Polanyi, question whether a spontaneously ordered
market can exist, completely free of "distortions" of political policy;
claiming that even the ostensibly freest markets require a state to exercise
coercive power in some areas - to enforce contracts, to govern the formation of
labor unions, to spell out the rights and obligations of corporations, to shape
who has standing to bring legal actions, to define what constitutes an
unacceptable conflict of interest, etc. Studies. Joshua Epstein and Robert
Axtell have attempted to predict the properties of free markets empirically in
the agent-based computer simulation "Sugarscape". They came to the conclusion
that, under idealized conditions, free markets lead to a Pareto distribution of
wealth. Each group is assigned a numerical value between 1 and 5; IEF is the
arithmetical mean of the values, rounded to the hundredth. Initially, countries
which were traditionally considered capitalistic received high ratings, but the
method improved over time. Some economists, like Milton Friedman and other
Laissez-faire economists have argued that there is a direct relationship
between economic growth and economic freedom, and studies suggest this is true.
Continuous debates among scholars on methodological issues in empirical studies
of the connection between economic freedom and economic growth still try to
find out what is the relationship, if any. Misconceptions. Some advocates of
free market ideologies have criticized mainstream conceptions of the free
market, arguing that a truly free market would not resemble the modern-day
capitalist economy. For example, contemporary mutualist Kevin Carson argues in
favor of "free market anti-capitalism." Carson has stated that "From Smith to
Ricardo and Mill, classical liberalism was a revolutionary doctrine that
attacked the privileges of the great landlords and the mercantile interests.
Today, we see vulgar libertarians perverting âfree marketâ rhetoric to
defend the contemporary institution that most closely resembles, in terms of
power and privilege, the landed oligarchies and mercantilists of the Old
Regime: the giant corporation." Carson believes that a true free market society
would be "world in which... land and property [is widely distributed, capital
freely available to laborers through mutual banks, productive technology [is
freely available in every country without patents, and every people free to
develop locally without colonial robbery..." Criticisms. Two prominent Canadian
authors (both very hostile to the "Chicago School" philosophy) argue that
government at times has to intervene to ensure competition in large and
important industries. Naomi Klein illustrates this roughly in her work "The
Shock Doctrine" and John Ralston Saul more humorously illustrates this through
various examples in "The Collapse of Globalism and the Reinvention of the
World". While its supporters argue that only a free market can create healthy
competition and therefore more business and reasonable prices, opponents say
that a free market in its purest form may result in the opposite. According to
Klein and Ralston, the merging of companies into giant corporations or the
privatization of government-run industry and national assets often result in
monopolies (or oligopolies) requiring government intervention to force
competition and reasonable prices. Critics dispute the claim that in practice
free markets create perfect competition, or even increase market competition
over the long run. Whether the marketplace "should be" or "is" free is
disputed; many assert that government intervention is necessary to remedy
market failure that is held to be an inevitable result of absolute adherence to
free market principles. These failures range from military services to roads,
and some would argue, to health care. This is the central argument of those who
argue for a mixed market, free at the base, but with government oversight to
control social problems. Critics of laissez-faire since Adam Smith variously
see the unregulated market as an impractical ideal or as a rhetorical device
that puts the concepts of freedom and anti-protectionism at the service of
vested wealthy interests, allowing them to attack labor laws and other
protections of the working classes. Because no national economy in existence
fully manifests the ideal of a free market as theorized by economists, some
critics of the concept consider it to be a fantasy â outside of the bounds of
reality in a complex system with opposing interests and different distributions
of wealth. These critics range from those who reject markets entirely, in
favour of a planned economy, such as that advocated by various Marxists, to
those who wish to see market failures regulated to various degrees or
supplemented by government interventions. For example, Keynesians support a
role for government in providing corrective measures, such as use of fiscal
policy for economy stimulus, when decisions in the private sector are believed
to lead to suboptimal economic outcomes, such as depression or recession, which
manifest in widespread hardship. Business cycle theory is used by Keynes to
explain 'liquidity traps' by which underconsumption occurs, to argue for
government intervention with central banking. Free market economists consider
this credit-expansion as the cause of the business cycle in refutation of this
Keynesian criticism. Simulation of biological laws. The free market is believed
to self-regulate in the most efficient and just way. Adam Smith described this
behavior applied to competitive markets with the metaphor of an invisible hand
urging society towards prosperity. Charles Darwin's theory of evolution was
appealing to some economists, sociologists and political scientists (most
notably Walter Bagehot and William Graham Sumner) who adapted and rationalized
the invisible hand by incorporating the popular idea of the survival of the
fittest. They proposed â among others â that in a fully competitive
economic environment (as they thought was the case of ecosystems) the most
potent individuals would thrive and in turn society would prosper (in analogy
to the observed biodiversity and abundance of life on earth). Such arguments
lead to the consolidation of neoliberalism and laissez-faire.
