Free Software Foundation The Free Software Foundation (FSF) is a non-profit
organization founded by Richard Stallman on 4 October 1985 to support the free
software movement, a movement which aims to promote the universal freedom to
create, distribute and modify computer software, with the organization's
preference for copyleft (except in certain cases), such as with its own GNU
General Public License, being used to license software whose modifications
retain these permissions. The FSF is incorporated in Massachusetts, USA. For
software for which the copyright holder insists on using a permissive free
software license, the FSF recommends version 2.0 of the Apache License over
other permissive licenses due to its patent protection. From its founding until
the mid-1990s, FSF's funds were mostly used to employ software developers to
write free software for the GNU Project. Since the mid-1990s, the FSF's
employees and volunteers have mostly worked on legal and structural issues for
the free software movement and the free software community. Consistent with its
goals, only free software is used on FSF's computers. History. The Free
Software Foundation was founded in 1985 as a non-profit corporation supporting
free software development. It continued existing GNU projects such as the sale
of manuals and tapes, and employed developers of the free software system.
Since then, it has continued these activities, as well as advocating for the
free software movement. The FSF is also the steward of several free software
licenses, meaning they publish them and have the ability to make revisions as
needed. In March 2003, SCO filed suit against IBM alleging that IBM's
contributions to various free software, including FSF's GNU, violated SCO's
rights. While FSF was never a party to the lawsuit, FSF was subpoenaed on
November 5, 2003. During 2003 and 2004, FSF put substantial advocacy effort
into responding to the lawsuit and quelling its negative impact on the adoption
and promotion of free software. In 2007, the FSF published the third version of
the GNU General Public License after significant outside input. GPL
enforcement. The FSF holds the copyrights on many pieces of the GNU system,
such as GNU Compiler Collection. As holder of these copyrights, it has the
authority to enforce the copyleft requirements of the GNU General Public
License (GPL) when copyright infringement occurs on that software. While other
copyright holders of other software systems adopted the GPL as their license,
FSF was the only organization to regularly assert its copyright interests on
software so licensed until Harald Welte launched gpl-violations.org in 2004.
From 1991 until 2001, GPL enforcement was done informally, usually by Stallman
himself, often with assistance from FSF's lawyer, Eben Moglen. Typically, GPL
violations during this time were cleared up by short email exchanges between
Stallman and the violator. In late 2001, Bradley M. Kuhn (then Executive
Director), with the assistance of Moglen, David Turner, and Peter T. Brown,
formalized these efforts into FSF's GPL Compliance Labs. From 2002-2004, high
profile GPL enforcement cases, such as those against Linksys and OpenTV, became
frequent. GPL enforcement and educational campaigns on GPL compliance was a
major focus of the FSF's efforts during this period. In December 2008 FSF filed
a lawsuit against Cisco for using GPL-licensed components shipped with Linksys
products. Cisco was notified of the licensing issue in 2003 but Cisco
repeatedly disregarded its obligations under the GPL. In May 2009 FSF dropped
the lawsuit when Cisco agreed to make a monetary donation to the FSF and
appoint a Free Software Director to conduct continuous reviews of the company's
license compliance practices. From 2003 to 2005, FSF held legal seminars to
explain the GPL and the law around it. Usually taught by Bradley M. Kuhn and
Daniel Ravicher, these seminars offered CLE credit and were the first effort to
give formal legal education on the GPL. High priority projects. The FSF
maintains a list of "high priority projects" to which the Foundation claims
that ""there is a vital need to draw the free software community's attention"".
The FSF considers these projects ""important because computer users are
continually being seduced into using non-free software, because there is no
adequate free replacement."" Previous projects highlighted as needing work
included the Free Java implementations, GNU Classpath, and GNU Compiler for
Java, which ensure compatibility for the Java part of OpenOffice.org, and the
GNOME desktop environment (see Java: Licensing). The effort has been criticized
for either not instigating active development or for there only being slow work
being done, even after certain projects were added to the list. Structure. The
FSF Board of Directors is elected by the Voting Membership, whose powers
include at least this are outlined in the by-laws: There are currently no known
documents available that indicate the composition of the FSF's Voting
Membership. John Sullivan is the current FSF Executive Director. Previous
members that occupied the position were Peter Brown (2005–2010) and Bradley
M. Kuhn (2001–2005). At any given time, there are usually around a dozen
employees. Most, but not all, work at the FSF headquarters in Boston,
Massachusetts. Eben Moglen and Dan Ravicher previously served individually as
pro bono legal counsel to the FSF. Since the forming of the Software Freedom
Law Center, legal services to the FSF are provided by that organization. On
November 25, 2002, the FSF launched the FSF Associate Membership program for
individuals. Bradley M. Kuhn (FSF Executive Director, 2001–2005) launched the
program and also signed up as the first Associate Member Associate members hold
a purely honorary and funding support role to the FSF. Criticism. Linus
Torvalds has criticized FSF for using GPLv3 as a weapon in their fight against
DRM. Torvalds argues that the issue of DRM and that of a software license
should be treated as two separate issues. On June 16, 2010, Joe Brockmeier, a
journalist at Linux Magazine, criticized the Defective by Design campaign by
the FSF as "negative" and "juvenile" and not being adequate for providing users
with "credible alternatives" to proprietary software. FSF responded to this
criticism by saying "that there is a fundamental difference between speaking
out against policies or actions and smear campaigns", and "that if one is
taking an ethical position, it is justified, and often necessary, to not only
speak about the benefits of freedom but against acts of dispossession and
disenfranchisement.".
