Germanophile A germanophile or teutophile[http://www.scribd.com/doc/39010599/
List-of-Philias, [http://thedarkfoxofdoom.deviantart.com/journal/Philias-
226989051 is a person who is fond of German culture, German people, and Germany
in general, or even exhibits German nationalism – so to speak – in spite of
not being an ethnic German or a German citizen. Its opposite is Germanophobia.
The term was especially in use in the 19th to 20th centuries after the creation
of the German nation state and the rise of the German Empire. The term is used
not only politically but also culturally; for example Slavoj Žižek refers to
the geographical triad of Europe as being England (utilitarian pragmatism),
France (revolutionary hastiness) and Germany (reflective thoroughness). In 19th
century British romanticism, the term's antonym was Scandophile, expressing a
dichotomy of associating Anglo-Saxon culture either with continental West
Germanic culture, or with North Germanic (Scandinavian) culture (the "Viking
revival"). The term was also used in opposition to Hellenophile, an affinity to
"Teutonic" or Germanic culture and worldview as opposed to a predilection for
Classical Antiquity. In 19th century continental Europe, the dichotomy was
rather between Germany and France, the main political players of the period,
and a Germanophile would choose to side with Germany, against French or
"Romance" interests taken to heart by a Francophile. The corresponding term
relating to England is Anglophile, an affinity that was in turn often observed
in early 20th century Germans choosing to side against France. This term was
also popularly used in the 20th century to refer to the German educational
system formed by Wilhelm von Humboldt, which was leading at that time, and
served as a model for many elite universities around the world from Oslo to
Harvard.
