Giffen good In economics and consumer theory, a Giffen good is one which people
paradoxically consume more of as the price rises, violating the law of demand.
In normal situations, as the price of a good rises, the substitution effect
causes consumers to purchase less of it and more of substitute goods. In the
Giffen good situation, the income effect dominates, leading people to buy more
of the good, even as its price rises. Evidence for the existence of Giffen
goods is limited, but microeconomic mathematical models explain how such a
thing could exist. Giffen goods are named after Scottish economist Sir Robert
Giffen, who was attributed as the author of this idea by Alfred Marshall in his
book "Principles of Economics". Giffen first proposed the paradox from his
observations of the purchasing habits of the Victorian era poor. For most
products, price elasticity of demand is negative (note that, although they are
negative, price elasticities of demand are often reported as positive numbers;
see the mathematical definition for more). In other words, price and quantity
demanded pull in opposite directions; if price goes up, then quantity demanded
goes down, or vice versa. Giffen goods are an exception to this. Their price
elasticity of demand is positive. When price goes up, the quantity demanded
also goes up, and vice versa. In order to be a true Giffen good, price must be
the only thing that changes to get a change in quantity demand, and a Giffen
good should not be confused with products bought as status symbols or for
conspicuous consumption (such a situation would indicate a Veblen good). The
classic example given by Marshall is of inferior quality staple foods, whose
demand is driven by poverty that makes their purchasers unable to afford
superior foodstuffs. As the price of the cheap staple rises, they can no longer
afford to supplement their diet with better foods, and must consume more of the
staple food. Giffen goods are also related to experience goods and credence
goods in that the two often exhibit increases in demand with price, yet are
different in that close substitutes are available for the latter types.
Analysis. If precondition #1 is changed to "The good in question must be so
inferior that the income effect is greater than the substitution effect" then
this list defines necessary and sufficient conditions. As the last condition is
a condition on the buyer rather than the good itself, the phenomenon can also
be labeled as "Giffen behavior". This can be illustrated with a diagram.
Initially the consumer has the choice between spending their income on either
commodity Y or commodity X as defined by line segment MN (where M = total
available income divided by the price of commodity Y, and N = total available
income divided by the price of commodity X). The line MN is known as the
consumer's budget constraint. Given the consumer's preferences, as expressed in
the indifference curve I0, the optimum mix of purchases for this individual is
point A. If there is a drop in the price of commodity X, there will be two
effects. The reduced price will alter relative prices in favour of commodity X,
known as the substitution effect. This is illustrated by a movement down the
indifference curve from point A to point B (a pivot of the budget constraint
about the original indifference curve). At the same time, the price reduction
causes the consumers' purchasing power to increase, known as the income effect
(an outward shift of the budget constraint). This is illustrated by the
shifting out of the dotted line to MP (where P = income divided by the new
price of commodity X). The substitution effect (point A to point B) raises the
quantity demanded of commodity X from Xa to Xb while the income effect lowers
the quantity demanded from Xb to Xc. The net effect is a reduction in quantity
demanded from Xa to Xc making commodity X a Giffen good by definition. Any good
where the income effect more than compensates for the substitution effect is a
giffen good. Empirical evidence. Evidence for the existence of Giffen goods has
generally been limited. A 2002 preliminary working paper by Robert Jensen and
Nolan Miller of Harvard University made the claim that rice and wheat/noodles
are Giffen goods in parts of China by tracking prices of goods. A further 2007
working paper by the same authors (now published in the September 2008 issue of
American Economic Review) experimentally demonstrated the existence of Giffen
goods among humans at the household level by directly subsidizing purchases of
rice and wheat flour for extremely poor families. It is easier to find Giffen
effects where the number of goods available is limited, as in an experimental
economy: DeGrandpre et al. (1993) provide such an experimental demonstration.
In 1991, Battalio, Kagel, and Kogut proved that quinine water is a Giffen good
for some lab rats. However, they were only able to show the existence of a
Giffen good at an individual level and not the market level. All Giffen goods
are inferior goods but not all inferior goods are Giffen goods. Giffen goods
are difficult to find because a number of conditions must be satisfied for the
associated behavior to be observed. One reason for the difficulty in finding
Giffen goods is Giffen originally envisioned a specific situation faced by
individuals in a state of poverty. Modern consumer behaviour research methods
often deal in aggregates that average out income levels and are too blunt an
instrument to capture these specific situations. Furthermore, complicating the
matter are the requirements for limited availability of substitutes, as well as
that the consumers are not so poor that they can only afford the inferior good.
It is for this reason that many text books use the term "Giffen paradox" rather
than "Giffen good". Some types of premium goods (such as expensive French
wines, or celebrity-endorsed perfumes) are sometimes claimed to be Giffen
goods. It is claimed that lowering the price of these high status goods can
decrease demand because they are no longer perceived as exclusive or high
status products. However, the perceived nature of such high status goods
changes significantly with a substantial price drop. This disqualifies them
from being considered as Giffen goods, because the Giffen goods analysis
assumes that only the consumer's income or the relative price level changes,
not the nature of the good itself. If a price change modifies consumers'
perception of the good, they should be analysed as Veblen goods. Some
economists question the empirical validity of the distinction between Giffen
and Veblen goods, arguing that whenever there is a substantial change in the
price of a good its perceived nature also changes, since price is a large part
of what constitutes a product. However the theoretical distinction between the
two types of analysis remains clear; which one of them should be applied to any
actual case is an empirical matter. Great Famine in Ireland. Potatoes during
the Irish Great Famine were long believed to be the only example of a Giffen
good. But this theory was debunked by Gerald P. Dwyer and Cotton M. Lindsey in
their 1984 article "Robert Giffen and the Irish Potato", where they showed the
contradicting nature of the Giffen "legend" with respect to historical
evidence. The Giffen nature of the Irish potato was also later discredited by
Sherwin Rosen of the University of Chicago in his 1999 paper "Potato
Paradoxes". Rosen showed that the phenomenon could be explained by a normal
demand model. Other proposed examples. It has been suggested that a number of
other goods might be Giffen. While the arguments are theoretically sound (i.e.,
they accord with Marshall's basic intuition), in each case the supporting
empirical evidence has been found to be unconvincing. Anthony Bopp (1983)
proposed that kerosene, a low-quality fuel used in home heating, was a Giffen
good. Schmuel Baruch and Yakar Kanai (2001) suggested that shochu, a Japanese
distilled beverage, "might" be a Giffen good. In both cases, the authors
offered supporting econometric evidence. However, the empirical evidence has
been generally considered to be incomplete. In a 2005 article, Sasha Abramsky
of The Nation conjectured that gasoline, in certain circumstances, may act as a
Giffen good. However, no supporting evidence was offered, and evidence from the
large increases in oil prices in 2008 would suggest that quantity demanded for
gasoline did actually fall as a result of increased prices. Of course, the lack
of evidence at the aggregate level does not rule out that the proposed goods
may have been Giffen for certain groups of consumersâ€”in particular for poor
consumers. The great recession has raised the possibility that very safe
financial assets (Treasuries, cash, gold) become Giffen goods in liquidity trap
scenarios or during bad economic times. As investors fear lower returns in
equities and other investments they minimize risk by purchasing more of a low
return, higher price asset that is considered safer.
