Global justice movement The global justice movement is a network or
constellation of globalized social movements opposing what is often known as
the “corporate globalization” and promoting equal distribution of economic
resources. Movement of movements. The global justice movement describes the
loose collection of individuals and groups—often referred to as a “movement
of movements”—who advocate fair trade rules and are negative to current
institutions of global economics such as the World Trade Organization.
Furthermore, ‘global social justice’ surely has to mean more than simply
‘achieving income, health opinion and education targets as defined by the
MDGs’. The net is cast much wider in the Millennium Declaration (freedom,
equality, solidarity etc. ...), and this is reflected in the current emphasis
on ensuring a voice for stakeholders, as well as the accountability of public
institutions. These are critical, not just as routes to good government, but
also, at least in the case of ‘voice’, as goods in their own right. also,
rights are central – especially economic, social and cultural rights. Having
the right to education or health, is about more than access to schooling or
treatment. Having a right to education means not only being able to go to
school, it also means having recourse, through the administration or the
courts, if a school is not provided. In other words, somebody, somewhere, is
accountable. The movement is often labeled the anti-globalization movement by
the mainstream media. Those involved, however, frequently deny that they are
anti-globalization, insisting that they support the globalization of
communication and people and oppose only the global expansion of corporate
power. The term further indicates an anti-capitalist and universalist
perspective on globalization, distinguishing the movement from those opponents
of globalization whose politics are based on a conservative defence of national
sovereignty. It is, however, argued by some scholars of social movements, that
a new concept of justice, alongside some old notions, underlies many critical
ideas and practices developed in this movement. S. A. Hamed Hosseini coins this
new mode of conceptualizing justice "accommodative justice" and argues that
both the very unique nature of the movement and the global complexities of the
post-Cold War era can be accounted for the rise of such notion. According to
him, "this new concept of justice has emerged from many activists’
experiences of and reflections on the complexities of globalization". Important
organizational pillars of the movement are Via Campesina, the family farmers'
international; Peoples' Global Action, a loose collection of often youthful
groups; Jubilee 2000, the Christian-based movement for relieving international
debt; Friends of the Earth, the environmentalist international; and some think-
tanks like Focus on the Global South and Third World Network. Participants
include worldwide student groups, NGOs, trade unions, faith-based and peace
groups, and publications such as "New Internationalist". A loose coordination
of the movement is taking place on the Social Forums. However, although formal
power is often situated in the global South, the resources of North-based NGOs
give these disproportionate power to often informally marginalize popular
organizations from the South. Massive protests. The movement is characterized
by the massive citizen protests and alternative summits which have, for the
last decade, accompanied most meetings of the G8, World Trade Organization,
International Monetary Fund, and World Bank. The movement came to the attention
of many in the US when activists successfully used protests to shut down the
1999 WTO Ministerial in Seattle. This represented, however, just one of a
series of massive Global Justice protests that have included protests at the
1988 World Bank/IMF meetings in Germany, "IMF riots" beginning in Lima in 1975,
over cuts in the social safety-net presided over by IMF and other international
organizations, and spreading through the world, and "water wars" in Bolivia and
South Africa. International solidarity. The global justice movement claims to
place a significant emphasis on transnational solidarity uniting activists in
the global South and global North. Some have argued that the World Social Forum
is one excellent example of this emphasis, bringing activists together from
around the world to focus on shared philosophy and campaigning. However others
see the World Social Forum as dominated by Northern NGOs, donors and activists
and argue that Southern representation is largely organized via Northern donors
and their NGOs and that popular organizations in the global South are
systematically marginalized or included in a deeply subordinated manner. For
this reason many grassroots movements in the South boycott the forum and the
NGOs that gate-keep representation at the forum or, in some instance, actively
oppose it as just one more space of domination.
