Godless Americans March on Washington The Godless Americans March on Washington
(GAMOW) occurred on the National Mall in Washington, DC on November 2, 2002
with the participation of many atheists, freethinkers, agnostics and humanists.
The public cable network, C-SPAN documented the event on video. Timeline of the
event. The event started at 11:00 A.M. near the Washington Monument, led by the
American Atheist's banner promoting the separation of church and state. About
halfway down the Mall the people were confronted by counter-protesters.
However, the people continued to proceed to the other end of the Mall in front
of the Capitol. At 11:30 A.M., the rally started and featured over 20 speakers
and musical entertainment. The rally lasted for about 4 hours. Slogans. The
event was marked by many slogans and banners on shirts, badges, etc. A few of
the slogans include "What Our Schools Need is a Moment of Science!", "Atheism
is Myth-Understood!", "Secular Humanists for a Secular America.", "Citizen -
Atheist -Patriot.". The official T-shirt for the march showed a picture of the
Capitol and the American Flag with the statement: "Free, Proud and on the Move
- GODLESS AMERICANS." Speeches. Many speakers delivered speeches at the March.
A few noted speakers were Frank Zindler, editor of the American Atheist
magazine, Margaret Downey of the Freethought Society of Greater Philadelphia
and Ed Buckner, executive director of the Council for Secular Humanism, etc.
( see Event Speakers The speeches delivered were basically on theism, atheism
and related themes. Ed Buckner is reported to have attacked on the way theists
think of the lack of morality of atheists. Aims and Objectives. Ellen Johnson,
former president of American Atheists and director of the Godless Americans
March On Washington Task Force announced at the event the formation of the
Godless Americans Political Action Committee, or GAMPAC. Later, the GAMPAC was
renamed Enlighten the Vote. Reaction. Atheist groups by and large considered
the march a success, though some within the atheist community did criticize the
event for a number of reasons, including the exclusion of theists from being
able to endorse the event, how atheism was defined for the purposes of the
march, and the apparent attempt by organizers to use the march as a way of
"creating an identity for nonbelievers." An organization calling itself the
Religious Freedom Coalition ran newspaper ads the day before the event
characterizing the views of atheists and Satanists to be identical. Following
the event, the same organization called the event a success, but described it
as "ill timed" and an indication of a dangerous brand of new atheism. Following
the march, leaders of three atheist organizations - Atheist Alliance
International, the Institute for Humanist Studies, and the Internet Infidels -
met and set in motion the founding of the Secular Coalition for America. Hemant
Mehta of the blog the Friendly Atheist and author of "I Sold My Soul on eBay"
referenced the event in the context of the Reason Rally which was held on
Saturday, March 24th, 2012.
