Government procurement Government procurement, also called public tendering or
public procurement, is the procurement of goods and services on behalf of a
public authority, such as a government agency. With 10 to 15% of GDP in
developed countries, and up to 20% in developing countries, government
procurement accounts for a substantial part of the global economy. To prevent
fraud, waste, corruption or local protectionism, the law of most countries
regulates government procurement more or less closely. It usually requires the
procuring authority to issue public tenders if the value of the procurement
exceeds a certain threshold. Government procurement is also the subject of the
Agreement on Government Procurement, a plurilateral international treaty under
the auspices of the WTO. Regulation by jurisdiction. European Union. Government
procurement in the European Union is regulated and harmonized by community law
since the 1970s. European regulations also provide for electronic procurement.
Russia. Russian Federal Law N94-ФЗ of 21.07.2005 require all federal,
regional and municipal government customers to publish all information about
government tenders, auctions and other purchase procedures on special public
government websites. The Soloviev Institute of Government Procurement is active
in procurement certification and training. United States. US government
procurement is generally governed by the Federal Acquisition Regulation, which
appears in title 48 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The National Institute
of Governmental Purchasing and the Federal Acquisition Institute are active in
procurement certification and training. A specialized program in procurement
law in the United States is located at The George Washington University Law
School.
