Grassroots Radio Coalition The Grassroots Radio Coalition is a coalition of
community media activists. The GRC has a mailing list and holds a conference
every year, but has so far not incorporated. There are no dues, no hierarchy
and no bylaws. At the GRC11 in 2006, conference attendees decided to establish
a steering committee to help coordinate coalition issues. History. The
Grassroots Radio Coalition was born in 1996, as a reaction against increasing
commercialization of public radio and lack of support for volunteer-based
stations. Though not "founders" per se, Marty Durlin of KGNU and Cathy Melio of
WERU are generally recognized as "midwives" of the GRC. They have said that the
idea of the GRC was ready to be born; they just helped make it happen.
Conferences have been held each summer since 1996, organized and hosted by one
or two grassroots radio stations or organizations each year. Steering
Committee. At the GRC11 in Madison, WI, conference attendees decided to create
a steering committee to help coordinate discussions, assist in conference
planning, and maintain institutional memory. The concept of the steering
committee is in line with the GRC's decentralized, grassroots nature. Though
there is no minimum or maximum number of members of the steering committee, it
was agreed that it should include representatives from stations who have hosted
past GRC conferences, representatives from future GRC conference hosts, and
representatives from the People of Color caucus. People of Color Caucus. The
People of Color Caucus is a loose group of producers and activists in the
coalition. The People of Color Caucus holds meet-ups at the summer GRC
conferences and undertakes initiatives to help increase the racial & ethnic
diversity of the coalition and conference attendees. The People of Color Caucus
raises funds for and administers the "Solidarity Fund" - a scholarship fund to
assist low income people of color to attend GRC conferences.
