Great power A great power is a state that is recognized as having the ability
to exert its influence on a global scale. Great powers characteristically
possess military and economic strength and diplomatic and soft power influence
which may cause small powers to consider the opinions of great powers before
taking actions of their own. International relations theorists have posited
that great power status can be characterized into power capabilities, spatial
aspects, and status dimensions. Sometimes the status of great powers is
formally recognized in conferences such as the Congress of Vienna or an
international structure such as the United Nations Security Council. The term
"great power" was first used to represent the most important powers in Europe
during the post-Napoleonic era. The "Great Powers" constituted the "Concert of
Europe" and claimed the right to joint enforcement of the postwar treaties. The
formalization of the division between small powers and great powers came about
with the signing of the Treaty of Chaumont in 1814. Since then, the
international balance of power has shifted numerous times, most dramatically
during World War I and World War II. While some nations are widely considered
to be great powers, there is no definitive list of them. Characteristics. There
are no set or defined characteristics of a great power. These characteristics
have often been treated as empirical, self-evident to the assessor. However,
this approach has the disadvantage of subjectivity. As a result, there have
been attempts to derive some common criteria and to treat these as essential
elements of great power status. Early writings on the subject tended to judge
states by the realist criterion, as expressed by the historian A. J. P. Taylor
when he noted that "The test of a great power is the test of strength for war."
Later writers have expanded this test, attempting to define power in terms of
overall military, economic, and political capacity. Kenneth Waltz, the founder
of the neorealist theory of international relations, uses a set of five
criteria to determine great power: population and territory; resource
endowment; economic capability; political stability and competence; and
military strength. These expanded criteria can be divided into three heads:
power capabilities, spatial aspects, and status. Power dimensions. As noted
above, for many, power capabilities were the sole criterion. However, even
under the more expansive tests, power retains a vital place. This aspect has
received mixed treatment, with some confusion as to the degree of power
required. Writers have approached the concept of great power with differing
conceptualizations of the world situation, from multi-polarity to overwhelming
hegemony. In his essay, 'French Diplomacy in the Postwar Period', the French
historian Jean-Baptiste Duroselle spoke of the concept of multi-polarity: "A
Great power is one which is capable of preserving its own independence against
any other single power." This differed from earlier writers, notably from
Leopold von Ranke, who clearly had a different idea of the world situation. In
his essay 'The Great Powers', written in 1833, von Ranke wrote: "If one could
establish as a definition of a Great power that it must be able to maintain
itself against all others, even when they are united, then Frederick has raised
Prussia to that position." These positions have been the subject of criticism.
Spatial dimension. All states have a geographic scope of interests, actions, or
projected power. This is a crucial factor in distinguishing a great power from
a regional power; by definition the scope of a regional power is restricted to
its region. It has been suggested that a great power should be possessed of
actual influence throughout the scope of the prevailing international system.
Arnold J. Toynbee, for example, observes that "Great power may be defined as a
political force exerting an effect co-extensive with the widest range of the
society in which it operates. The Great powers of 1914 were 'world-powers'
because Western society had recently become 'world-wide'." Other suggestions
have been made that a great power should have the capacity to engage in extra-
regional affairs and that a great power ought to be possessed of extra-regional
interests, two propositions which are often closely connected. Status
dimension. Formal or informal acknowledgment of a nation's great-power status
has also been a criterion for being a great power. As political scientist
George Modelski notes, "The status of Great power is sometimes confused with
the condition of being powerful, The office, as it is known, did in fact evolve
from the role played by the great military states in earlier periods ... But
the Great power system institutionalizes the position of the powerful state in
a web of rights and obligations." This approach restricts analysis to the post-
Congress of Vienna epoch; it being there that great powers were first formally
recognized. In the absence of such a formal act of recognition it has been
suggested that great power status can arise by implication, by judging the
nature of a state's relations with other great powers. A further option is to
examine a state's willingness to act as a great power. As a nation will seldom
declare that it is acting as such, this usually entails a retrospective
examination of state conduct. As a result this is of limited use in
establishing the nature of contemporary powers, at least not without the
exercise of subjective observation. Other important criteria throughout history
are that great powers should have enough influence to be included in
discussions of political and diplomatic questions of the day, and have
influence on the final outcome and resolution. Historically, when major
political questions were addressed, several great powers met to discuss them.
Before the era of groups like the United Nations, participants of such meetings
were not officially named, but were decided based on their great power status.
These were conferences which settled important questions based on major
historical events. This might mean deciding the political resolution of various
geographical and nationalist claims following a major conflict, or other
contexts. There are several historical conferences and treaties which display
this pattern, such as the Congress of Vienna, the Congress of Berlin, the
discussions of the Treaty of Versailles which redrew the map of Europe, and the
Treaty of Westphalia. History. Different sets of great, or significant, powers
have existed throughout history; however, the term "great power" has only been
used in scholarly or diplomatic discourse since the Congress of Vienna in 1815.
The Congress established the Concert of Europe as an attempt to preserve peace
after the years of Napoleonic Wars. Lord Castlereagh, the British Foreign
Secretary, first used the term in its diplomatic context, in a letter sent on
February 13, 1814: "It affords me great satisfaction to acquaint you that there
is every prospect of the Congress terminating with a general accord and
Guarantee between the Great powers of Europe, with a determination to support
the arrangement agreed upon, and to turn the general influence and if necessary
the general arms against the Power that shall first attempt to disturb the
Continental peace." The Congress of Vienna consisted of five main powers: the
United Kingdom, the Austrian Empire, Prussia, France, and Russia. These five
primary participants constituted the original great powers as we know the term
today. Other powers, such as Spain, Portugal, and Sweden were consulted on
certain specific issues, but they were not full participants. Hanover, Bavaria,
and WÃ¼rttemberg were also consulted on issues relating to Germany. Of the five
original great powers recognised at the Congress of Vienna, only France and the
United Kingdom have maintained that status continuously to the present day,
although France was defeated in the Franco-Prussian War and occupied during
World War II. After the Congress of Vienna, the British Empire emerged as the
pre-eminent power, due to its navy and the extent of its territories, which
signalled the beginning of the Pax Britannica and of The Great Game between
Britain and Russia. The balance of power between the Great Powers became a
major influence in European politics, prompting Otto von Bismarck to say "All
politics reduces itself to this formula: try to be one of three, as long as the
world is governed by the unstable equilibrium of five great powers." Over time,
the relative power of these five nations fluctuated, which by the dawn of the
20th century had served to create an entirely different balance of power. Some,
such as the United Kingdom and Prussia (as part of the newly formed German
state), experienced continued economic growth and political power. At the same
time, other states were emerging and expanding in power, largely through the
process of industrialization. The foremost of these emerging powers were Japan
after the Meiji Restoration and the United States after its civil war, both of
which had been minor powers in 1815. By the dawn of the 20th century the
balance of world power had changed substantially since the Congress of Vienna.
The Eight-Nation Alliance was a belligerent alliance of eight nations against
the Boxer Rebellion in China. It formed in 1900 and consisted of the five
Congress powers plus Italy, Japan, and the United States, representing the
great powers at the beginning of 20th century. Great powers at war. Shifts of
international power have most notably occurred through major conflicts. The
conclusion of the Great War and the resulting treaties of Versailles, St-
Germain, and Trianon witnessed Great Britain, France, Italy, Japan and the
United States as the chief arbiters of the new world order. In the aftermath of
World War I the German Empire was defeated, the Austria-Hungarian empire was
divided into new, less powerful states and the Russian Empire fell to a
revolution. During the Treaty of Versailles the "Big Three" â France, Great
Britain and the United States â held noticeably more power and influence on
the proceedings and outcome of the treaty than Italy or Japan. The victorious
great powers also gained an acknowledgement of their status through permanent
seats at the League of Nations Council, where they acted as a type of executive
body directing the Assembly of the League. However, the Council began with only
four permanent members â Great Britain, France, Italy, and Japan â because
the United States, meant to be the fifth permanent member, left because the US
Senate voted on 19 March 1920 against the ratification of the Treaty of
Versailles, thus preventing American participation in the League. When World
War II started in 1939, it divided the world into two alliances â the Allies
(the United Kingdom and France at first, followed in 1941 by the Soviet Union,
the United States, and China); and the Axis powers consisting of Germany, Italy
and Japan. The end of World War II saw the United States, United Kingdom, and
Soviet Union emerge as the primary victors. The importance of the Republic of
China and France was acknowledged by their inclusion, along with the other
three, in the group of countries allotted permanent seats in the United Nations
Security Council. Since the end of the World Wars, the term "great power" has
been joined by a number of other power classifications. Foremost among these is
the concept of the superpower, used to describe those nations with overwhelming
power and influence in the rest of the world. It was first coined in 1944 by
William T.R. Fox and according to him, there were three superpowers: the
British Empire, the United States, and the Soviet Union. But by the mid 1950s
the British Empire lost its superpower status, leaving the United States and
the Soviet Union as the world's superpowers. The term middle power has emerged
for those nations which exercise a degree of global influence, but are
insufficient to be decisive on international affairs. Regional powers are those
whose influence is generally confined to their region of the world. During the
Cold War, the Asian power of Japan and the European powers of the United
Kingdom, France, and West Germany rebuilt their economies. France and the
United Kingdom maintained technologically advanced armed forces with power
projection capabilities and maintain large defence budgets to this day. Yet, as
the Cold War continued, authorities began to question if France and the United
Kingdom could retain their long-held statuses as great powers. China, with the
world's largest population, has slowly risen to great power status, with large
growth in economic and military power in the post-war period. After 1949, the
Republic of China began to lose its recognition as the sole legitimate
government of China by the other great powers, in favour of the People's
Republic of China. Subsequently, in 1971, it lost its permanent seat at the UN
Security Council to the People's Republic of China. Aftermath of the Cold War.
China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States are referred to
as great powers. These five nations are the only states to have permanent seats
with veto power on the UN Security Council. They are also the recognized
"Nuclear Weapons States" under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and have
the five largest military expenditures in the world. After the dissolution of
the Soviet Union, its UN Security Council permanent seat was transferred to the
Russian Federation in 1991, as its successor state. The newly formed Russian
Federation emerged on the level of a great power, leaving the United States as
the only remaining global superpower (although some support a multipolar world
view). However, there is no unanimous agreement among authorities as to the
current status of these powers or what precisely defines a "great" power.
Sources have at times referred to China, France, the United Kingdom, and Russia
as middle powers. Japan and Germany are sometimes classified as middle powers.
However, they are also included among the great powers, due to their economic
status (having the third and fourth largest economies respectively), despite
their lack of permanent seats and veto power on the UN Security Council or
strategic military reach. With continuing European integration, the European
Union is increasingly being seen as a great power in its own right, with
representation at the WTO and at G8 and G-20 summits. This is most notable in
areas where the European Union has exclusive competence (i.e. economic
affairs). It also reflects a non-traditional conception of Europe's world role
as a global "civilian power", exercising collective influence in the functional
spheres of trade and diplomacy, as an alternative to military dominance. The
European Union is not a sovereign state and has limited scope in the areas of
foreign affairs and defense policy. These remain with the member states of the
European Union, which include three larger powers (referred to as the "EU
three"): France, Germany and the United Kingdom.
