Great American Boycott The Great American Boycott (, lit. "the Great American
Strike") was a one-day boycott of United States schools and businesses by
immigrants in the United States illegally, of mostly Latin American origin that
took place on May 1, 2006. The date was chosen by boycott organizers to
coincide with May Day, the International Workers Day observed as a national
holiday in Asia, most of Europe, and Mexico, but not officially recognized in
the United States due to its Communist associations. As a continuation of the
2006 U.S. immigration reform protests, the organizers called for supporters to
abstain from buying, selling, working, and attending school, in order to
attempt to demonstrate through the extent to which the labor obtained of
illegal immigrants is needed. Supporters of the boycott rallied in major cities
across the U.S. to demand general amnesty and legalization programs for illegal
aliens. For this reason, the day is referred to as "A Day Without an Immigrant"
in reference to the 2004 political satire film "A Day Without a Mexican". Most
who participated in the marches waved flags of Mexico and other Central and
South American countries, while others waved flags bearing the likeness of
slain Marxist revolutionary leader Che Guevara, and/or the red flag. Though
some demonstrations were peaceful, a Vista, California rally took a violent
turn at day's end when crowds began throwing rocks and bottles at sheriff's
deputies. There were also two arrests made at a demonstration in Los Angeles's
MacArthur Park. A stabbing that occurred near the location of the march in San
Jose, California, may or may not have been related to the day's events. While
the economic effects of the boycott are unknown, most initial reports indicated
that the boycott failed to halt "business as usual". In a show of solidarity,
internationally, labor unions and other groups engaged in a one-day boycott of
U.S. products called the "Nothing Gringo Boycott", particularly in Mexico and
Central American countries. It was later reported that this boycott had little,
if any, effect on the U.S. economy. Demonstrations were also held in major
cities across Mexico. Origin. The boycott was announced on April 10, 2006 in
Los Angeles, California by the March 25 Coalition of Catholic groups, illegal
immigration advocacy organizations, and labor unions. Hermandad Mexicana, an
affiliate of the Mexican American Political Association, the Coalition for
Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles (CHIRLA), Amigos de Orange, and local
MEChA chapters all promptly joined. It was coordinated nationally by the May
Day Movement for Worker & Immigrants Rights. The coalition arose out of
protests against H.R. 4437, a legislative proposal that was passed by the
United States House of Representatives on December 16, 2005 by a vote of 239 to
182, only to die in the United States Senate by not being brought to the floor
before the 109th Congress ended. This bill would have made residing in the U.S.
illegally a felony and imposed stiffer penalties on those who knowingly employ
and harbour noncitizens illegally. It also called for the construction of new
border security fences along portions of the 2,000-mile United Statesâ€“Mexico
border. The coalition takes its name from the date of the first mass protest
against the bill, a day which saw upwards of 500,000 demonstrators on the
streets of Los Angeles, as well as hundreds of thousands in other major U.S.
cities. The March 25, 2006 protests were noted for their peaceful nature,
despite the controversy surrounding the immigration issue. According to the
"New York Times", Initial response. The boycott and strike provoked controversy
as soon as they were proposed. National organizations and prominent figures
split over whether to support the boycott, with many moderates endorsing
demonstrations but withholding support for the boycott. Many of the "moderate"
demonstrations were scheduled for three o'clock in the afternoon, after
working-hours for the many unskilled professions where illegal immigrant labor
tends to be concentrated. President George W. Bush urged immigrants not to
boycott, and instead to protest after work and on the weekend. California
governor Arnold Schwarzenegger said that a boycott would "hurt everyone".
California's top education official opposed the boycott and called for students
to stay in school on Monday. Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa, the city's
first Mexican-American mayor since the 19th century, called for children to
attend school and for a late afternoon rally. He also urged protesters to carry
American flags, and not the flags of their home countries. The United States
Conference of Catholic Bishops offered Mass as an alternative to boycotting,
and suggested that churches toll their bells in memory of immigrants who died
trying to come to the U.S. The bishops, too, urged students to stay in school.
National Hispanic and immigration-advocacy groups were also split, with some
fearing that the actions would provoke a backlash. The League of United Latin
American Citizens, normally a moderate organization, was one of the few to
fully support both the boycott and the strike. The Washington, D.C.-based
National Capital Immigration Coalition denounced the Boycott, while the
National Council of La Raza took no position whatsoever. Numerous anti-war,
left-wing, socialist and communist groups also endorsed the Boycott. The Act
Now to Stop War and End Racism coalition, in particular, provided signs and
mobilized supporters to attend demonstrations, and while the American Civil
Liberties Union took no official stance, it offered advice and information for
protesters on its website. The AFL-CIO also endorsed the protests, saying that
the H.R. 4437 "isn't the answer" to immigration issues. The AFL-CIO's executive
vice president, Linda Chavez-Thompson, stated: "We believe that there is
absolutely no good reason why any immigrant who comes to this country prepared
to work, to pay taxes, and to abide by our laws and rules should be relegated
to this repressive, second-class guest worker status." Opposition. Republican
congressman Tom Tancredo stated that "The iron triangle of illegal employers,
foreign governments and (interest) groups ... puts tremendous pressure on our
elected officials to violate the desires of law-abiding Americans. As nearly
every recent poll shows, Americans want secure borders -- not amnesty -- and
sooner or later they'll elect representatives who will listen to their
constituents." Counter-demonstrations took place in various cities to coincide
with the day's events, although they were mostly small in size. Some encouraged
their members to buy from American businesses to offset the economic impact of
the boycott. Among them are the Southern California talk radio hosts John and
Ken, who called for "The Great American Spend-a-Lot", a contest with prizes for
listeners who spent the most money. The volunteer border security Minuteman
Project, which has organized citizens' patrols along the US-Mexican border to
monitor and deter illegal immigration, hosted rallies across the country,
starting on Wednesday, May 3 in Los Angeles. They also began constructing a
barbed wire fence along the border in Arizona. According to Minuteman Project
founder Jim Gilchrist, "It's intimidation when a million people march down main
streets in our major cities under the Mexican flag. This will backfire." A new
group, the 'You Don't Speak For Me' coalition, was formed in response to the
boycott to challenge the notion that May 1 protesters speak on behalf of all
Hispanics. According to former Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Pete Nunez,
who is the group's spokesperson, "Millions of Hispanic-Americans -- including
many who have gone through the immigration process the right way -- are
offended by the demands being made by people who have broken our nation's
laws." CNN's Lou Dobbs, criticized the boycott for its promotion by groups such
as the radical protest organization ANSWER, (Act Now to Stop War and End
Racism). Dobbs also stated that "It is no accident that they chose May 1 as
their day of demonstration and boycott. It is the worldwide day of
commemorative demonstrations by various socialist, communist, and even anarchic
organizations." The "Washington Post" suggested that the May 2 ouster of the
mayor and two council members in the town of Herndon, Virginia who had suffered
criticism for their support of a day-labor center was a negative reaction to
the Boycott. Some Southern and Western states drew up new tougher anti-illegal
immigration laws. The "Post" also credited backlash from the Boycott support in
the Arizona legislature for the passage of laws penalizing businesses who hire
illegal immigrants and on other crimes associated with illegal immigration.
Georgia has also since passed a law, which took effect in 2007, that prohibits
illegal immigrants from receiving many social services and requires police and
employers to report illegal workers to the Immigration Service. Fox News's Sean
Hannity asked "Why is it that so many people who didn't respect our laws and
our sovereignty are demanding for the right to stay here, demanding for the
right to jump in front of other people who are going through the process
properly, and those that disagree are being called racist and bigoted?"
According to an editorial by conservative commentator, Cinnamon Stillwell of
the San Francisco Chronicle, "The one thing the boycott did achieve was to
expose the lie that the country cannot function without the labor of illegal
immigrants. While some may have been inconvenienced by the experience, the
economy hardly came to a grinding halt. It seems there are still some jobs
Americans are willing to do." Summary. The boycott highlighted the concerns of
millions living in the United States legally and illegally and the highly
emotional issue of illegal aliens in the US, provoking intense debate on all
sides of the political spectrum. On May 15, 2006, President Bush announced
plans for the Pentagon to deploy up to 6,000 National Guard troops to help
secure the Southern U.S. border. H.R. 4437 was passed by the House of
Representatives on December 16, 2005 by a vote of 239 to 182. On May 25, 2006,
The U.S. Senate approved by a vote of 62-36, its own White House-backed
immigration reform bill that would grant some illegal aliens a chance at
citizenship and strengthen border security. Negotiations were held with the aim
of meshing the Senate's immigration bill with H.R.4437, no agreement was
reached before the election in November.
