Green liberalism Green liberalism is a term used to refer to liberals who have
incorporated green concerns into their ideology. Philosophy. Green liberalism
values the Earth very highly, and this philosophy highly values the planet
being passed down to the next generation unharmed. Green liberalism accepts
that the natural world is a system in a state of flux, and does not seek to
conserve the natural world as it is. However, it does seek to minimize the
damage done by the human species on the natural world, and to aid the
regeneration of damaged areas. In economic issues, green liberals take a
position somewhere between classical liberalism and social liberalism: they may
favor slightly less government involvement than do social liberals, but far
more than do classical liberals. Some within the circle of green liberals
practice free-market environmentalism and thus, sharing similarity with
classical liberalism or libertarianism. This is one of a few reasons why a
blue-green alliance is possible in politics. The historian Conrad Russell, a
British Liberal Democrat member of the House of Lords, dedicated a chapter of
his book "The Intelligent Person's Guide to Liberalism" to the subject of green
liberalism. The term "green liberalism" was coined, however, by political
philosopher Marcel Wissenburg in - among others - his 1998 book "Green
Liberalism: The free and the green society". The Liberal Party of Canada under
St√©phane Dion placed the environment at the front of its political agenda,
proposing an ecotax and tax shift it called the Green Shift. Similarly, the
Liberal Democrats (UK) have proposed a "Green Tax Switch" based around the same
ideas.
