Right to keep and bear arms The right to keep and bear arms (often referred as
the right to bear arms or to have arms) is the enumerated right that people
have a personal right to firearms for individual use, and a collective right to
bear arms in a militia. The phrase "right of the people to keep and bear Arms"
was first used in the text of the United States Bill of Rights (coming into law
as the Second Amendment to the Constitution of the United States), although
similar legal wording can be found in the 1688 English Bill of Rights which
states "Subjects which are Protestants may have Arms for their Defence". Beyond
the United States of America, the general concept of a right to bear arms
varies widely by country, state or jurisdiction. Australia. There is no right
to own firearms that is recognized or upheld by the government of Australia.
Gun laws are not as extremely tight as e.g. Japan, but much tighter than in the
USA. Receiving a license depends on the discretion of police as to need and
appropriateness, and therefore a privilege rather than a right. The law
strictly forbids ownership for the "explicit purpose" of self-defence. The
exceptions are of course security guards and police. Carrying weapons on the
person is strictly illegal, even if the owner is licensed - there is no such
thing as a 'carry permit'. A "genuine reason" must be given when applying for a
permit, and several valid categories such as sport, hunting or collecting are
specified (excepting self-defence). As with most other jurisdictions persons
with criminal convictions cannot acquire a permit. Historically, controls on
firearm ownership have usually followed major crimes which resulted in public
outrage. This resulted in an incoherent collection of regulations - following
the fact that Australia is a federal country. Legality varied wildly between
jurisdictions, approaching American latitudes in places like Queensland and
Tasmania. The current licensing and permit regime was enacted following the
Port Arthur massacre (Australia), and has largely converged all jurisdictions
to a similar standard. The present pressures on gun law legislation in
Australia arise from organised-crime activity, particularly the drug trade.
Australia has been an agrarian country for much of its history, and therefore
there is a significant population of gun owners. "See also - Australian mass
murders for a list of major crimes which impacted on gun legislation." Canada.
In Canada, it is not difficult to obtain a firearm. Certain models are
classified as "prohibited firearms", as defined by the Firearms Act. Possession
of a restricted firearm requires a Restricted Possession and Acquisition
License or RPAL. An RPAL may be obtained at the same time as, or subsequent to,
a PAL with additional testing and scrutiny by the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police. An Authorization to Transport allows RPAL holders to transport their
restricted firearms directly to and from gun ranges and gunsmiths or to a
change of address. Under certain circumstances, an Authorization to Carry may
be issued, allowing one to carry a loaded restricted firearm on their person.
Cuba. Chapter 1, Article 3 of the states the following: ""When no other
recourse is possible, all citizens have the right to struggle through all
means, including armed struggle, against anyone who tries to overthrow the
political, social and economic order established in this Constitution."
Finland. In Finland, citizens need a permission to possess a firearm.
Permission is given by the police and requires a valid reason. The permission
may be denied, for example, if the person has a criminal background or problems
with drugs, alcohol or mental health. The right to possess a firearm does not
include the right to carry it in public, except while hunting. At home,
firearms must be kept behind locks or inoperative. Knives and similar items may
not be carried in public. India. ===Crop P Protection of Ones Person. This
license is issued if a person's life is threatened or the police is convinced
that there is an eminent threat to a person's life or to his/her person and
that the threatened person cannot be protected at all times by law enforcement
officers. However this licence is not given to a person who is in the service
of protecting someone else(E.g. security guards, bodyguards, bouncers). The
firearm cannot be used for defence of any other person other than the one
holding the licence. Highly restricted ammunition acquisitions. Sports. License
issued to people who are state-level or national-level or international-level
shooters and practice target-shooting are allowed non-prohibited bores.
Abundant ammunition is provided for. The person must show ample proof of skill
and level of qualification. Dealership Licence. License for dealing in arms and
ammunitions but isn't allowed to utilize, test or prove or to carry outside the
premises of the dealership home. Collector's License. This license is issued to
people who wish to place their arms on display but have no intent on using it
for defensive or offensive purposes. This license isn't allowed the
acquisitions of ammunitions. Fire-arms of this license are called imitation-
firearms irrespective of their capacity to fire a projectile. Manufacturer's
License. License required to produce and manufacture an imitation-firearm or a
firearm. This license is also required to possess machinery that can be used to
produce weapons unless sufficient evidence to the contradictory is provided. It
is required even to produce non-firearms. Company Protection License. Security
Companies/agencies that recruit armed security personnel require a license
which is registered in the name of the Security company or agency. Any misuse
of the arm by the employee of the company in whose custody the arm is placed is
the responsibility of the company/agency. Non-Firearms. Arms other than
firearms do not require license unless it is the opinion of the police or the
government that there should be control on non-firearms in either parts of the
state or the whole state and this must be notified to the Central government.
Knives which are not packed and/or are above 2Â inches or more in width and/or
9Â inches or greater in length are considered arms even if they are blunt.
Swords, Arrows, spears, pole-arms, chain-knives, traditional weapons including
the "Tigers claw" and the Trident are all considered arms and REQUIRE LICENCES
irrespective of whether they are blunt or sharp if the government is of that
opinion. Conditions. Jurisdiction. A person carrying a license cannot carry the
arm or ammunition registered within the license outside the prescribed
jurisdiction within the license. If the arm must be carried outside the
prescribed area then a Temporary Journey Permit must be acquired and the arms
and ammunition must be registered at the nearest police station within 48 hours
of arrival at the location prescribed within the Temporary Journey Permit.
Transfer to a unlicensed person. The arm or ammunition specified in the License
cannot be loaned or transferred to a person not holding a license or is
mentally not qualified to possess an arm. It is a cognizable and non-bailable
offence. Transfer to a Licensed person. Transferring an arm or ammunition to a
person who is having a valid license must be registered to the licensing
authority. Periodical Inspection of arms. The arms and the license must be
procured before the licensing authority or any other authority authorized by
the licensing authority periodically to ensure that there have been no
modifications made to the arm as described in the license. Modification of
Arms. Any modification to an arm must be registered with the licensing
authority before the modification of the arm to ensure that it is a legal
modification. Other. The licenses can be revoked or request for license can be
rejected by the licensing authority if they are of the opinion that the
concerned person are not in need of the license, have a criminal history or are
not in the mental state to possess an Arm. To Bring a weapon into the country
or take one out you must possess a license at the time of the arrival or
departure. If license is revoked then the arms and ammunitions must be handed
over to the nearest police station. Arms might need to be surrendered to the
nearest police station or must not be brought out of the home during duration,
specified by the police, of any governmental elections, riots, civil unrest,
large religious or public events, etc. This is generally referenced to as
"achar-sahiti". For all the above licences the citizen must be above the age of
21. In general, a citizen cannot acquire more than 3 arms simultaneously the
licensing authority can however make the condition of the license vary at his/
her discretion. A person can purchase only a limited amount of ammunition both
at once and annually as prescribed in the license which is decided by the
licensing authority based on the licencee's needs and requirements. Both these
limits are relaxed for Sports and Dealership licenses where a person of the
"Renowned Shooters"- status is allowed a maximum of 5 arms and the dealer is
allowed several arms as long as they are never armed or loaded and ammunition
is kept safely locked. There are two classes of fire-arms, Prohibited bore and
Non-Prohibited bore. The classification is given in the Arms Act of 1959. The
three important acts that govern the use of arms are Arms Act of 1959, 1962 and
1983. Israel. According to the licensing service for a private carry permit, a
permit may be issued to a legal resident over the age of 21,that is working or
living in dangerous zones defined by the Ministry; an individual who works in
specific professions listed by the Ministry or individuals who served in the
Israeli Defense Force or other military agencies, at the rank of Captain or
equivalent (currently serving in the standing army or reserves), retired
officers at a rank of Lt. Colonel, or active reserve members of specific
special forces units. The granting of a private weapon permit is neither an
inherent statutory right nor automatically approved. An applicant is vetted
medically and by the police, and even then the request can still be denied by
the licensing officer, though a denial can be appealed. Japan. With the
exception of law enforcement and defense force personnel, ownership of
"conventional" firearms is prohibited in Japan. Exceptions are made for
firearms with cultural/artistic value (i.e. museum pieces) and for class 4 air
pistol competitors, such as Olympic athletes. Mexico. Legal right. Since 1917
Mexican citizens have had the right to possess firearms "except those expressly
prohibited by law". However after rioters looted gun stores in Mexico City in
the 1960s, the Mexican government began to restrict wholesale gun ownership. By
1995, the government had closed the last private gun stores and given the
military a monopoly on gun sales. Penalties. Mexico's gun laws are very
restrictive, and extremely harsh if you do not follow them and unlike Canada,
where you're likely to be turned away at the border if you have unauthorized
firearms or ammo, unwary visitors to Mexico have been imprisoned in Mexican
jails for five years due to a single spent shell casing in their vehicle. Where
there are prohibitions, there are penalties. The penalties for possession of
prohibited "military firearms" include: 3â12 months in prison for bayonets,
sabers and lances, 1â7 years for .357 magnum revolvers and any revolver
larger than a .38 Special, and 2â12 years for other prohibited weapons. North
Korea. Chapter IV, Article 60 of the Socialist Constitution of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) "The State shall implement the line of
self-reliant defence, the import of which is to arm the entire people, fortify
the country, train the army into a cadre army and modernize the army on the
basis of equipping the army and the people politically and ideologically."
People's Republic of China. According to PRC law, there are firearms
regulations and according to those regulations "whoever, in violation of
firearm-control regulations, secretly keeps firearms or ammunition and refuses
to relinquish them shall be sentenced to fixed-term imprisonment of not more
than two years or criminal detention." Private ownership of firearms in China
was first banned by the Qing dynasty. Sharia law. Under Sharia law, there is an
intrinsic freedom to own arms. However, in times of civil strife or internal
violence, this right can be temporarily suspended to keep peace and prevent
harm, as mentioned by Imam ash-Shatibi in his works on Maqasid ash-Shari'ah
(The Intents and Purposes of Shari'ah) Jews and Christians are prohibited from
bearing arms and are required to be protected by the Islamic State's Military,
the state for which they pay the jizyah. Spain. Per section 149.26 of the ""The
State shall have exclusive competence over ... the regime for the production,
trading, holding and use of weapons"" In practice, there is a tight regime over
firearms which are regulated by law and administered by the "IntervenciÃ³n de
Armas" unit of the "Guardia Civil". The law requires every person carrying or
having possession of a firearm to have a licence issued by the Civil Guard
Authority. There are separate licence categories for officers of the state
(e.g., the armed forces, the police and customs officers), personal use,
security guards, game hunters large and small, for collectors, sports users and
for minors participating in sports. Licences usually are issued for a limited
period and are restrictive regarding the class of weapon that may be held.
Switzerland. Rules regarding firearms in Switzerland differ markedly from those
in other European countries. Under Swiss law, all adult males who have received
training in the Swiss armed forces are reservists who are required under law to
keep their official firearms at home. According to the gun law of 1999
(larm99), automatic weapons like the Swiss army assault rifle have to be
stocked separately of the bolt, which has to be in a locked place. Switzerland
has one of the lowest crime rates in the world, and one of the highest gun
ownership rates in the world. In recent times political opposition has
expressed a desire for tighter gun regulations. However in 2011, Swiss voters
overwhelmingly defeated tighter controls that would have required all guns
(including privately owned guns) to be kept in government arsenals. United
Kingdom. English law and Scots law do not in general talk about rights. Modern
law exists only to curtail certain actions which are deemed illegal for the
common good. There is an English common law right to keep and bear arms for
self-protection but the possession of certain arms is controlled ostensibly for
the common good. The Bill of Rights of 1689 undid the disarming of Protestants
which had occurred in the aftermath of the Civil War but did not create any new
rights. The right to regulate arms was clarified, making it certain to be the
prerogative of Parliament and not the Monarch. The first serious control on
firearms after this was not made until the passing of the Pistols Act 1903 more
than 200 years later. Modern-day possession of guns operates as follows:
everything that isn't prohibited under section 5 of the Firearms Act 1968 must
be held on a section 1 firearms certificate, unless it is a section 2 shotgun
and can thus go on a Shot Gun Certificate. The requirements for a firearms
certificate are more demanding than that of a Shot Gun Certificate. Police
officers in Great Britain do not routinely carry firearms but do typically
carry a baton and/or pepper spray. Police that do carry firearms regularly are
typically those guarding national ports of entry, those engaged with diplomatic
security, Royal Protection officers or the Civil Nuclear Constabulary. General.
The Prevention of Crime Act 1953 prohibited the carrying of an offensive weapon
without lawful authority or reasonable excuse. This is defined as any article
made or adapted for use to causing injury to the person, or intended by the
person having it with him for such use. The law covers not just firearms but
also knives. A person cannot merely carry a knife around with him for self-
defence as the courts will not regard this as reasonable excuse. Since 1972, in
the Queens Bench court case Evans v. Hughes, the threat has to be believed to
be real and imminent. A person with fishing tackle and carrying a knife or on a
camping expedition would have a reasonable excuse for carrying a knife. Non
locking, folding knives with a blade under 3Â inches, may be carried freely
without "reasonable excuse", however the police and courts will regard them as
an offensive weapon if used as such. It was not considered a "reasonable
excuse" to carry a weapon for self-defence, unless his job carried a high risk
of being attacked by criminals such as people carrying money to a bank,
security guards and certain people who worked for the government. Since 1973,
security guards and others are not allowed to carry truncheons and other
weapons as part of their duties and only police are allowed to carry weapons.
Firearms. Pistols with barrels shorter than 9Â inches were first controlled by
the 1903 Pistols Act, which placed hurdles in the path of those who were not
householders. Pistols, revolvers, rifles and ammunition, but not shotguns, were
much more tightly controlled by the Firearms Act of 1920, which made it illegal
to possess these weapons without first obtaining a certificate from the police
and registering each individual firearm. Less stringent provisions were
introduced for shotguns in 1967. UK legislation often gives considerable powers
to ministers to issue regulations that control the way the various acts are
applied. In relation to firearms, this power generally falls to the Home
Secretary. The Home Office therefore has some control of the conditions under
which firearms certificates can be issued. On a few occasions over the years,
permits have been granted to private individuals to keep firearms for personal
protection, however these are very limited and exceptional cases. The Firearms
Acts 1936/7 placed additional controls on fully automatic firearms, effectively
restricting them to the armed forces and police. The Criminal Justice Act 1967
was passed which introduced Shotgun Certificates. The act was at least in part
a response to the murder by criminals of three policemen the previous year,
though this had been committed with handguns. The Firearms Act 1968 introduced
the concept of compulsory security for rifles and pistols and incorporated the
Shotgun Certificate first outlined in the Criminal Justice Act 1967. The
Firearms Act 1982 extended the provision of the 1968 Act, including control of
imitation firearms. The Hungerford killings in 1987 was followed by the
Firearms Act 1988 which banned centre-fire self-loading and pump action rifles
and extended compulsory security to shotguns. The Dunblane massacre in Scotland
in 1996 was followed by the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997, which effectively
banned all but .22 pistols; and then, after the Labour government led by Tony
Blair came into power, the Firearms (Amendment) (No.2) Act 1997 was introduced,
which effectively banned the private possession of all modern pistols, even for
competitive sporting purposes. Rifles are not limited to smallbore, or to
competition use and numerous types of rifles, shotguns and black powder pistols
and longarms, may be owned privately. The Anti-Social Behaviour Act 2003 has
brought certain types of air weapons into the categories of control created by
the firearms acts. The Crown Prosecution Service has published a summary of the
laws regarding firearms in England and Wales. Knives. The following laws apply
to the controlled use of knives in the UK; possession of an offensive weapon in
a public place (section 1 Prevention of Crime Act 1953); the possession of a
bladed or pointed article in a public place (Section 139 Criminal Justice Act
1988); trading in flick or gravity knives (restricted under the Offensive
Weapons Act 1959), the unlawful marketing of combat knives and publishing
adverts for combat knives and using someone to mind a weapon (Violent Crime
Reduction Act VCRA 2006). The police have powers entry, seizure, retention and
forfeiture(The Knives Act 1997). School staff members have powers to search
school students and others (VCRA s.45, 46 and 47 & S550aa of the Education Act
1996). Senior police officers can authorise constables to stop and search
persons in a specific area either where a serious public order problem is
likely to arise, or look for offensive weapons or dangerous instruments (S60
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994). The Crown Prosecution Service has
published a summary of the laws regarding knives in England and Wales. Others.
The Firearms Act 1968 also forbids the use of "any weapon of whatever
description designed or adapted for the discharge of any noxious liquid, gas or
other thing." This for example covers pepper spray, ammonia, CS gas, and
electric shock armaments such as the Taser. United States. The intended meaning
of the amendment has long been disputed between supporters and opponents of gun
rights, with opponents arguing that "well-regulated militia" allows firearms
regulation, while supporters placing emphasis on the second clause. English
precedent. The Second Amendment to the United States Constitution was heavily
influenced by the English Bill of Rights 1689, which restricted the right of
the English Crown to interfere with the personal right to bear arms. The 1689
Bill of Rights restricted the right of the monarch to have a standing army and
to interfere with the personal right to bear arms. It did not create a new
right to have arms, but instead rescinded and deplored acts of the deposed King
James II which extended the right to Catholics and Protestant dissenters in
addition to upholding prior legislation that limited the ownership of arms to
certain social classes. The English Bill of Rights firmly established that
regulating the right to bear arms was one of the powers of Parliament, and did
not belong to the monarch. Sir William Blackstone wrote in the eighteenth
century, at a time when there were no police or forces of law enforcement,
about the right to have arms being auxiliary to the "natural right of
resistance and self-preservation", but conceded that the right was subject to
their suitability and allowance by law.  Civilian usage meaning. The right to
keep and bear arms, which is protected under the second amendment, is often
presented in the context of military service and the broader right of self
defense. Whether this right pertains to individuals acting independently or the
people acting collectively has been the topic of several Supreme Court
decisions. On June 26, 2008, the Supreme Court of the United States, in a 5-
4 decision, held that residents of the District of Columbia have an individual
right to handguns for self-defense within the home in the case "District of
Columbia v. Heller" while at the same time reaffirming a broad range of federal
restrictions on firearms as being constitutional. Also, the large body of state
based law regarding the right to firearms and restrictions on firearms remain
largely unchanged, though the Supreme Court ruled in the 2010 case McDonald v.
Chicago that the right to keep and bear arms applies to state governments via
the due process clause of the fourteenth amendment. The people's right to have
their own arms for their defense is described in the philosophical and
political writings of Aristotle, Cicero, John Locke, Machiavelli, the English
Whigs and others. Though possessing arms appears to be distinct from "bearing"
them, the possession of arms is recognized as necessary for and a logical
precursor to the bearing of arms. Don Kates, a civil liberties lawyer, cites
historic English usage describing the "right to keep and bear "their private
arms"." Likewise, Sayoko Blodgett-Ford notes a non-military usage of the phrase
in pamphlet widely circulated by the dissenting minority dating from the time
of the Pennsylvania ratifying convention for the US Constitution: Likewise, the
U.S. Supreme Court ruled in "District of Columbia v. Heller" (2008), No. 07-
290, that "he Second Amendment protects an individual right to possess a
firearm unconnected with service in a militia, and to use that arm for
traditionally lawful purposes, such as self-defense within the home." Military
service meaning. Some historians have argued that prior to and through the 18th
century, the expression "bear arms" appeared exclusively in military contexts,
as opposed to the use of firearms by civilians.Uviller, H. Richard. & Merkel,
William G.: "The Militia and the Right to Arms, Or, How the Second Amendment
Fell Silent ", Page 194. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3017-2 However,
this conclusion is disputed and may be due to selection bias, which arises from
the use of a limited selection of government documents that overwhelmingly
refer to matters of military service. Commenting on this previous research,
other historians note:"Searching more comprehensive collections of English
language works published before 1820 shows that there are a number of uses
that...have nothing to do with military service...The common law was in
agreement. Edward Christian's edition of Blackstone's Commentaries that
appeared in the 1790's described the rights of Englishmen (which every American
colonist had been promised) in these terms 'everyone is at liberty to keep or
carry a gun, if he does not use it for the [unlawful destruction of game.' This
right was separate from militia duties." The Oxford English Dictionary defines
the term "to bear arms" as: ""to serve as a soldier, do military service,
fight,"" dating to about 1330. Garry Wills, author and history professor at
Northwestern University, has written of the origin of the term "bear arms":
Garry Wills also cites Greek and Latin etymology:Wills, Garry (1999). "A
Necessary Evil" pages 256â257. New York, NY. Simon & Schuster. Historically,
the right to keep and bear arms, whether considered an individual or a
collective or a militia right, did not originate fully formed in the Bill of
Rights in 1791; rather, the Second Amendment was the codification of the six-
centuries-old responsibility to keep and bear arms for king and country that
was inherited from the English Colonists that settled North America, tracing
its origin back to the Assize of Arms of 1181 that occurred during the reign of
Henry II. Through being codified in the United States Constitution, the common
law right was continued and guaranteed for the People, and statutory law
enacted subsequently by Congress cannot extinguish the pre-existing common law
right to keep and bear arms. This right is often presented in the United States
as synonymous with the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution. Some
have seen the Second Amendment as derivative of a common law right to keep and
bear arms; Thomas B. McAffee & Michael J. Quinlan, writing in the North
Carolina Law Review, March 1997, Page 781, have stated ""...Â Madison did not
invent the right to keep and bear arms when he drafted the Second
Amendmentâthe right was pre-existing at both common law and in the early
state constitutions."" Akhil Reed Amar similarly notes the basis of Common Law
for the first ten amendments of the U.S. Constitution, "following John Randolph
Tucker's famous oral argument in the 1887 Chicago anarchist case, Spies v.
Illinois":  Uviller and Merkel hold that the right to bear arms was not
reserved for the state, but rather was an individual and personal right for
arms only to the extent needed to maintain a well regulated militia to support
the state. They also hold that a militia recognizable to the framers of the
Constitution has ceased to exist in the United States resulting from deliberate
Congressional legislation and also societal neglect; nonetheless, "Technically,
all males aged seventeen to forty-five are members of the unorganized militia,
but that status has no practical legal significance." Uviller, H. Richard. &
Merkel, William G.: "The Militia and the Right to Arms, Or, How the Second
Amendment Fell Silent ", Page 23. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-3017-
2 Uviller, H. Richard. & Merkel, William G.: "The Militia and the Right to
Arms, Or, How the Second Amendment Fell Silent ", Page 24. Duke University
Press. ISBN 0-8223-3017-2 Early commentary in state courts. The Second
Amendment of the United States Constitution is a federal provision. Each of the
fifty states also has its own state constitution. Forty-four states have chosen
to explicitly embody a right to bear arms into its state constitution.
Approximately thirty-one states have explicitly chosen to include the right to
arms for "individual right", "defense of self", "defense of home" or similarly
worded reasons. Approximately thirteen states, as with the U.S. Constitution,
did not choose to explicitly include "individual", "self" or "home" wording
associated with a right to bear arms for their specific states. Approximately
twenty-eight states have explicitly chosen to include the right to bear arms
for "security of a free state", "defense of state", "common defense" or
similarly worded reasons, as with the U.S. Constitution. Approximately sixteen
states did not choose to include explicitly "free state", "defense of state" or
"common defense" wording for their specific state. Whether the inclusion of
these kinds of wording in state constitutions has relevance to the issue of
whether implicit "individual" rights exist, or whether such rights (if any) are
implicitly protected by the states' constitutions or by the U.S. Constitution's
Second Amendment, remains a matter of dispute. Regarding the state
interpretations of these state and the federal constitutional rights to bear
arms, state courts have addressed the meaning of these specific rights in
considerable detail. Two different models have emerged from state
jurisprudence: an individual right and a collective right. "Bliss v.
Commonwealth" (1822, KY) addressed the right to bear arms pursuant to Art. 10,
Sec. 23 of the Second Constitution of Kentucky (1799): "That the right of the
citizens to bear arms in defence of themselves and the state, shall not be
questioned." This was interpreted to include the right to carry a concealed
sword in a cane. This case has been described as about "a statute prohibiting
the carrying of concealed weapons was violative of the Second Amendment."
Others, however, have seen no conflict with the Second Amendment by the
Commonwealth of Kentucky's statute under consideration in "Bliss" since "The
Kentucky law was aimed at concealed weapons. No one saw any conflict with the
Second Amendment. As a matter of fact, most of the few people who considered
the question at all believed amendments to the U.S. Constitution did not apply
to state laws." The Kentucky High Court stated in "Bliss", "But it should not
be forgotten, that it is not only a part of the right that is secured by the
constitution; it is the right entire and complete, as it existed at the
adoption of the constitution; and if any portion of that right be impaired,
immaterial how small the part may be, and immaterial the order of time at which
it be done, it is equally forbidden by the constitution." The "constitution"
mentioned in this quote refers to Kentucky's Constitution. The case prompted
outrage in the Kentucky House, all the while recognizing that Section 23 of the
Second Constitution of Kentucky (1799) did guarantee individuals the right to
bear arms. The "Bliss" ruling, to the extent that it dealt with concealed
weapons, was overturned by constitutional amendment with Section 26 in
Kentucky's Third Constitution (1850) banning the future carrying of concealed
weapons, while still asserting that the bearing of arms in defense of
themselves and the state was an individual and collective right in the
Commonwealth of Kentucky. This recognition, has remained to the present day in
the Commonwealth of Kentucky's Fourth Constitution enacted in 1891, in Section
1, Article 7, that guarantees "The right to bear arms in defense of themselves
and of the State, subject to the power of the General Assembly to enact laws to
prevent persons from carrying concealed weapons." As noted in the Northern
Kentucky Law Review Second Amendment Symposium: Rights in Conflict in the
1980s, vol. 10, no. 1, 1982, p.Â 155, "The first state court decision resulting
from the "right to bear arms" issue was "Bliss v. Commonwealth". The court held
that "the right of citizens to bear arms in defense of themselves and the State
must be preserved entire, ..." "This holding was unique because it stated that
the right to bear arms is absolute and unqualified." The importance of "Bliss"
is also seen from the defense subsequently given against a murder charge in
Kentucky against Mattews Ward, who in 1852 pulled out a concealed pistol and
fatally wounded his brother's teacher over an accusation regarding eating
chestnuts in class. Ward's defense team consisted of eighteen lawyers,
including U.S. Senator John Crittenden, former Governor of Kentucky, and former
United States Attorney General. The defense successfully defended Ward in 1854
through an assertion that "a man has a right to carry arms; I am aware of
nothing in the laws of God or man, prohibiting it. The Constitution of Kentucky
and our Bill of Rights guarantee it. The Legislature once passed an act
forbidding it, but it was decided unconstitutional, and overruled by our
highest tribunal, the Court of Appeals." As noted by Cornell, "Ward's lawyers
took advantage of the doctrine advanced in "Bliss" and wrapped their client's
action under the banner of a constitutional right to bear arms. Ward was
acquitted." In contrast, in "State v. Buzzard" (1842, Ark), the Arkansas high
court adopted a militia-based, political right, reading of the right to bear
arms under state law, and upheld the 21st section of the second article of the
Arkansas Constitution that declared, "that the free white men of this State
shall have a right to keep and bear arms for their common defense", while
rejecting a challenge to a statute prohibiting the carrying of concealed
weapons. Buzzard had carried a concealed weapon and stood "indicted by virtue
of the authority of the 13th section of an act of the Legislature prohibiting
any person wearing a pistol, dirk, large knife or sword-cane concealed as a
weapon, unless upon a journey, under the penalties of fine and imprisonment."
Justice Lacy, in a dissenting opinion in "Buzzard", summarizing the majority
viewpoint to which he disagreed, declared: "That the words "a well regulated
militia being necessary for the security of a free State", and the words
"common defense" clearly show the true intent and meaning of these
Constitutions Ark. and U.S. and prove that it is a political and not an
individual right, and, of course, that the State, in her legislative capacity,
has the right to regulate and control it: This being the case, then the people,
neither individually nor collectively, have the right to keep and bear
arms."Joel Prentiss Bishop's influential "Commentaries on the Law of Statutory
Crimes" (1873) took Buzzard's militia-based interpretation, a view that Bishop
characterized as the "Arkansas doctrine", as the orthodox view of the right to
bear arms in American law. Political scientist Earl Kruschke has categorized
both "Bliss" and "Buzzard" as being "cases illustrating the individual view."
Professor Eugene Volokh revealed, in the California Political Review, that a
statement in a concurring opinion in "Buzzard" was the only support for a
collective right view of the right to keep and bear arms in the 19th century.
In 1905, the Kansas Supreme Court in "Salina v. Blaksley" made the first
"collective right" judicial interpretation. The Kansas high court declared:
"That the provision in question applies only to the right to bear arms as a
member of the state militia, or some other military organization provided for
by law, is also apparent from the second amendment to the federal Constitution,
which says: 'A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a
free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be
infringed.'" Modern commentary: three models. Three models of interpreting the
right to bear arms in the United States commonly exist. These three models are
founded on differing interpretations of the Second Amendment, ""A well
regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right
of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed."" The first two
models focus on the preamble, or "purpose" clause, of the AmendmentÂ â the
words ""A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free
State."" The first model, the collective model, holds that the right to bear
arms belongs to the people collectively rather than to individuals, because the
right's only purpose is to enable states to maintain a militia. The second
model, the modified collective model, is similar to the first. It holds that
the right to keep and bear arms exists only for individuals actively serving in
the militia, and then only pursuant to such regulations as may be prescribed.
The third model, the individual-rights model, holds that a right of individuals
is to own and possess firearms, much as the First Amendment protects a right of
individuals to engage in free speech. This view was more strongly reflected by
the Supreme Court in "District of Columbia v. Heller" (2008) than had previous
interpretations by the Court. Prior to the Supreme Court's ruling in "Heller"
there was a split among the federal courts, with nine of the federal circuit
courts of appeal supporting a modified collective rights view, two of the
federal circuits supporting an individual rights view, and one federal circuit
court having not addressed the question. Supreme Court justice Antonin Scalia
in 2008 wrote that the right to bear arms is not unlimited and is subject to
reasonable prohibitions and regulations and subsequently federal court rulings
have upheld existing gun prohibitions and regulations. Nadine Strossen,
President of the American Civil Liberties Union, has stated the argument that
the Individual Rights model must yield to reasonable regulation. "Let's assume
for the sake of argument it does protect an individual right," said Strossen,
"it is no more absolute than freedom of speech or any other right in the
Constitution. No right is absolute; the government is always allowed to
restrict the right if it can satisfy Constitutional strict scrutiny and show
the restriction is narrowly tailored to promote a goal of compelling
importance." At the state level, each of the fifty state constitutions, state
laws, and state courts address the state-based right to bear arms distinctly
within their respective jurisdictions. The degree and the nature of the
protection, prohibition, and regulation at the state level varies from state to
state. The District of Columbia, not being a state, falls within the federal
jurisdiction. In the Nineteenth century, in the United States, considerable
attention in public discourse and the courts was directed to the issue of the
risks of arming of slaves (prior to the Civil War), and later to the right of
the Negro people to belong to militia and the arming of the Negro people. Most
famously this is seen in the court arguments of the court case Dred Scott v.
Sandford, whether the slave Dred Scott could be a citizen, with rights,
including the right to bear arms. This debate about the rights of slaves and
former slaves often included the usage of the term 'bear arms' with the meaning
of individual Negroes having or not having the right to possess firearms. The
"Emerson" decision was consistent with a view of Constitutional interpretation
known by its principal advocates as the "Standard Model" view, and
alternatively referred to as the "Individualist view". There is some dispute
whether the "individualist view" predates the collective "militia view" in
American jurisprudence. Some assert the "militia view" first appeared only in
the early to mid 1990s. A contrasting opinion asserts the militia view long
predates the individualist view, with the individualist view dating back to
only 1960. In the late twentieth (20th) century, gun advocates argued that the
term 'keep and bear arms' means and has meant keeping and bearing private arms
for self-defense or hunting purposes. The 1986 TV film "The Right of the
People" refers to this for self-defense against crime. The Second Amendment of
the United States has also been viewed by many private Americans, including
those who are part of the modern militia movement, as providing a means for
resisting governmental tyranny. Those supporting the modern militia movement in
the United States have quoted the words of the founding fathers on websites and
in publications. These quotes generally align not with the Federalists, but
rather with the Anti-Federalists, who opposed the ratification of the
Constitution but were the driving force behind the Bill of Rights. The politics
of the right to keep and bear arms. Interest groups, primarily in the United
States, exert political pressure for and against legislation limiting the right
to keep and bear arms. This political debate in America is organized between
those who seek stricter regulations and those who believe gun regulations
violate the Second Amendment protection of a right to keep and bear arms. The
largest advocacy group in this regard is the National Rifle Association, and
its political wing, the NRA Institute for Legislative Action. The NRA has been
described as one of the largest and most powerful political special interest
group in the United States. Several other groups including the Gun Owners of
America and the Citizens Committee for the Right to Keep and Bear Arms, while
smaller in size, are also politically active. The main gun control advocacy
group is the Brady Campaign which has been described as considerably less
effective than gun-rights organizations. Yemen. In Yemen firearms are both
easily and legally accessible.
