Haymarket Books Haymarket Books is a non-profit left-wing book publisher and
distributor. It is published by the Center for Economic Research and Social
Change. Background. Haymarket Books was founded in 2001, and named in memory of
the "Haymarket Martyrs" - five anarchist labor activists given the death
penalty after the Haymarket Riot and now generally believed to have been
innocent. Haymarket publishes nonfiction from a left-wing or socialist
perspective, with subjects focusing primarily on history and politics. It
publishes both original work and out-of-print "classics." In addition to books,
it publishes a magazine, International Socialist Review, audio tapes, and
political buttons. Original works. Original works on Marxism and socialism
include pamphlets and books by Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Leon Trotsky,
Vladimir Lenin, and Rosa Luxemburg such as Marx's "Das Kapital", the "The
Communist Manifesto", Engel's "Socialism Utopian and Scientific", and Trotsky's
"Literature and Revolution". Books on socialism, Marxism, and Leninism by
contemporary socialists are also included. Haymarket also publishes accounts of
various revolutions such as Alexander Rabinowitch's "The Bolsheviks Come to
Power", "Building the Party" and "All Power to the Soviets" by Tony Cliff about
the Russian Revolution, along with books about the Spanish Revolution and the
German Revolution. Topics of books published. Haymarket Books publishes a range
of titles, including books about contemporary politics, such as Noam Chomsky's
"Hopes and Prospects", Arundhati Roy's "Field Notes on Democracy", and Amy
Goodman's "Breaking the Sound Barrier".
