Head of state Head of State (), or Chief of State (), is term used in
constitutional law, international law, political science, and diplomatic
protocol when referring to the official who holds the highest ranked position
in a sovereign state and has the vested or implied powers to act as the chief
public representative of a state. Heads of state in most countries are natural
persons holding an office, however, in four United Nations member states the
head of state position is held by a body of persons: the Federal Council of
Switzerland, the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Co-Princes of
Andorra and the Captains Regent of San Marino. The term "head of state" is
often used differentiating it from the term head of government, e.g. as in
article 7 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, article 1 of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally
Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents and the United Nations protocol
list. For instance, in parliamentary systems like the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the Federal Republic of Germany; the Monarch
and the President are recognized as their respective heads of state, while the
Prime Minister and the Chancellor are recognized as the heads of government.
However in republics with a presidential system, as in the United States of
America and the Federative Republic of Brazil, their presidents are recognized
as being both "heads of state and heads of government". The latter is also
generally true in absolute monarchies and sometimes as well in other forms of
authoritarian government. The role of the head of state generally includes
legitimizing the state and exercising the political powers, functions, and
duties granted to the head of state in the country's constitution and laws. The
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations operates under the presumption that
the head of a diplomatic mission (i.e. ambassador or nuncio) of the sending
state is accredited to the head of state of the receiving state. In nation
states the head of state is often thought of as the official "leader" of the
nation. Charles de Gaulle described the role he envisaged for the French
presidency before he wrote the modern French constitution, stating the head of
state should embody "the spirit of the nation" for the nation itself and the
world: "a certain idea about France" (). Today, many countries expect their
head of state to embody national values in a similar fashion. Constitutional
models. In protocolary terms, states are distinguished as monarchy or republic
depending on the style (and usually mode of accession, see below) of their head
of state, a typical constitutional provision, but as such this is not defining
for the actual political system, which often evolves significantly, or can
remain unaltered in other respects despite a transition from monarchy to
republic (or, rarer, vice versa). The same role in a federal constituent and a
dependent territory is fulfilled by the corresponding office equivalent to that
of a head of state. For example, in each Canadian province the role is
fulfilled by the Lieutenant Governor, whereas in most British Overseas
Territories the powers and duties are performed by the Governor. The same
applies to Australian states, Indian states, etc. Hong Kong's constitutional
document, the Basic Law, for example, specifies the Chief Executive as the head
of the special administrative region, in addition to his role as the head of
government. These non-sovereign-state heads, nevertheless, have limited or no
role in diplomatic affairs, depending on the status and the norms and practices
of the territories concerned. Parliamentary system. Standard model. In
parliamentary systems the head of state may be merely the nominal chief
executive officer, heading the executive branch of the state, and possessing
executive power. In reality, however, following a process of constitutional
evolution, powers are usually only exercised by direction of a cabinet,
presided over by a head of government who is answerable to the legislature.
This accountability and legitimacy requires that someone be chosen who has a
majority support support in the legislature (or, at least, not a majority
opposition - a subtle but important difference). It also gives the legislature
the right to vote down the head of government and his cabinet, forcing it
either to resign or seek a parliamentary dissolution. The excutive branch is
thus said to be responsible (or answerable) to the legislature, with the head
of government and cabinet in turn accepting constitutional responsibility for
offering constitutional advice to the head of state. In parliamentary
constitutional monarchies, the legitimacy of the unelected head of state
typically derives from the tacit approval of the people via the elected
representatives. Accordingly, at the time of the Glorious Revolution, the
English Parliament acted of its own authority to name a new king and queen
(joint monarchs Mary II and William III); likewise, Edward VIII's abdication
required the approval of the parliaments in each of the six independent realms
at the time who shared the same monarch. In monarchies with a written
constitution, the position of monarch is a creature of the constitution and
could quite properly be abolished through a democratic procedure of
constitutional amendment, although there are often significant procedural
hurdles imposed on such a procedure (as in the Constitution of Spain). In
republics with a parliamentary system (such as India, Germany, Austria, Italy
and Israel) the head of state is usually titled "president", but the principal
functions of such presidents are mainly ceremonial and symbolic, as opposed to
the presidents in a presidential or semi-presidential system. In reality,
numerous variants exist to the position of a head of state within a
parliamentary system. The older the constitution, the more constitutional
leeway tends to exist for a head of state to exercise greater powers over
government, as many older parliamentary system constitutions in fact give heads
of state powers and functions akin to presidential or semi-presidential
systems, in some cases without containing reference to modern democratic
principles of accountability to parliament or even to modern governmental
offices. Usually, the King had the power of declaring war without previous
consent of the Parliament. For example, under the 1848 constitution of the
Kingdom of Italy, the "Statuto Albertino", the parliamentary approval to the
government appointed by the King was customary, but not required by law. So,
Italy had a de facto parliamentarian system, but a de jure "presidential"
system. Some Commonwealth parliamentary systems combine a body of written
constitutional law, unwritten constitutional precedent, Orders in Council,
letters patent, etc. that may give a head of state or their representative
additional powers in unexpected circumstances (such as the dismissal of
Australian prime minister Gough Whitlam by Governor-General Sir John Kerr.)
Other examples of heads of state in parliamentary systems using greater powers
than usual, either because of ambiguous constitutions or unprecedented national
emergencies, include the decision by King LÃ©opold III of the Belgians to
surrender on behalf of his state to the invading German army in 1940, against
the will of his government. Judging that his responsibility to the nation by
virtue of his coronation oath required him to act, he believed that his
government's decision to fight rather than surrender was mistaken and would
damage Belgium. (Leopold's decision proved highly controversial. After World
War II, Belgium voted in a referendum to allow him back on the throne, but
because of the ongoing controversy he ultimately abdicated.) Non-executive
model. These officials are excluded completely from the executive: they do not
possess even theoretical executive powers or any role, even formal, within the
government. Hence their states' governments are not referred to by the
traditional parliamentary model head of state styles of "His/Her Majesty's
Government" or "His/Her Excellency's Government." Within this general category,
variants in terms of powers and functions may exist. Since the passage of the
1974 Instrument of Government, Swedish monarchs no longer have many of the
standard parliamentary system head of state functions that had previously
belonged to them, as was the case in the preceding 1809 Instrument of
Government. Nowdays, the Speaker of the Riksdag appoints (following a vote in
the Riksdag) the Prime Minister and terminates his commission following a vote
of no confidence or voluntary resignation. Cabinet members are appointed and
dismissed at the sole discretion of the Prime Minister. Executive authority is
vested in the Government (i.e. cabinet, of which the King is not a member).
Laws and ordinances are promulgated by two cabinet members in unison signing
"On Behalf of the Government". The Government (not the monarch) is the high
contracting party with respect to international treaties. The remaining
official functions of the Monarch, by constitutional mandate or by unwritten
convention, are to open the annual session of the Riksdag, receiving foreign
ambassadors and signs the letters of credence for Swedish ambassadors, chairs
the foreign advisory committee, to preside at the special cabinet council when
a new Prime Minister takes office, and to be kept informed by the Prime
Minister on matters of state. In contrast, the only contact the President of
Ireland has with the Irish government is through a formal briefing session
given by the Taoiseach (head of government) to the President. However, he or
she has no access to documentation and all access to ministers goes through the
Department of the Taoiseach. The President does however hold limited reserve
powers, such as referring a bill to the Supreme Court to test its
constitutionality, which are used under the president's discretion. Semi-
presidential systems. Semi-presidential systems combine features of
presidential and parliamentary systems, notably a requirement that the
government be answerable to both the president and the legislature. The
constitution of the Fifth French Republic provides for a prime minister who is
chosen by the president, but who nevertheless must be able to gain support in
the National Assembly. Should a president be of one side of the political
spectrum and the opposition be in control of the legislature, the president is
usually obliged to select someone from the opposition to become prime minister,
a process known as Cohabitation. President FranÃ§ois Mitterrand, a Socialist,
for example, was forced to cohabit with the neo-Gaullist (right wing) Jacques
Chirac, who became his prime minister from 1986 to 1988. In the French system,
in the event of cohabitation, the president is often allowed to set the policy
agenda in security and foreign affairs and the prime minister runs the domestic
agenda. Other countries evolve into something akin to a semi-presidential
system or indeed a full presidential system. Weimar Germany, for example, in
its constitution provided for a popularly elected president with theoretically
dominant executive powers that were intended to be exercised only in
emergencies, and a cabinet appointed by him from the Reichstag, which was
expected, in normal circumstances, to be answerable to the Reichstag.
Initially, the President was merely a symbolic figure with the Reichstag
dominant; however, persistent political instability, in which governments often
lasted only a few months, led to a change in the power structure of the
republic, with the president's emergency powers called increasingly into use to
prop up governments challenged by critical or even hostile Reichstag votes. By
1932, power had shifted to such an extent that the German President, Paul von
Hindenburg, was able to dismiss a chancellor and select his own person for the
job, even though the outgoing chancellor possessed the confidence of the
Reichstag while the new chancellor did not. Subsequently President von
Hindenburg used his power to appoint Adolf Hitler as Chancellor without
consulting the Reichstag. Presidential system. "Note: The head of state in a
"presidential" system may not actually hold the title of "president" - the name
of the system refers to any head of state who actually governs and is
independent of the legislature." Some constitutions or fundamental laws provide
for a head of state who is not only in theory but in practice chief executive,
operating separately from, and independent from, the legislature. This system
is known as a "presidential system" and sometimes called the "imperial model",
because the executive officials of the government are answerable solely and
exclusively to a presiding, acting head of state, and is selected by and on
occasion dismissed by the head of state without reference to the legislature.
It is notable that some presidential systems, while not providing for
collective executive accountability to the legislature, may require legislative
approval for individuals prior to their assumption of cabinet office and
empower the legislature to remove a president from office (for example, in the
United States of America). In this case the debate centers on the suitability
of the individual for office, not a judgement on them when appointed, and does
not involve the power to reject or approve proposed cabinet members "en bloc",
so it is not accountability in the sense understood in a parliamentary system.
Presidential systems are a notable feature of constitutions in the Americas,
including those of the Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, Mexico and
Venezuela; this is generally attributed to the strong influence of the United
States in the region, and as the United States Constitution served as an
inspiration and model for the Latin American wars of independence of the early
19th century. Most presidents in such countries are selected by democratic
means (popular direct or indirect election); however, like all other systems,
the presidential model also encompasses people who become head of state by
other means, notably through military dictatorship or "coup d'Ã©tat", as often
seen in Latin American, Middle Eastern and other presidential regimes. Some of
the characteristics of a presidential system (i.e., a strong dominant political
figure with an executive answerable to them, not the legislature) can also be
found among absolute monarchies, parliamentary monarchies and single party
(e.g. Communist) regimes, but in most cases of dictatorship, their stated
constitutional models are applied in name only and not in political theory or
practice. In the 1870s in the United States, in the aftermath of the
impeachment of President Andrew Johnson and his near-removal from office, it
was speculated that the United States, too, would move from a presidential
system to a semi-presidential or even parliamentary one, with the Speaker of
the House of Representatives becoming the real center of government as a quasi-
prime minister. This did not happen and the presidency, having been damaged by
three late nineteenth and early twentieth century assassinations (Lincoln,
Garfield and McKinley) and one impeachment (Johnson), reasserted its political
dominance by the early twentieth century through such figures as Theodore
Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson. In a sense, elected monarchies, such as the Holy
See, the defunct Holy Roman Empire or pre 16th century Swedish monarchy, can be
regarded as 'crowned' presidential systems. Single-party states. Since real
political power belongs to the sole legal party, in certain states under
Marxist constitutions of the constitutionally socialist state type inspired by
the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) and its constitutive
Soviet republics, there was no formal office of head of state, but rather the
leader of the legislative branch was considered to be the closest common
equivalent of a head of state as a natural person. In the Soviet Union this
position carried such titles as "Chairman of the Central Executive Committee of
the USSR"; "Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet"; and in the case
of the Soviet Russia "Chairman of the Central Executive Committee of the All-
Russian Congress of Soviets" (pre-1922), and "Chairman of the Bureau of the
Central Committee of the Russian SFSR" (1956â1966). This position may or may
not have been held by the de facto Soviet leader at the moment. For example,
Nikita Khrushchev never headed the Supreme Soviet but was First Secretary of
the Central Committee of the Communist Party (party leader) and Chairman of the
Council of Ministers (head of government). This may even lead to an
institutional variability, as in North Korea, where, after the presidency of
party leader Kim Il-Sung, the office was vacant for years, the late president
being granted the posthumous title (akin to some ancient Far Eastern traditions
to give posthumous names and titles to royalty) of ""Eternal President"" (while
all substantive power, as party leader, itself not formally created for four
years, was inherited by his son Kim Jong Il, initially without any formal
office) until it was formally replaced on 5 September 1998, for ceremonial
purposes, by the office of Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme People's
Assembly, while the party leader's post as Chairman of the National Defense
Commission was simultaneously declared "the highest post of the state", not
unlike Deng Xiaoping earlier in the People's Republic of China. Complications
with categorization. While clear categories do exist, it is sometimes difficult
to choose which category some individual heads of state belong to. In reality,
the category to which each head of state belongs is assessed not by theory but
by practice. Constitutional change in Liechtenstein in 2003 gave its head of
state, the Reigning Prince, constitutional powers that included a veto over
legislation and power to dismiss the head of government and cabinet. It could
be argued that the strengthening of the Prince's powers, vis-a-vis the Landtag
(legislature), has moved Liechtenstein into the semi-presidential category.
Similarly the original powers given to the Greek President under the 1974
Hellenic Republic constitution moved Greece closer to the French semi-
presidential model. Another complication exists with South Africa, in which the
President is in fact elected by the National Assembly (legislature) and is thus
similar, in principle, to a head of government in a parliamentary system but is
also, in addition, recognized as the head of state. The offices of President of
Nauru and President of Botswana are similar in this respect to the South
African presidency. Panama, during the military dictatorships of Omar Torrijos
and Manuel Noriega, was nominally a presidential republic. However, the elected
civilian presidents were effectively figureheads with real political power
being exercised by the chief of the Panamanian Defense Forces. Roles of heads
of state. Often depending on which constitutional category (above) a head of
state belongs to, they may have some or all of the roles listed below, and
various other ones. Symbolic role. One of the most important roles of the
modern head of state is being a living national symbol of the state; in
hereditary monarchies this extends to the monarch being a symbol of the
unbroken continuity of the state. For instance, the Canadian monarch is
described by the government as being the personification of the Canadian state
and is described by the Department of Canadian Heritage as the "personal symbol
of allegiance, unity and authority for all Canadians". In many countries,
official portraits of the head of state can be found in government offices,
courts of law, even airports, libraries, and other public buildings. The idea,
sometimes regulated by law, is to use these portraits to make the public aware
of the symbolic connection to the government, a practice that dates back to
medieval times. Sometimes this practice is taken to excess, and the head of
state begins to believe that he is the only symbol of the nation, resulting in
the emergence of a personality cult where the image of the head of state is the
only visual representation of the country, surpassing other symbols such as the
flag, constitution, founding father(s) etc. Modern examples in this field
include Adolf Hitler, Mao Zedong and Kim Jong Il, whose tenures as heads of
state were accompanied by a significant cult of personality. Other common
iconic presences, especially of monarchs, are on coins, stamps and banknotes;
more discreet variations see them represented by a mention and/or signature.
Furthermore, various institutions, monuments and the like, are named for
current or previous heads of state, such as streets and squares, schools,
charitable and other organizations; in monarchies (e.g. Belgium) there can even
be a practice to attribute the adjective "royal" on demand based on existence
for a given number of years. However, such political techniques can also be
used by leaders without the formal rank of head of state, even party - and
other revolutionary leaders without formal state mandate. In general, the
active duties amount to a ceremonial role. Thus heads of state often greets
important foreign visitors. They may also assume a host role during the VIP's
visit, inviting the visitor to a state dinner at his or her official residence,
or some other equally hospitable affair. At home, they are expected to render
luster to various occasions by their presence; such as by attending artistic or
sports performances or competitions (often in a theatrical honor box, on a
platform, on the front row, at the honours table etc.), expositions, national
day celebrations, military parades and war remembrances, prominent funerals,
visiting different parts of the country and people from different walks of
life; and at times performing a symbolic act such as cutting a ribbon,
groundbreaking, ship christening, laying the first stone, and so on. Some parts
of national life receive their regular attention, often on an annual basis, or
even in the form of official patronage. As the potential for such invitations
is enormous, such duties are often in part delegated: to such persons as a
spouse, a head of government or a cabinet minister or in other cases (possibly
as a message, for instance, to distance themselves without rendering offense)
just a military officer or civil servant. For non-executive heads of state
there is often a degree of censorship by the politically responsible government
(such as the head of government), discreetly approving agenda and speeches,
especially where the constitution (or customary law) assumes all political
responsibility by granting the crown inviolability (in fact also imposing
political emasculation) as in the Kingdom of Belgium from its very beginning;
in a monarchy this may even be extended to some degree to other members of the
dynasty, especially the heir to the throne. Chief diplomatic officer. The head
of state accredits (i.e. formally validates) his or her country's ambassadors,
High Commissioners or rarer equivalent diplomatic mission chiefs (such as papal
nuncio), through sending formal Letter of Credence to other heads of state and,
conversely, receives the letters of their foreign counterparts. Without that
accreditation, they cannot take up a role and receive the highest diplomatic
status. However, there are provisions in international law to perform the same
diplomatic functions, or at least part of them, such as accrediting, with a
lower title with the head of government, or functioning within another mission.
The head of state is often designated the high contracting party in
international treaties on behalf of the state; signs them either personally or
has them signed in his/her name by ministers (government members or diplomats);
subsequent ratification, when necessary, may rest with the legislature. In
Canada, these head of state powers belong to the Monarch as part of the Royal
Prerogative, but the Governor General has been permitted to exercise them since
1947 and has done so since the 1970s. Chief executive officer. In the majority
of states, whether republics or monarchies, executive authority is vested, at
least notionally, in the head of state. In presidential systems the head of
state is the actual, de facto chief executive officer. Under parliamentary
systems the executive authority is exercised by the head of state, but in
practice is done so on the advice of the cabinet of ministers. This produces
such terms as "Her Majesty's Government" and "His Excellency's Government."
Examples of parliamentary systems in which the head of state is notional chief
executive include Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Germany, India, Italy,
Norway, Spain and the United Kingdom. The few exceptions where the head of
state is not even the nominal chief executive - and where supreme executive
authority is according to the constitution explicitly vested in a cabinet -
include the Czech Republic, Ireland, Israel, Japan and Sweden. Chief
appointments officer. The head of state usually appoints most or all the key
officials in the government, including the head of government and other cabinet
ministers, key judicial figures; and all major office holders in the civil
service, foreign service and commissioned officers in the military. In many
parliamentary systems, the head of government is appointed with the consent (in
practice often decisive) of the legislature, and other figures are appointed on
the head of government's advice. In practice, these decisions are often a
formality. The last time a British monarch unilaterally selected the Prime
Minister was in 1963, when Queen Elizabeth II appointed Alec Douglas-Home on
the advice of outgoing Prime Minister Harold Macmillan. In Canada, a similar
situation took place in 1925 wherein Governor General Lord Byng of Vimy
appointed Arthur Meighen after William Lyon Mackenzie King refused to resign
the premiership (known as the King-Byng Affair). In 1975, Governor-General of
Australia Sir John Kerr appointed Malcolm Fraser as caretaker Prime Minister
after having dismissed his predecessor Gough Whitlam. In presidential systems,
such as that of the United States, appointments are nominated by the
President's sole discretion, but this nomination is often subject to
confirmation by the legislature; and specifically in the US, the Senate has to
approve senior executive branch and judicial appointments by a simple majority
vote. The head of state may also dismiss office-holders. There are many
variants on how this can be done. For example, members of the Irish Cabinet are
dismissed by the President on the advice of the Taoiseach; in other instances,
the head of state may be able to dismiss an office holder unilaterally; other
heads of state, or their representatives, have the theoretical power to dismiss
any office-holder, while it is exceptionally rarely used. In France, while the
President cannot force the Prime Minister to tender the resignation of the
Government, he can, in practice, request it if the Prime Minister is from his
own majority. In presidential systems, the president often has the power to
fire ministers at his sole discretion. In the United States, the unwritten
convention calls for the heads of the executive departments to resign on their
own initiative when called to do so. Some countries have alternative provisions
for senior appointments: In Sweden, under the Instrument of Government of 1974,
the Speaker of the Riksdag has the role of formally appointing the Prime
Minister, following a vote in the Riksdag, and the Prime Minister in turn
appoints and dismisses cabinet ministers at his/her sole discretion. Military
role. A head of state is often, by virtue of holding the highest executive
powers, explicitly designated as the commander-in-chief of that nation's armed
forces, holding the highest office in all military chains of command. In a
constitutional monarchy or non-executive presidency, the head of state may de
jure hold ultimate authority over the armed forces but will only normally, as
per either written law or unwritten convention, exercise their authority on the
advice of their responsible ministers: meaning that the de facto ultimate
decision making on military maneuvers is made elsewhere. The head of state
will, regardless of actual authority, perform ceremonial duties related to the
country's armed forces, and will sometimes appear in military uniform for these
purposes; particularly in monarchies where also the monarch's consort and other
members of a royal family may also appear in military garb. This is generally
the only time a head of state of a stable, democratic country will appear
dressed in such a manner, as statesmen and public are eager to assert the
primacy of (civilian, elected) politics over the armed forces. In military
dictatorships, or governments which have arisen from coups d'Ã©tat, the
position of commander-in-chief is obvious, as all authority in such a
government derives from the application of military force; occasionally a power
vacuum created by war is filled by a head of state stepping beyond his or her
normal constitutional role, as King Albert I of Belgium did during World War I.
In these and in revolutionary regimes, the head of state, and often executive
ministers whose offices are legally civilian, will frequently appear in
military uniform. Some countries designates officials other than the head of
state with command-in-chief powers. In Germany, the Basic Law of the Federal
Republic vests this authority in the Minister of Defence in normal peace-time
(article 65a), and that command authority is transferred to the Federal
Chancellor when a state of defence is invoked (article 115b): something which
has never happened so far. In Israel, the applicable basic law states that the
ultimate authority over the Israel Defense Forces rests with the Government of
Israel as a collective body. The authority of the Government is exercised by
the Minister of Defense on behalf of the Government, and subordinate to the
Minister is the Chief of General Staff who holds the highest level of command
within the military. Legislative roles. It is usual that the head of state,
particularly in parliamentary systems as part of the symbolic role, is the one
who opens the annual sessions of the legislature, e.g. the annual State Opening
of Parliament with the Speech from the Throne in Britain. Even in presidential
systems the head of state often formally reports to the legislature on the
present national status, e.g. the State of the Union address in the United
States of America. Most countries require that all bills passed by the house or
houses of the legislature be signed into law by the head of state. In some
states, such as the United Kingdom, Belgium and Ireland, the head of state is,
in fact, formally considered a tier of parliament. However, in most
parliamentary systems, the head of state cannot refuse to sign a bill, and, in
granting a bill their assent, indicate that it was passed in accordance with
the correct procedures. The signing of a bill into law is formally known as
"promulgation". Some monarchical states call this procedure "Royal Assent". In
some parliamentary systems, the head of state retains certain powers in
relation to bills to be exercised at his or her discretion. They may have
authority to veto a bill until the houses of the legislature have reconsidered
it, and approved it a second time; reserve a bill to be signed later, or
suspend it indefinitely (generally in states with royal prerogative; this power
is rarely used); refer a bill to the courts to test its constitutionality;
refer a bill to the people in a referendum. If he or she is also chief
executive, he or she can thus politically control the necessary executive
measures without which a proclaimed law can remain dead letter, sometimes for
years or even forever. Summoning and dissolving the legislature. A head of
state is often empowered to summon and dissolve the country's legislature. In
most parliamentary systems, this is often done on the advice of the head of
government. In some parliamentary systems, and in some presidential systems,
however, the head of state may do so on their own initiative. Some states have
fixed term legislatures, with no option of bringing forward elections (e.g.
Article II, Section 3, of the U.S. Constitution). In other systems there are
usually fixed terms, but the head of state retains authority to dissolve the
legislature in certain circumstances. Where a head of government has lost
support in the legislature, some heads of state may refuse a dissolution, where
one is requested, thereby forcing the head of government's resignation.
Selection and various types and styles of Heads of State. Various heads of
state use a multitude of different styles and titles, often with many
variations in content under diverse constitutions, even in a given state. In
numerous cases, two or more of the following peculiar types apply, not counting
the primary duo monarchy-republic. There are also several methods of head of
state succession in the event of the removal or death of a sitting head of
state. In a monarchy, the Monarch is the Head of State. This is a relatively
recent phenomenon; until the last few decades a monarch was seen as the
personal embodiment of the state (""L'etat c'est moi"", so to speak), and
therefore could not be head of himself or herself (hence many constitutions
from the 19th century and earlier make no mention of a "head of state"). Though
some still maintain that calling a Monarch Head of State is incorrect, it has
now become a widespread convention to attach the label to Monarchs. The Emperor
of Japan is defined as a symbol, not head, of state by the post-war
constitution (contrasting with the former divine status) but is treated as an
imperial head of state under diplomatic protocol (even ranking above kings) and
retains Shinto mystique. For the numerous styles in past and present
monarchies, in most cases commonly -though often not quite accurately- rendered
as King or Emperor, but also many other (e.g. Grand duke, Sultan), see Prince,
princely state and monarchy. In a republic, the head of state is nowadays
usually styled President, and usually their permanent constitutions provide for
election, but many have or had other titles and even specific constitutional
positions (see below), and some have used simply 'head of state' as their only
formal title. Shared and substitute heads of state. Interim. Whenever a head of
state is not available for any reason, constitutional provisions may allow the
role to fall temporarily to an assigned person or collective body. In a
republic, this is - depending on provisions outlined by the constitution or
improvised - a vice-president, the chief of government, the legislature or its
presiding officer. In a monarchy, this is usually a regent or collegial regency
(council). For example, in the United States the Vice-President acts when the
President is incapacitated, and in the United Kingdom the Queen's powers may be
delegated to Counselors of State when she is abroad or unavailable. Delegation.
Where one person is head of state of multiple sovereign states (such as in a
personal union), there may be need to appoint a permanent representative in
each (except the primary country of residence). Examples include Commonwealth
realms in which their respective monarch resides in the oldest realm, the
United Kingdom, and so is represented in each of the others by an appointed
governor-general and Andorra which is headed by two non-resident co-princes,
one of which is also the President of the French Republic. The governor-general
of a commonwealth realm may fulfill many of the roles of a head of state, but
is traditionally regarded as a personal representative of the monarch appointed
to act on his or her behalf, even when the monarch is present in the country
concerned. Governors-General can be considered as "de facto heads of state"
because they operate in practice very much like a head of state would in most,
if not all aspects. At the United Nations, governors-general are accorded a
status akin to a head of state. At state banquets, for example, toasts are made
to monarch, not to a governor-general, except insofar as a personal toast may
be proposed subsequently to "Governor-General and Mrs. X" as hosts of, or
guests at, the banquet. In 2005, Canada, Australia and New Zealand changed
their policies with repect to letters of credence, and they now solely address
the governor-general of the relevant nation, not the monarch. There is an
ongoing debate in Australia, and to a much lesser extent in Canada, as to which
officeholder the absentee monarch or the local viceregal representative
actually is their head of state. In the case of Andorra, two Co-Princes act as
the principality's heads of state; one is also simultaneously the President of
France, residing in France, and the other is the Bishop of Urgell, residing in
Spain. Each Co-Prince is represented in Andorra by a delegate, though these
persons hold no formal title. As a colony or other dependent state or territory
lacks the authority to vest in a true head of state of its own, it either has
no comparable office, simply receiving those roles exercised by the paramount
powers (in person or, most of the time, through an appointed representative,
often styled governor or lieutenant-governor, but also various other titles, on
the Cook Islands even simply King/Queen's Representative) or has one, such as a
formerly sovereign dynasty, but under a form of metropolitan guardianship, such
as protection, vassal or tributary status. Extraordinary arrangements. In
exceptional situations, such as war, occupation, revolution or a coup d'Ã©tat,
constitutional institutions, including the symbolically crucial head of state,
may be reduced to a figurehead or be suspended in favor of an emergency office
(such as the original Roman Dictator) or eliminated by a new "provisionary"
regime, such as a collective of the junta type, or removed by an occupying
force, such as a military governor (an early example being the Spartan
Harmost). Religious heads of state. Since antiquity, various dynasties or
individual rulers have claimed the right to rule by divine authority, such as
the Mandate of Heaven and the divine right of kings. Some monarchs even claimed
divine ancestry, such as Egyptian pharaohs and Sapa Incas, who claimed descent
from their respective sun gods and often sought to maintain this bloodline by
practicing incestuous marriage. In Ancient Rome, during the Principate, the
title ('divine') was conferred (notably posthumously) on the emperor, a
symbolic, legitimating element in establishing a de facto dynasty.
Christianity. In Roman Catholicism, the Pope was once Sovereign Pontiff and
head of state, first, of the politically important Papal States. After Italian
unification, the Pope remains head of state of Vatican City. In the Church of
England, the reigning monarch holds the title Defender of the Faith and acts as
Supreme Governor of the Church of England, although this is purely symbolic
role. Islam. During the early period of Islam, caliphs were spiritual and
temporal absolute successors of the Prophet Mohammed, but gradually lost
political power. Various political Muslim leaders since have styled themselves
"Caliph" and served as dynastic heads of state, sometimes in addition to
another title, such as the Ottoman Sultan. Historically, some theocratic
Islamic states known as "imamates" have been led by imams as head of state,
such as in what is now Oman, Yemen, and Saudi Arabia. In the modern Islamic
Republic of Iran the "rahbar" (Supreme Leader, at present Ali Khamenei) serves
as head of state. The Aga Khans, a unique dynasty of temporal/religious
leadership, leading an offshoot of Shia Islam in Central and South Asia, once
ranking among British India's princely states, continue to the present day.
Hinduism. In Hinduism, certain dynasties adopted a title expressing their
positions as "servant" of a patron deity of the state, but in the sense of a
viceroy under an absentee god-king, ruling "in the name of" the patron god
(ess), such as Patmanabha Dasa (servant of Vishnu) in the case of the Maharaja
of Travancore. Buddhism. Some Dalai Lamas were both political and spiritual
leaders ("god-king") of Tibet in Imperial China. Outer Mongolia, the former
homeland of the imperial dynasty of Genghis Khan, was another lamaist theocracy
from 1585, using various styles, such as tulku. The establishment of the
Communist Mongolian People's Republic replaced this regime in 1924. Multiple or
collective Heads of State. A collective head of state can exist in republics
(internal complexity): e.g. nominal triumvirates; the Directoire; the seven-
member Swiss Federal Council, where each member acts in turn as ceremonial
chief of state); Bosnia and Herzegovina (three member presidium, from three
different nations); San Marino (two "Captains-regent"), which maintains the
tradition of Italian medieval republics, where there always was an even number
of consuls. In condominiums, sovereignty is shared between two external powers:
e.g. Andorra (president of France and bishop of Urgell, Spain, co-princes), and
the former Anglo-French New Hebrides (each nation's head of state was
represented by a high commissioner). In the Roman Republic there were two heads
of state, styled Consul, both of whom alternated months of authority during
their year in office, similarly there was an even number of supreme magistrates
in the Italic republics of Ancient Age. In the Athenian Republic there were
nine supreme magistrates, styled archons. In Carthage there were two supreme
magistrates, styled kings or suffetes (judges). In ancient Sparta there were
two hereditary kings, belonging to two different dynasties. Such arrangements
are not to be confused with supranational entities which are not states and are
not defined by a common monarchy but may (or not) have a symbolic, essentially
protocollary, titled highest office, e.g. Head of the Commonwealth (held by the
British crown, but not legally reserved for it) or 'Head of the Arab Union' (14
February - 14 July 1958, held by the Hashemite King of Iraq, during its short-
lived Federation with Jordan, its Hashemite sister-realm). Unique cases and
titles. Though "president" and various monarchic titles are most commonly used
for heads of state, in some nationalistic regimes (usually republics), the
leader adopts, formally or de facto, a unique style simply meaning "leader" in
the national language, such as Nazi Germany's single party chief and head of
state and government, Adolf Hitler FÃ¼hrer (see that article for equivalents).
In 1959, when former British crown colony Singapore gained self-government, it
adopted the Malay style "Yang di-Pertuan Negara" (literally means "head of
state" in Malay) for its governor (the actual head of state remained the
British monarch). The second and last incumbent of the office, Yusof bin Ishak,
kept the style at the 31 August 1963 unilateral declaration of independence and
after the 16 September 1963 accession to Malaysia as a state (so now as a
constitutive part of the federation, a non-sovereign level). After expulsion
from Malaysia on 9 August 1965, Singapore became a sovereign Commonwealth
republic and installed Yusof bin Ishak as its first President. In 1959 after
the Resignation of Vice President Mohammad Hatta Indonesia's president Sukarno
proclaimed himself president for life Tertinggi meaning Highest roughly
translated to English as Supreme Commander of the Revolution, Often He was
praised as Paduka Yang Mulia, a Malay honorific title originally given to
Kings, Due to Sukarno's noble descent he awarded himself titles in that
fashion, After Vice-President Mohammad Hatta resigned as Vice President the
title of Vice-President was abolished And the Title of Vice-President, Prime-
Minister and Head of Cabinet were also claimed by President Sukarno Him self
There are also a few nations in which the exact title and definition of the
office of head of state have been vague. During the Cultural Revolution,
following the downfall of Liu Shaoqi, who was Chairman of the People's Republic
of China, no successor was named, so the duties of the head of state were
transferred collectively to the Standing Committee of the National People's
Congress. This situation was later changed: the Head of State of the PRC is now
the President of the People's Republic of China. In North Korea, Kim Il-sung
was named "eternal president" following his death and the presidency was
abolished. As a result, the duties of the head of state are constitutionally
delegated to the Supreme People's Assembly whose chairman is "Head of State for
foreign affairs" and performs some of the roles of a Head of State, such as
accrediting foreign ambassadors. However, the symbolic role of a Head of State
is generally performed by Kim Jong-un, who as the leader of the party and
military, is the most powerful person in North Korea. There is debate as to
whether Samoa is/was an elective monarchy or an aristocratic republic, given
the comparative ambiguity of the title "O le Ao o le Malo" and the nature of
the head of state's office. In some states the office of head of state is not
expressed in a specific title reflecting that role, but constitutionally
awarded to a post of another formal nature. Thus in March 1979 Colonel Muammar
Gaddafi, who kept absolute power (until his overthrow in 2011 referred to as
"Guide of the Revolution"), after ten years as combined Head of State and Head
of government of the Libyan "Jamahiriya" ("state of the masses"), styled
Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council, formally transferred both
qualities to the General secretaries of the General People's Congress
(comparable to a Speaker) respectively to a Prime Minister, in political
reality both were his creatures. Sometimes a head of state assumes office as a
state becomes legal and political reality, before a formal title for the
highest office is determined; thus in the since 1 January 1960 independent
republic Cameroon ("Cameroun", a former French colony), the first President,
Ahmadou Babatoura Ahidjo, was at first not styled "prÃ©sident" but 'merely'
known as "Chef d'Ã©tat" (literal French for 'Head of State') until 5 May 1960;
in Uganda, military coup leader since 25 January 1971 Idi Amin was formally
styled "military head of State" till 21 February 1971, only from then on
regular (but unconstitutional, not elected) President. In certain cases a
special style is needed to accommodate imperfect statehood, e.g. the title
Sardar-i-Riyasat was used in Kashmir after its accession to India, and PLO-
leader Yasser Arafat was styled the first "President of the Palestinian
National Authority" in 1994. Legitimacy. The position of head of state can be
established in different ways, and with different sources of legitimacy. By
fiction or fiat. Power can come from force, but formal legitimacy is often
established, even if only by fictitious claims of continuity (e.g., a forged
claim of descent from a previous dynasty). There have been cases of sovereignty
granted by deliberate act, even when accompanied by laws of succession (as may
be the case in a dynastic split). Such grants of sovereignty are usually
forced, as is common with self-determination granted after nationalist revolts.
This occurred with the last Attalid king of Hellenistic Pergamon, who by
testament left his realm to Rome to avoid a disastrous conquest. By divine
appointment. Under a theocracy, perceived divine status translated into earthly
authority under divine law This can take the form of supreme divine authority
above the state's, granting a tool for political influence to a priesthood. In
this way, the Amun priesthood reversed the reforms of Pharaoh Akhenaten after
his death. The division of theocratic power can be disputed, as happened
between the Pope and Holy Roman Emperor in the Investiture conflict when the
temporal power sought to control key clergy nominations in order to guarantee
popular support, and thereby his own legitamcy, by incorporating the formal
ceremony of unction during coronation. By social contract. The notion of a
social contract holds that the nationâeither the whole people or the
electorateâgives a mandate, through acclamation or election. By constitution.
Individual heads of state may acquire their position by virtue of a
constitution. By hereditary succession. The position of a monarch is usually
hereditary, but in constitutional monarchies, there are usually restrictions on
the incumbent's exercise of powers and prohibitions on the possibility of
chosing successor by other means than by birth. In some monarchies there may be
liberty for the incumbent, or some body convening after his or her demise, to
choose from eligible members of the ruling house, often limited to legitimate
descendants of the dynasty's founder. Rules of succession may be further
limited by state religion, residency, equal marriage or even permission from
the legislature. By election. Election usually is the constitutional way to
choose the head of state of a republic, and some monarchies, either directly
through popular election, indirectly by members of the legislature or of a
special college of electors (such as the Electoral College in the United
States), or as an exclusive prerogative. Exclusive prerogative allows the heads
of states of constituent monarchies of a federation to choose the head of state
for the federation among themselves, as in the United Arab Emirates and
Malaysia. The Pope, head of state of Vatican City, is chosen by previously
appointed cardinals under 80 years of age from among themselves in a papal
conclave. By appointment. A head of state can be empowered to designate his
successor, such as Lord Protector of the Commonwealth Oliver Cromwell, who was
succeeded by his son Richard. By force or revolution. A head of state may seize
power by force or revolution. This is not the same as the use of force to
"maintain" power, as is practiced by authoritarian or totalitarian rulers.
Dictators often use democratic titles, though some proclaim themselves
monarchs. Examples of the latter include Emperor Napoleon III of France and
King Zog of Albania. In Spain, general Francisco Franco adopted the formal
title "Jefe del Estado", or Chief of State, and established himself as regent
for a vacant monarchy. Uganda's Idi Amin was one of several who named
themselves President for Life. By foreign imposition. A foreign power can
establishing a branch of their own dynasty, or one friendly to their interests.
This was the outcome of the Russo-Swedish War from 1741 to 1743 where the
Russian Empress made the imposition of her relative Adolf Frederick as the heir
to the Swedish Throne, to succeed Frederick I who lacked legitimate issue, as a
peace condition. Loss. Apart from violent overthrow, a head of state's position
can be lost in several ways, including death, another by expiration of the
constitutional term of office, abdication, or resignation. In some cases, an
abdication cannot occur unilaterally, but comes into effect only when approved
by an act of parliament, as in the case of British King Edward VIII. The post
can also be abolished by constitutional change; in such cases, an incumbent may
be allowed to finish his or her term. Of course, a head of state position will
cease to exist if the state itself does. Heads of state generally enjoy widest
inviolability, although some states allow impeachment, or a similar
constitutional procedure by which the highest legislative or judicial
authorities are empowered to revoke the head of state's mandate on exceptional
grounds. This may be a common crime, a political sin, or an act by which he or
she violates such provisions as an established religion mandatory for the
monarch. By similar procedure, an original mandate may be declared invalid.
Serious violations of certain fundamental treaty obligations is sometimes
considered a valid reason for the relevant international community to depose a
head of state, as the United Nations Security Council or certain alliances may
do. Former heads of state. A monarch may retain his style and certain
prerogatives after abdication, as did King Leopold III of Belgium, who left the
throne to his son after winning a referendum which allowed him to retain a full
royal household deprived him of a constitutional or representative role.
Napoleon transformed the Italian principality of Elba, where he was imprisoned,
into a miniature version of his First Empire, with most trappings of a
sovereign monarchy, until his "Cent Jours" escape and reseizure of power in
France convinced his opponents, reconvening the Vienna Congress in 1815, to
revoke his gratuitous privileges and send him to die in exile on barren Saint
Helena. By tradition, deposed monarchs who have not freely abdicated are
allowed to use their monarchical titles as a courtesy for the rest of their
lives. Hence, even after he ceased to be Greek king, it is still standard to
refer to the deposed king as Constantine II of Greece. However, none of his
descendants will be entitled to be called "King of the Hellenes" after his
death. Some states dispute the international acceptance of the right of their
deposed monarchs to be referred to by their former title. It remains a
generally accepted formula, however. Other states have no problem with deposed
monarchs being referred to by their former title, and even allow them to travel
internationally on the state's diplomatic passport. Former presidents of the
United States, while holding no legitimate power, continue to exert great
influence in national and world affairs.
