Health department A health department or health ministry is a part of
government which focuses on issues related to the general health of the
citizenry. Subnational entities, such as states, counties and cities, often
also operate a health department of their own. Health departments perform food
licensing and food inspection (the person who performs this job is often called
a Health Inspector), vaccination programs, free STD and HIV tests, and other
medical assistance. Health departments also compile statistics about health
issues of their area. In 1986, several of the worlds' national health
departments met to establish an international guideline by which health
departments operate. The meeting was in Ottawa, Canada, and hence the
guidelines established are known as the Ottawa Charter. The Ottawa Charter was
designed to ‘achieve Health for All’. "Health department" can also refer to
a university health department. Health departments around the world. Sub-
national. All U.S. states have a state health department. Counties, cities,
metropolitan areas, districts, and tribes may also have a department of health.
Local health departments protect and promote health and well-being for all
people in their communities by coordinating programs and services that make it
easier for people to be healthy and safe from public health emergencies. The
Los Angeles County Department of Health Services is an example of a local
health department. Sub-national entities in other countries, such as the states
of Australia, also have their own health departments. See Also: "state health
department"; See Also: "local health department"
