Hedonic regression In economics, hedonic regression or hedonic demand theory is
a revealed preference method of estimating demand or value. It decomposes the
item being researched into its constituent characteristics, and obtains
estimates of the contributory value of each characteristic. This requires that
the composite good being valued can be reduced to its constituent parts and
that the market values those constituent parts. Hedonic models are most
commonly estimated using regression analysis, although more generalized models,
such as sales adjustment grids, are special cases of hedonic models. An
attribute vector, which may be a dummy or panel variable, is assigned to each
characteristic or group of characteristics. Hedonic models can accommodate non-
linearity, variable interaction, or other complex valuation situations. Hedonic
models are commonly used in real estate appraisal, real estate economics and
Consumer Price Index (CPI) calculations. In CPI calculations hedonic regression
is used to control the effect of changes in product quality. Price changes that
are due to substitution effects are subject to hedonic quality adjustments.
Hedonic pricing method. Certain environmental services often influence the
market prices. The Hedonic pricing method is often brought into play in order
to assess the economic values of such services. It is important to note that
the hedonic pricing method is based on the fact that prices of goods in a
market are affected by their characteristics. For example, the price of a pair
of pants will depend on the comfort, the cloth used, the brand, the fit, etc.
So this method helps us estimate the value of a commodity based on peopleâ€™s
willingness to pay for the commodity as and when its characteristics change. A
particular example which is used most often is the real estate market where the
value of two different properties (which can otherwise be compared) will vary
depending on the various environmental amenities present in the surrounding
areas of these properties. If there is a measurable price drop of properties
located near a dump yard (as compared to other locations), the difference in
the prices point towards the external cost of the dump yard. It is the marginal
willingness to pay (in higher housing prices) for the given difference in
cleanliness and serenity of the locality. Hedonic Regression methods are used
to estimate these price differentials. The Hedonic Pricing Method (HPM) as
mentioned earlier is a form of revealed preference method of valuation and it
uses surrogate markets to estimate the value of the environmental amenity.
Surrogate market is a concept that one uses when one cannot directly estimate
the market prices for certain environmental goods. Therefore, a similar good
sold in the market is chosen as a proxy. For example, if we want to know the
value of clean air estimated by an individual, he may reveal his preference in
the form of establishing his house in a clean society and paying an extra
premium for the same. Thus, with the help of Hedonic Pricing Method, the
environmental component of the value and the market price can be separated. In
turn, this market price is used a surrogate for the environmental value.
Hedonic models and real estate valuation. In real estate economics, it is used
to adjust for the problems associated with researching a good that is as
heterogeneous as buildings. Because buildings are so different, it is difficult
to estimate the demand for buildings generically. Instead, it is assumed that a
house can be decomposed into characteristics such as number of bedrooms, size
of lot, or distance to the city center. A hedonic regression equation treats
these attributes (or bundles of attributes) separately, and estimates prices
(in the case of an additive model) or elasticity (in the case of a log model)
for each of them. This information can be used to construct a price index that
can be used to compare the price of housing in different cities, or to do time
series analysis. As with CPI calculations, hedonic pricing can be used to
correct for quality changes in constructing a housing price index. It can also
be used to assess the value of a property, in the absence of specific market
transaction data. It can also be used to analyze the demand for various housing
characteristics, and housing demand in general. It has also been used to test
assumptions in spatial economics. The Uniform Standards of Professional
Appraisal Practice, or USPAP, provides for mass appraisal standards to govern
the use of hedonic regressions and other automated valuation models when used
for real estate appraisal. Appraisal methodology treats the hedonic regression
as essentially a statistically robust form of the sales comparison approach.
Hedonic models are commonly used in tax assessment, litigation, academic
studies, and other mass appraisal projects. Application of the Hedonic Pricing
Method. While studying the application of the Hedonic Pricing Method, the first
assumption made is the value of a house is affected by a particular combination
of characteristics that it possesses given that properties with better
qualities demand higher prices as compared to properties with lower qualities.
This is the Hedonic Pricing Function. The price of a house will thus be
affected by the structural characteristics (s1, s2, s3...) of the house itself,
characteristics of the locality/neighbourhood (n1, n2, n3...), and
environmental characteristics (e1, e2, e3...) Structural Characteristics could
be anything from size of the house, to the number of rooms, type of flooring,
etc. Neighbourhood attributes include variables like posh-ness of the locality,
quality of roads, etc. And the environmental characteristics are variables such
quality of air, proximity to parks, beaches, dumping yards, etc. The analysis
takes place in two stages. The first stage involves employing regression
techniques to estimate the Hedonic Price Function of the property. This
function will relate the prices of many properties in the same housing area to
the different characteristics. So Price Function (P) = f (s1, s2, s3...sj; n1,
n2, n3...nj; e1, e2, e3...ej) This function could be linear or non-linear. The
prices may change at an increasing or decreasing rate when the characteristics
change. When you now differentiate the price function with respect to any one
of the above characteristics, the implicit price function for that particular
characteristic is yielded. It is considered implicit because the price function
is indirectly revealed to us by what the people are willing to pay in order to
obtain better quality or quantities of the characteristic. In the second stage,
these implicit prices are regressed against the actual quantities/qualities
chosen by the people in order to attain the marginal willingness to pay for the
amenity. The results of this analysis will indicate the changes in property
values for a unit change in each characteristic, given that all the other
characteristics are constant. Some variables however may be correlated. This
will result in similar changes in their values. Criticism. Some commentators,
including Austrian economists, have criticized the US government's use of
hedonic regression in computing its CPI, fearing it can be used to mask the
"true" inflation rate and thus lower the interest it must pay on Treasury
Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) and Social Security cost of living
adjustments. However, the same use of hedonic models when analyzing consumer
prices in other countries has shown that non-hedonic methods may misstate
inflation over time by failing to take quality changes into account.
