Herbert Baxter Adams Herbert Baxter Adams (April 16, 1850Â â€“ July 30, 1901)
was an American educator and historian. Adams was born to Nathaniel Dickinson
Adams and Harriet (Hastings) Adams in Shutesbury, Massachusetts. On his
mother's side, he was a descendant of Thomas Hastings (colonist) who came from
the East Anglia region of England to the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1634.
Adams received his early training in the Amherst, Massachusetts public schools
and Phillips Exeter Academy. He graduated from Amherst College in 1872, and
received the degree of Ph.D. at Heidelberg, Germany, in 1876. He was a fellow
in history at Johns Hopkins University from 1876 to 1878, associate from 1878
to 1883, and was appointed associate professor in 1883. He is credited with
bringing the study of politics into the realm of the social sciences. At Johns
Hopkins, in 1880, he began his famous seminar in history, where a large
proportion of the next generation of American historians trained. Adams founded
the "Johns Hopkins Studies in Historical and Political Science," the first of
such series. He brought about the organization in 1884 of the American
Historical Association, for which he was secretary until 1900, when he resigned
and was made first vice president. His historical writings introduced
scientific methods of investigation that influenced many historians, including
Frederick Jackson Turner and John Spencer Bassett. He authored "Life and
Writings of Jared Sparks" (1893) and many articles and influential reports on
the study of the social sciences. In 1873 he went to Europe and devoted three
years to travel and study. His principal writings are "The Germanic Origin of
the New England Towns"; "Saxon Tithing-Men in America"; "Norman Constables in
America"; "Village Communities"; "Methods of Historical Study," and "Maryland's
Influence upon Land Cessions to the United States." All these papers are
published in the "Johns Hopkins University Studies in Historical and Political
Science," edited by Prof. Adams, 4 vols. (Baltimore, 1883-'86). Although less
known for his contributions to the history of education, Adams was essential to
its early development. He edited the circular series titled, "Contributions to
American Educational History," which was printed and distributed by the U.S.
Bureau of Education. Herbert B. Adams died in 1901.
