Herfindahl index The Herfindahl index (also known as Herfindahlâ€“Hirschman
Index, or HHI) is a measure of the size of firms in relation to the industry
and an indicator of the amount of competition among them. Named after
economists Orris C. Herfindahl and Albert O. Hirschman, it is an economic
concept widely applied in competition law, antitrust and also technology
management. It is defined as the sum of the squares of the market shares of the
50 largest firms (or summed over all the firms if there are fewer than 50)
within the industry, where the market shares are expressed as fractions. The
result is proportional to the average market share, weighted by market share.
As such, it can range from 0 to 1.0, moving from a huge number of very small
firms to a single monopolistic producer. Increases in the Herfindahl index
generally indicate a decrease in competition and an increase of market power,
whereas decreases indicate the opposite. Alternatively, if whole percentages
are used, the index ranges from 0 to 10,000. The major benefit of the
Herfindahl index in relationship to such measures as the concentration ratio is
that it gives more weight to larger firms. The measure is essentially
equivalent to the Simpson diversity index used in ecology. Example. We will
assume that the remaining 10% of output is divided among 10 equally sized
producers. This behavior rests in the fact that the market shares are squared
prior to being summed, giving additional weight to firms with larger size. The
index involves taking the market share of the respective market competitors,
squaring it, and adding them together (e.g. in the market for X, company A has
30%, B, C, D, E and F have 10% each and G through to Z have 1% each). If the
resulting figure is above a certain threshold then economists consider the
market to have a high concentration (e.g. market X's concentration is 0.142 or
14.2%). This threshold is considered to be 0.25 in the U.S., while the EU
prefers to focus on the level of change, for instance that concern is raised if
there is a 0.025 change when the index already shows a concentration of 0.1. So
to take the example, if in market X company B (with 10% market share) suddenly
bought out the shares of company C (with 10% also) then this new market
concentration would make the index jump to 0.162. Here it can be seen that it
would not be relevant for merger law in the U.S. (being under 0.18) or in the
EU (because there is not a change over 0.025). Formula. where "si" is the
market share of firm "i" in the market, and "N" is the number of firms. Thus,
in a market with two firms that each have 50 percent market share, the
Herfindahl index equals 0.502+0.502 = 1/2. The Herfindahl Index ("H") ranges
from 1/"N" to one, where "N" is the number of firms in the market.
Equivalently, if percents are used as whole numbers, as in 75 instead of 0.75,
the index can range up to 1002, or 10,000. A HHI index below 0.01 (or 100)
indicates a highly competitive index. A HHI index above 0.25 (above 2,500)
indicates high concentration [http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/guidelines/hmg-
2010.html]. A small index indicates a competitive industry with no dominant
players. If all firms have an equal share the reciprocal of the index shows the
number of firms in the industry. When firms have unequal shares, the reciprocal
of the index indicates the "equivalent" number of firms in the industry. Using
case 2, we find that the market structure is equivalent to having 1.55521 firms
of the same size. where again, N is the number of firms in the market, and H is
the usual Herfindahl Index, as above. Problems. The usefulness of this
statistic to detect and stop harmful monopolies however is directly dependent
on a proper definition of a particular market (which hinges primarily on the
notion of substitutability). The United States Federal anti-trust authorities
such as the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission use the
Herfindahl index as a screening tool to determine whether a proposed merger is
likely to raise antitrust concerns [increases of over 0.0100 points generally
provoke scrutiny, although this varies from case to case. The Antitrust
Division of the Department of Justice considers Herfindahl indices between
0.1500 and 0.2500 to be "moderately concentrated" and indices above 0.2500 to
be "highly concentrated". As the market concentration increases, competition
and efficiency decrease and the chances of collusion and monopoly increase.
Intuition. When all the firms in an industry have equal market shares, H = 1/N.
The Herfindahl is correlated with the number of firms in an industry because
its lower bound when there are N firms is 1/N. An industry with 3 firms cannot
have a lower Herfindahl than an industry with 20 firms when firms have equal
market shares. But as market shares of the 20-firm industry diverge from
equality the Herfindahl can exceed that of the equal-market-share 3-firm
industry (e.g., if one firm has 81% of the market and the remaining 19 have 1%
each H=0.658). A higher Herfindahl signifies a less competitive industry.
Decomposition. If we suppose that "N" firms share all the market, then the
index can be expressed as formula_3 where "N" is the number of firms, as above,
and "V" is the statistical variance of the firm shares, defined as formula_4.
If all firms have equal (identical) shares (that is, if the market structure is
completely "symmetric", in which case "si" = 1/"N" for all "i") then "V" is
zero and "H" equals 1/"N". If the number of firms in the market is held
constant, then a higher variance due to a higher level of asymmetry between
firms' shares (that is, a higher "share dispersion") will result in a higher
index value. See Brown and Warren-Boulton (1988), also see Warren-Boulton
(1990).
