Human development theory Human development theory is a theory that merges older
ideas from ecological economics, sustainable development, welfare economics,
and feminist economics. It seeks to avoid the overt normative politics of most
so-called "green economics" by justifying its theses strictly in ecology,
economics and sound social science, and by working within a context of
globalization. Like ecological economics it focuses on measuring well-being and
detecting uneconomic growth that comes at the expense of human health. However,
it goes further in seeking not only to measure but to optimize well-being by
some explicit modeling of how social capital and instructional capital can be
deployed to optimize the overall value of human capital in an economy - which
is itself part of an ecology. The role of individual capital within that
ecology, and the adaptation of the individual to live well within it, is a
major focus of these theories. The most notable proponent of human development
theory are Mahbub ul Haq and Amartya Sen. Amartya Sen asked, in Development as
Freedom, "what is the relationship between our wealth and our ability to live
as we would like?" This question cannot be answered strictly from an energy,
feminist, family, environmental health, peace, social justice, or ecological
well-being point of view, although all of these may be factors in our
happiness, and if tolerances of any of these are violated seriously, it would
seem impossible to be happy at all. Accordingly, human development theory is a
major synthesis that is probably not confined within the bounds of conventional
economics or political science, nor even the political economy that relates the
two.
