Idealism in international relations In the American study of international
relations, idealism usually refers to the school of thought personified in
American diplomatic history by Woodrow Wilson, such that it is sometimes
referred to as Wilsonianism, or Wilsonian Idealism. Idealism holds that a state
should make its internal political philosophy the goal of its foreign policy.
For example, an idealist might believe that ending poverty at home should be
coupled with tackling poverty abroad. Wilson's idealism was a precursor to
liberal international relations theory, which would arise amongst the
"institution-builders" after World War II. It particularly emphasized the ideal
of American exceptionalism. Since the 1880s, there has been growing study of
the major writers of this idealist tradition of thought in international
relations, including Sir Alfred Zimmern, Norman Angell, John Maynard Keynes,
John A. Hobson, Leonard Woolf, Gilbert Murray, Florence Stawell (known as
Melian Stawell), Philip Henry Kerr, 11th Marquess of Lothian, Arnold J.
Toynbee, Lester Pearson and David Davies. Much of this writing has contrasted
these idealist writers with 'realists' in the tradition of E.H. Carr, whose
"The Twenty Years' Crisis" (1939) both coined the term 'idealist' and was a
fierce and effective assault on the inter-war idealists. Idealism is also
marked by the prominent role played by international law and international
organizations in its conception of policy formation. One of the most well-known
tenets of modern idealist thinking is democratic peace theory, which holds that
states with similar modes of democratic governance do not fight one another.
Wilson's idealistic thought was embodied in his Fourteen points speech, and in
the creation of the League of Nations. Idealism transcends the left-right
political spectrum. Idealists can include both human rights campaigners
(traditionally, but not always, associated with the left) and American
neoconservatism which is usually associated with the right. Idealism may find
itself in opposition to Realism, a worldview which argues that a nation's
national interest is more important than ethical or moral considerations;
however, there need be no conflict between the two (see Neoconservatism for an
example of a confluence of the two). Realist thinkers include Hans Morgenthau,
Niccol√≤ Machiavelli, Otto von Bismarck, George F. Kennan and others. Recent
practitioners of Idealism in the United States have included Ronald Reagan and
George W. Bush. Wilsonian idealism. Link finds that Wilson from his earliest
days had imbibed the beliefs of his denomination - in the omnipotence of God,
the morality of the Universe, a system of rewards and punishments and the
notion that nations, as well as man, transgressed the laws of God at their
peril. Blum (1956) argues that he learned from William Ewart Gladstone a mystic
conviction in the superiority of Anglo-Saxons, in their righteous duty to make
the world over in their image. Moral principle, constitutionalism, and faith in
God were among the prerequisites for alleviating human strife. While he
interpreted international law within such a brittle, moral cast, Wilson
remained remarkably insensitive to new and changing social forces and
conditions of the 20th century. He expected too much justice in a morally
brutal world which disregarded the self-righteous resolutions of parliaments
and statesmen like himself. Wilson's triumph was as a teacher of international
morality to generations yet unborn. Daniel Patrick Moynihan sees Wilson's
vision of world order anticipated humanity prevailing through the "Holy Ghost
of Reason," a vision which rested on religious faith. American foreign
relations since 1914 have rested on Wilsonian idealism, says historian David
Kennedy, even if adjusted somewhat by the "realism" represented by Franklin
Delano Roosevelt and Henry Kissinger. Kennedy argues that every president since
Wilson has "embraced the core precepts of Wilsonianism. Nixon himself hung
Wilson's portrait in the White House Cabinet Room. Wilson's ideas continue to
dominate American foreign policy in the twenty-first century. In the aftermath
of 9/11 they have, if anything, taken on even greater vitality." Descendant
theories. Idealism proper was a relatively short-lived school of thought, and
suffered a crisis of confidence following the failure of the League of Nations
and the outbreak of World War II. However, subsequent theories of international
relations would draw elements from Wilsonian Idealism when constructing their
world views. Liberalism. Liberalism manifested a tempered version of Wilson's
idealism in the wake of World War I. Cognizant of the failures of Idealism to
prevent renewed isolationism following World War I, and its inability to manage
the balance of power in Europe to prevent the outbreak of a new war, liberal
thinkers devised a set of international institutions based on rule of law and
regularized interaction. These international organizations, such as the United
Nations and the NATO, or even international regimes such as the Bretton Woods
system, and General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), were calculated both
to maintain a balance of power as well as regularize cooperation between
nations. Neoconservatism. Neoconservatism drew from Liberalism its intense
focus on the promotion of "universal values", in this case democracy, human
rights, free trade, women's rights and minority protections. However, it
differs in that it is less wedded to the importance of preserving international
institutions and treaties while pursuing assertive or aggressive stances which
it deems morally worthy, and is willing to use force or the threat of force,
unilaterally if necessary, to push for its goals.
