Ilısu Dam Campaign The Ilısu Dam Campaign is a UK based campaign working to
stop the construction of the Ilısu Dam on the river Tigris in south east
Turkey. The construction plans for the dam would lead to the flooding of about
300 square kilometers and would displace between 25,000 and 78,000 people, in
the Hasankeyf district of the Batman province. Initial plans for the dam. The
main purpose of the dam is the production of hydroelectric power, but it's also
supposed to provide better irrigation for local agriculture. Those who oppose
the dam claim that human rights and environmental issues have been disregarded
in the planning. The dam would also lead to the drowning of hundreds of
archeological sites, including the ancient town of Hasankeyf. In 2002, the
campaign won an important victory when it forced UK based company Balfour
Beatty and other European companies, like Swedish based Skanska, to withdraw
from the project. The companies involved in the project had applied for Export
Credit Guarantees from their home governments, which meant that taxpayers money
would be used to finance the project. Current plans. The plans for the dam were
not scrapped however, and in 2005 the project resurfaced. This time one of the
main contractors of the dam is Austrian based VA TECH, a subsidiary of Siemens
AG. According to the Turkish government, new resettlement plans are supposedly
planned and a large fund is supposed to be set up to rescue some parts of the
town of Hasankeyf by moving them elsewhere. According to the opponents of the
dam, these new plans do not adequately address the original concerns and as of
August 2005 the campaign is still active.
