Immigration policy An immigration policy is any policy of a state that deals
with the transit of persons across its borders into the country, but especially
those that intend to work and to remain in the country. Immigration policies
can range from allowing no migration at all to allowing most types of
migration, such as free immigration. Often, racial or religious bias is tied to
immigration policy (for example, a country might only allow commonwealth
citizens admission). Ethnic relations policy "within" a county can usually be
broadly categorized as either 'assimilationist' or 'multiculturalist'. An
important aspect of immigration policy is the treatment of refugees, more or
less helpless or stateless people who throw themselves on the mercy of the
state they enter, seeking refuge from poor treatment in their country of
origin. With the rise of terrorism worldwide, another major concern is the
national security of nations that let people cross borders. The belief is that
terrorists can come from overseas. These concerns often lead to intrusive
security searches and tighter visa requirements, which can discourage
immigration, temporary visitors, and even movement within countries or birth
within countries. There is often pressure on nations to loosen immigration
policy or inspections to enable tourism and relocation of businesses to a
country, from a destabilized region. Further reading. http://pewhispanic.org/
reports/report.php?ReportID=53 http://pewhispanic.org/reports/
report.php?ReportID=44 http://pewhispanic.org/reports/report.php?ReportID=74
