Immigration reduction in the United States Immigration reduction refers to a
movement in the United States that advocates a reduction in the amount of
immigration allowed into the country. Steps advocated for reducing the numbers
of immigrants include advocating stronger action to prevent illegal entry and
illegal immigration, and reductions in non-immigrant temporary work visas (such
as H-1B and L-1). Some advocate a tightening of the requirements for legal
immigration requirements to reduce total numbers, or move the proportions of
legal immigrants away from those on family reunification programs to skills-
based criteria. What separates it from others who want immigration reform is
that reductionists see immigration- or one of its forms- as being a significant
source of social, economic, and environmental problems, and wish to cut current
immigration levels. Many immigration reformists support continued legal
immigration, only opposing illegal immigration. Some immigration reductionists
want legal immigration to be set at a percentage of current levels until fewer
adverse effects are created by legal immigration. History. Antecedents to
immigration reduction or control exist in antiquity, notably in the Roman
Empire, where high living standards were an attractant to poorer tribes at the
edge of the Empire. Specifically the immigration from Northern Africa, the
Middle East, and of Germanic tribes from the northern European continent and
Pictish peoples north of Hadrian's Wall in Brittania were viewed as unwanted
population influxes. Modern history of the immigration reduction movement.
There have been several discernible groups at various times within the United
States, which pushed for immigration restrictions, with separate concerns,
origins, and aims; thus there are several antecedents for the modern
immigration reduction movement. These include the nativist United States
American Party, often called the Know Nothing movement of the mid-19th century,
which objected to increased Catholic immigration of predominantly Irish and
German origin; the Immigration Restriction League, which objected to greatly
increased immigration from southern and eastern Europe during the late-19th and
early 20th centuries, and the joint congressional Dillingham Commission, which
studied this latter complaint and proposed numerical restrictions. Eventually,
following World War I, these studies led to the Emergency Quota Act of 1921 and
the Immigration Act of 1924. Organized labor and parts of the political left
have also had an ongoing debate over immigration levels into the U.S. going
back to the 19th century. The National Labor Union (1866â€“1874) campaigned for
immigration restrictions as well as the eight-hour workday, as did the American
Federation of Labor under the leadership of Samuel Gompers. The AFL-CIO did not
reverse its position on immigration restrictions until 1999. The early United
States Socialist Party was split over the issue, with some Socialist leaders
including Jack London and Congressman Victor Berger supporting immigration
restrictions; the party as a whole never had consensus and officially opposed
only the importation of strikebreakers. A separate issue with some overlap was
concern over overpopulation. The leading early influence on that issue was Paul
R. Ehrlich, who both founded Zero Population Growth and published "The
Population Bomb" in 1968. The popular book foretold alarming disasters that
would inevitably occur in the next decades. Though some of his predictions did
not come to pass, many believe his main points are valid, and they succeeded in
inspiring a movement. Environmentalists including David R. Brower and David
Foreman took the threat seriously. The Zero Population Growth organization did
not involve itself, for the most part, in U.S. immigration policy, and a subset
of the overpopulation movement grew which believed that immigration needed to
be reduced, arguing that immigration was driving most U.S. population growth.
These activists founded organizations separate from ZPG which would
specifically address immigration issues. Among the important early
organizations was Negative Population Growth, founded in 1972 by Donald Mann.
The leading inspiration for the modern movement is John Tanton, a self-
described progressive and critic of neoclassical economics.Tanton founded the
Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR) in 1979, the largest and best
funded organization in the movement. Three years later, Tanton formed "US,
Inc". as an incubator and funding source to help form other organizations.
According to public tax records, US, Inc, FAIR, and other Tanton organizations
have received large donations from the Pioneer Fund and from the foundations
controlled by Richard Mellon Scaife. Tanton created "US English" (an English-
only advocacy group), the Center for Immigration Studies (CIS), ProEnglish
(another English-only advocacy group), and The Social Contract Press. US, Inc
and FAIR have provided funding and logistical support to other organizations,
including American Immigration Control Foundation (AICF), California Coalition
for Immigration Reform (CCIR), Californians for Population Stabilization
(CAPS), and the recent Protect Arizona Now (PAN) initiative, "Proposition 200".
FAIR claims that there is a relationship between lax immigration policies and
terrorism such as the 9/11 attack, and it asserts there is no connection
between itself and eugenics. The movement seemed to be triumphant in 1994 when
California voters passed Proposition 187, an initiative that limited benefits
to illegal aliens that had been authored and promoted by CCIR. However, one
federal judge enjoined implementation of parts of the law as unconstitutional,
and Democratic governor Gray Davis refused to pursue an appeal of the lower
court decision, abandoning Proposition 187. Residual resentment over the
racially divisive campaigns on both sides of the issue made immigration a topic
that politicians largely avoided dealing with. A notable exception has been Tom
Tancredo, who was elected to Congress from Littleton, Colorado in 1994.
Together with Patrick Buchanan and the Tanton network, Tancredo has emerged as
the most conspicuous voice advocating immigration reform in Congress. Another
effort was the coalition formed under the name "U.S. Sustainable Population
Policy Project" (USS3P) in 1996 by Douglas La Follette and David Pimentel. The
USS3P membership contained many immigration reductionists of the time. In 1999
it sought cosponsors for a major national conference on immigration. A number
of major individuals and minor organizations joined as co-sponsors, but no
large national groups joined and it folded in 2000 without holding the intended
conference. The Internet offered new opportunities for communication by
immigration reductionists, as it has with countless other movements. Peter
Brimelow founded his VDARE writers collective in 1999. The year 1999 also saw
the founding by Craig Nelson of ProjectUSA in New York City, which used
billboards to advertise Census Bureau and other statistics about immigration in
a campaign dubbed "Billboard Democracy," and publishes an ezine in which the
term "Minuteman" was first used (2002) in connection with civilian border
patrols. The NumbersUSA group founded by Roy Beck set up automated system for
website visitors to send advocacy faxes to their legislators on immigration
topics. Numerous websites, email lists, weblogs, and other resources furthered
the effort. The electoral success of Arizona's Proposition 200, PAN, indicates
the support for immigration reductionism among voters. The PAN initiative
qualified for the ballot following the expenditure by FAIR of hundreds of
thousands of dollars for signature gathering, plus comparable sums for
campaigning with some additional amounts raised locally. The initiative was
adopted by the public by a significant margin and is likely to inspire similar
efforts in other states. The success of Proposition 200 in Arizona was followed
in April 2005 by the Minuteman Project, in which volunteers came to Arizona to
help patrol the border, although this project did not have the support of the
United States Border Patrol and generated some controversy. The organizers of
the Minuteman Project have announced plans for similar projects in other states
including Texas, California, and Michigan. Target immigration levels.
Immigration reductionists differ on the ideal level of immigration they would
like to see into the United States. Some believe the numbers should be set each
year at whatever level would, in conjunction with the current fertility rate
and emigration from the U.S., maintain zero population growth in the country.
The most prominent immigration reductionist in government today is U.S.
Congressman Tom Tancredo R-CO. Tancredo has authored a bill that calls for
limiting annual immigration to between 30,000 and 300,000. The organization,
Population-Environment Balance (PEB), has issued a "Immigration Moratorium
Action Plan" [http://www.balance.org/asap/asapplan.html] calling for a "non-
piercable" cap of 100,000 persons annually, which would be a 95% cut from
current levels. Carrying Capacity Network (CCN), another small reductionist
group closely related to PEB, shares that goal while repeating that it is not
opposed to immigration. There are also some who support a moratorium on
immigration. The Diversity Alliance for a Sustainable America claims that 43%
of Californians polled said that a 3-year moratorium on immigration would be
beneficial to the state (compared to 40% who said it would be unbeneficial).The
America First Party calls for a ten-year moratorium, with only spouses and
children of citizens allowed in. [http://www.americafirstparty.org/docs/
platform.shtml Other advocates for moratoriums include the Reform Partyand 2004
Constitution Party presidential candidate Michael Peroutka [http://
www.issues2000.org/2004/Michael_Peroutka_Immigration.htm. Robert Locke
surpasses them by calling for a negative immigration rate. He has defined this
as restricting immigration to the U.S. to what he calls the "normal" (i.e.,
pre-1965) average flow of immigrants throughout U.S. history, combined with the
deportation of all illegal immigrants.[http://www.frontpagemag.com/Articles/
ReadArticle.asp?ID=2427] The Carrying Capacity Network (CCN) and Population-
Environment Balance (Now Defunct), two groups that both operate out of the same
Washington, D.C. address, issue frequent statements that advocating for the
numbers recommended by the Jordan Commission, 700,000 annually, is "counter-
productive". In a "National Alert" the CCN warned that organizations supporting
numbers higher than 300,000 undercut the movement, and they specifically
criticize the Federation for American Immigration Reform and NumbersUSA. [http:
//www.carryingcapacity.org/ealert2.html] Some groups not connected to the
immigration reduction movement nonetheless support a reduction to legal
immigration levels of around 500,000 to 600,000. In their 1997 book, "Misplaced
Blame", Alan Durning and Christopher Crowther of Northwest Environment Watch
write that illegal immigration gets too much attention, and identify five main
sources of population growth, including lack of access to family planning as
well as a misguided legal immigration policy, and subsidies to domestic
migration. They readily admit that immigation should be reduced by an
unspecified amount, but they also show concern for the rights of existing
residents. [http://www.northwestwatch.org/publications/mpblamedownload.asp].
The AFL-CIO and some mainstream environmentalist groups used to be on record
favoring lower immigration numbers, although most have quietly dropped this
position in recent years. Proposed methods of reducing illegal immigration.
Border barriers. The focus of some immigration reduction groups is hindering
illegal entry by building barriers on the border. The United States-Mexico
barrier has been partially constructed to reduce the flow of unauthorized
migrants into the United States. Mexico is constructing a barrier to
immigration along its southern border. Presently, India is constructing a fence
along the border to restrict migrants from Bangladesh, the long Indo-
Bangladeshi barrier; The stated aim of the fence is to stop infiltration of
terrorists, prevent smuggling, and to bring a close to unauthorized migration
from Bangladesh. The People's Republic of China is building a security barrier
along its border with North Korea to prevent defectors or refugees from North
Korea from entering the country illegally. On January 25, 2008 Egyptian
security forces blocked almost all illegal entry points along the border with
Gaza to try to stem the flow of Palestinians wanting to leave. Egyptian forces
in riot gear erected barbed wire and chain-link fences along the border to
prevent more Palestinians from crossing. Attrition through enforcement. Pro-
enforcement U.S. think tanks such as the Center for Immigration Studies have
supported an "attrition through enforcement" doctrine. The aim here is to, as
that organization states, "Shrink the illegal population through consistent,
across-the-board enforcement of the immigration law. By deterring the
settlement of new illegals, by increasing deportations to the extent possible,
and, most importantly, by increasing the number of illegals already here who
give up and deport themselves, the United States can bring about an annual
decrease in the illegal-alien population, rather than allowing it to
continually increase." This approach concedes that mass deportations of illegal
aliens is logistically, economically, and politically untenable. Arizona
SB1070, the broadest and strictest anti-illegal immigration measure enacted in
the U.S. in generations, explicitly states its intent as implementing the
attrition through enforcement strategy. Intergovernmental cooperation.
Conservative blogger Michelle Malkin supports coordination with federal
authorities through the use of Section 287(g) of the Illegal Immigration Reform
and Immigrant Responsibility Act. Section 287(g) provides for the deputization
of state and local law enforcement officers, for the purposes of reporting of
immigrants who have violated immigration law. Morristown, New Jersey mayor
Donald Cresitello (Democrat) has sought to deputize his police as immigration
agents. Newark, New Jersey city councilman Ron Rice, Jr. has proposed a
resolution mandating police to report felony suspects when they are found to be
in the United State illegally. Furthermore, the Attorney General of New Jersey
Anne Milgram has expanded officers power regarding illegal immigrants. She told
the state police to inform federal authorities when an illegal immigrant is
arrested in an indictable crime or for drunk driving. There are an estimated
380,000 people living in New Jersey without proper immigration documents. She
said that she wanted local, county and state police to hand more serious cases
directly to Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Legislative initiatives.
Others focus on lobbying to lower future illegal immigration levels through
congressional action, and to fight amnesties for existing illegal immigrants.
Many immigration restrictionists question the 1898 Supreme Court ruling "U.S.
v. Wong Kim Ark," which held that individuals born on U.S. soil to non-citizen
parents are U.S. citizens and guaranteed all the rights thereof. They feel that
citizenship should be denied to the children of immigrants without valid
immigration status. Thus they have sought to end birthright citizenship,
through a constitutional amendment or a congressional act. Denial of public
benefits to undocumented individuals is believed to remove the incentives and
rewards for illegal immigrants. The 1994 California Proposition 187 and the
2004 Arizona Proposition 200 "Protect Arizona Now" were written to require
proof of legal status in order to receive non-mandated benefits. Differences
within immigration reductionism. Many who support reduced immigration numbers
oppose association with the more extreme groups. The Federation for American
Immigration Reform has spoken out in 2004 against the views of another
reductionist leader, Virginia Abernethy, calling her views "repulsive
separatist views," and called on her to resign from the advisory board of
Protect Arizona Now in Arizona. PEB and CCN are also critical of FAIR for
FAIR's support of a national ID card, which PEB and CCN oppose. The Protect
Arizona Now movement split, with two rival state-level organizations, one
supported by FAIR, the other supported by PEB and CCN, working to support the
passage of the ballot initiative.
