Inclusive Democracy Inclusive Democracy is a political theory and political
project that aims for direct democracy, economic democracy in a stateless,
moneyless and marketless economy, self-management (democracy in the social
realm), and ecological democracy. The theoretical project of Inclusive
Democracy (ID), as distinguished from the political project which is part of
the democratic and autonomy traditions, emerged from the work of political
philosopher, former academic and activist Takis Fotopoulos in "Towards An
Inclusive Democracy" and was further developed by him and other writers in the
journal "Democracy & Nature" and its successor "The International Journal of
Inclusive Democracy", an electronic journal freely available and published by
the International Network for Inclusive Democracy According to Arran Gare,
"Towards an Inclusive Democracy" "offers a powerful new interpretation of the
history and destructive dynamics of the market and provides an inspiring new
vision of the future in place of both neo-liberalism and existing forms of
socialism". Also, as David Freeman points out that Fotopoulos' approach "is not
openly anarchism, yet anarchism seems the formal category within which he
works, given his commitment to direct democracy, municipalism and abolition of
state, money and market economy". The Conception of Inclusive Democracy.
Fotopoulos describes inclusive democracy as "a new conception of democracy,
which, using as a starting point the classical definition of it, expresses
democracy in terms of direct political democracy, economic democracy (beyond
the confines of the market economy and state planning), as well as democracy in
the social realm and ecological democracy. In short, inclusive democracy is a
form of social organisation which re-integrates society with economy, polity
and nature. The concept of inclusive democracy is derived from a synthesis of
two major historical traditions, the classical democratic and the socialist,
although it also encompasses radical green, feminist, and liberation movements
in the South". Starting point of the ID project is that the world, at the
beginning of the new millennium, faces a multi-dimensional crisis (economic,
ecological, social, cultural and political), which is shown to be caused by the
concentration of power in the hands of various elites. This is interpreted to
be the outcome of the establishment, in the last few centuries, of the system
of market economy (in the Polanyian sense), Representative democracy, and the
related forms of hierarchical structure. Therefore, an inclusive democracy is
seen not simply as a utopia, but perhaps as the only way out of the crisis,
based on the equal distribution of power at all levels. In this conception of
democracy, the public realm includes not just the political realm, as is usual
in the republican or democratic project (Hannah Arendt, Cornelius Castoriadis,
Murray Bookchin et al.), but also the economic, 'social' and ecological realms.
The political realm is the sphere of political decision-making, the area in
which political power is exercised. The economic realm is the sphere of
economic decision-making, the area in which economic power is exercised with
respect to the broad economic choices that any scarcity society has to make.
The social realm is the sphere of decision-making in the workplace, the
education place and any other economic or cultural institution which is a
constituent element of a democratic society. The public realm could be extended
to include the "ecological realm", which may be defined as the sphere of the
relations between society and nature. Therefore, the public realm, in contrast
to the private realm, includes any area of human activity in which decisions
can be made collectively and democratically. According to these four realms, we
may distinguish between four main constituent elements of an inclusive
democracy: the political, the economic, 'democracy in the social realm' and the
ecological. The first three elements form the institutional framework, which
aims at the equal distribution of political, economic and social power
respectively. In this sense, these elements define a system, which aims at the
effective elimination of the domination of human being over human being.
Similarly, ecological democracy is defined as the institutional framework,
which aims to eliminate any human attempt to dominate the natural world, in
other words, the system, which aims to reintegrate humans and nature.
Institutional framework. Political or direct democracy. The necessary condition
for the establishment of a political democracy involves the creation of
appropriate institutions, which secure an equal distribution of political power
among all citizens. All political decisions (including those relating to the
formation and execution of laws) are taken by the citizen body collectively and
without representation.The citizen body of a particular geographical area
consists of all residents beyond a certain age of maturity and irrespective of
their gender, race, ethnic or cultural identity. The age of maturity is to be
defined by the citizen body itself. The sufficient condition for the
reproduction of a political democracy refers to the citizens' level of
democratic consciousness and, as David Gabbard & Karen Appleton point out, "the
responsibility of cultivating the democratic consciousness requisite to this
conception of citizenship falls to paideia" which involves not simply education
but character development and a well-rounded knowledge and skills, i.e. the
education of the individual as citizen, which alone can give substantive
content to the public space. This is particularly so because democracy can only
be grounded on the conscious choice of citizens for individual and collective
autonomy. Thus it cannot be the outcome of any social, economic or natural
"laws" or tendencies dialectically leading to it, let alone any divine or
mystical dogmas and preconceptions. In this sense, neither representative
democracy nor soviet democracy meet the conditions for political democracy, and
are simply forms of political oligarchy, where political power is concentrated
in the hands of various elites, i.e. professional politicians, and party
bureaucrats respectively. The basic unit of decision making in an inclusive
democracy is the demotic assembly, i.e. the assembly of demos, the citizen body
in a given geographical area which may encompass a town and the surrounding
villages, or even neighbourhoods of large cities. This is very close to the
concept of the 'urban village' proposed today by supporters of de-growth
economics. However, apart from local decisions, many important decisions are to
be made at the regional or confederal level. This is why, as Serge Latouche
observes, the aim of Inclusive Democracy "presupposes a confederation of demoi"
made up of small, homogenous units of around 30,000 people. Therefore, an
inclusive democracy today can only take the form of a confederal democracy that
is based on a network of administrative councils whose members or delegates are
elected from popular face-to-face democratic assemblies in the various demoi.
Thus, their role is purely administrative and practical, not one of policy-
making like that of representatives in representative democracy. The citizen
body is advised by experts but it is the citizen body which functions as the
ultimate decision-taker . Authority can be delegated to a segment of the
citizen body to carry out specific duties, for example to serve as members of
popular courts, or of regional and confederal councils. Such delegation is
made, in principle, by lot, on a rotation basis, and is always recallable by
the citizen body. Delegates to regional and confederal bodies should have
specific mandates. Finally, political or direct democracy implies a very
different conception of citizenship than the usual liberal and socialist
conceptions. In this conception, political activity is not a means to an end,
but an end in itself so that one does not engage in political action simply to
promote one's welfare but to realize the principles intrinsic to political
life, such as freedom, equality and solidarity. This, in contrast to the
liberal and social-democratic conceptions which adopt an 'instrumentalist' view
of citizenship, i.e. a view which implies that citizenship entitles citizens
with certain rights that they can exercise as means to the end of individual
welfare. Economic democracy. The Inclusive Democracy (ID) project introduced a
very different conception from the usual one of economic democracy. According
to the ID project, economic democracy is the authority of demos (community) in
the economic sphere â€” which requires equal distribution of economic power.
Therefore, all 'macro' economic decisions, namely, decisions concerning the
running of the economy as a whole (overall level of production, consumption and
investment, amounts of work and leisure implied, technologies to be used, etc.)
are made by the citizen body collectively and without representation. However,
"micro" economic decisions at the workplace or the household levels are made by
the individual production or consumption unit through a proposed system of
vouchers. As with the case of direct democracy, economic democracy today is
only feasible at the level of the confederated demoi. It involves the ownership
and control of the means of production by the demos. This is radically
different from the two main forms of concentration of economic power :
capitalist and 'socialist' growth economy. It is also different from the
various types of collectivist capitalism, such as workers' control and milder
versions suggested by post-Keynesian social democrats. The demos, therefore,
becomes the authentic unit of economic life. For economic democracy to be
feasible, three preconditions must be satisfied: Demotic self-reliance, demotic
ownership of the means of production, and confederal allocation of resources.
Therefore, the system consists of two basic elements: Another distinguishing
feature of ID is its distinction between basic and non-basic needs.
Remuneration is according to need for basic needs, and according to effort for
non-basic needs. ID is based on the principle that meeting basic needs is a
fundamental human right which is guaranteed to all who are in a physical
condition to offer a minimal amount of work. By contrast,Fotopoulos argues,
Parecon follows the socialdemocratic rather than the anarcho-communist
tradition and instead of proposing satisfaction according to need (as the ID
project does) declares, first, that particular consumption needs such as health
care or public parks will be free to all and, second, that as regards special
needs, people will be able to make particular requests for need based
consumption to be addressed case by case by others in the economy. In fact,
Michael Albert explicitly states that what he calls 'norm four', i.e.
'remuneration according to each person's need' should be applied only in
exceptional cases of basic needs and not to all needs defined as such by the
citizens' assemblies, as the Inclusive Democracy project declares. Thus, as
Albert stresses: "beyond economic justice, we have our compassion, to be
applied via norm four where appropriate such as in cases of illness,
catastrophe, incapacity and so on". Democracy in the social realm. An inclusive
democracy is inconceivable unless it extends to the broader social realm to
embrace the workplace, the household, the educational institution and indeed
any economic or cultural institution, which constitutes an element of this
realm. The equal distribution of power in these institutions and self-
management are secured through the creation of assemblies of the people
involved in each place of work or education (workers' assemblies, student and
teachers' assemblies respectively) who make all important decisions about the
functioning of these places, within the framework of the decisions taken by
citizens' demotic assemblies as regards the general aims of production,
education and culture respectively. The assemblies are federated at the
regional and confederal levels so that the confederal assemblies of workers,
teaches, students and so on could be involved in a process of constant
interaction with the citizens' confederal assemblies to define society's
"general interest". A crucial issue with respect to democracy in the social
realm is democratisation of the household. One possible solution is the removal
of the divide between the household and the public realm. Thus, some feminist
writers, particularly eco-feminists, glorify the "oikos" and its values as a
substitute for the "polis" and its politics. This can be understood as an
attempt to dissolve the public into the private. At the other extreme, some
Marxist feminists attempt to remove the public/private divide by dissolving all
private space into a singular public, a socialised or fraternal state sphere.
Another possible solution is, taking for granted that the household belongs to
the private realm, to 'democratise' it in the sense that household
relationships should take on the characteristics of democratic relationships,
and that the household should take a form which is consistent with the freedom
of all its members. But for the ID project, the issue is not the dissolution of
the private/public realm divide. The real issue is how, maintaining and
enhancing the autonomy of the two realms, such institutional arrangements are
adopted that introduce democracy at the household and the social realm in
general (workplace, educational establishment etcetera) and at the same time
enhance the institutional arrangements of political and economic democracy. In
this sense, an effective democracy is only conceivable if free time is equally
distributed among all citizens, which requires ending the present hierarchical
relations in the household, the workplace and elsewhere. Furthermore, democracy
in the social realm, particularly in the household, requires institutional
arrangements which recognise the character of the household as a need-satisfier
and integrate the care and services that the household provides into the
general scheme of needs satisfaction. Ecological democracy. As Steven Best
stresses, "in bold contrast to the limitations of the animal advocacy movement
(AAM) and all other reformist causes, Takis Fotopoulos advances a broad view of
human dynamics and social institutions, their impact on the earth, and the
resulting consequences for society itself. Combining anti-capitalist, radical
democracy, and ecological concerns in the concept of "ecological democracy,"
Fotopoulos defines this notion as "the institutional framework which aims at
the elimination of any human attempt to dominate the natural world, in other
words, as the system which aims to reintegrate humans and nature. This implies
transcending the present 'instrumentalist' view of Nature, in which Nature is
seen as an instrument for growth, within a process of endless concentration of
power." Some critics of inclusive democracy ask what guarantees an inclusive
democracy may offer in ensuring a better relationship of society to nature than
the alternative systems of the market economy, or socialist statism. For
example, a well-known eco-socialist pointed out "the 'required' ecological
consensus among ecotopia' s inhabitants might not be ensured merely by
establishing an Athenian democracy where all are educated and rational".
However, ID supporters counter argue that this criticism represents a clear
misconception of what democracy is about because, "if we see it as a process of
social self-institution where there is no divinely or 'objectively' defined
code of human conduct, such guarantees are by definition ruled out. Therefore,
the replacement of the market economy by a new institutional framework of
inclusive democracy constitutes only the necessary condition for a harmonious
relation between the natural and social worlds. The sufficient condition refers
to the citizens' level of ecological consciousness. Still, the radical change
in the dominant social paradigm that would follow the institution of an
inclusive democracy, combined with the decisive role that paedeia will play in
an environmentally-friendly institutional framework, could reasonably be
expected to lead to a radical change in the human attitude towards Nature".
Supporters also claim that ID's institutional framework offers the best hope
for a better human relationship to nature than could ever be achieved in a
market economy, or one based on socialist statism. The factors supporting this
view refer to all three elements of an inclusive democracy: political, economic
and social. Political democracy presupposes a radical decentralisation
(physical or administrative) within a confederal society, which, by itself,
should enhance its environmentally friendly character. Furthermore, political
democracy would create a public space, a fact which would significantly reduce
the appeal of materialism by providing a new meaning of life to fill the
existential void that the present consumer society creates. Economic democracy
replaces the dynamics of the capitalist market economy leading to growth per se
with a new social dynamic aiming at the satisfaction of demos' needs. If the
satisfaction of demotic needs does not depend, as at present, on the continuous
expansion of production to cover the 'needs' that the market system itself
creates and if society is reintegrated with the economy, then there is no
reason why the present instrumentalist view of Nature will continue
conditioning human behaviour. Particularly so, since unlike socialist models
which are 'centralist', the aim of production in an Inclusive Democracy is not
economic growth, but the satisfaction of the basic needs of the community and
those non-basic needs for which members of the community express a desire and
are willing to work extra for. This implies a new definition of economic
efficiency, based not on narrow techno-economic criteria of input minimisation/
output maximisation as in socialist models like Parecon, but on criteria
securing full coverage of the democratically defined basic needs of all
citizens as well as of the non-basic needs they decide to meetâ€”even if this
involves a certain amount of inefficiency according to the orthodox economics
criteria. Finally, democracy in the social realm should be a decisive step in
the creation of the sufficient condition for a harmonious nature-society
relationship as the phasing out of patriarchal relations in the household and
hierarchical relations in general should create a new ethos of non-domination
which would engulf both nature and society. External resources. Note that
several of the printed resources listed below are also available online.
