Income tax An income tax is a tax levied on the income of individuals or
businesses (corporations or other legal entities). Various income tax systems
exist, with varying degrees of tax incidence. Income taxation can be
progressive, proportional, or regressive. When the tax is levied on the income
of companies, it is often called a corporate tax, corporate income tax, or
profit tax. Individual income taxes often tax the total income of the
individual (with some deductions permitted), while corporate income taxes often
tax net income (the difference between gross receipts, expenses, and additional
write-offs). Various systems define income differently, and often allow
notional reductions of income (such as a reduction based on number of children
supported). Principles of taxes. The "tax net" refers to the types of payment
that are taxed, which included personal earnings (wages), capital gains, and
business income. The rates for different types of income may vary and some may
not be taxed at all. Capital gains may be taxed when realized (e.g. when shares
are sold) or when incurred (e.g. when shares appreciate in value). Business
income may only be taxed if it is significant or based on the manner in which
it is paid. Some types of income, such as interest on bank savings, may be
considered as personal earnings (similar to wages) or as a realized property
gain (similar to selling shares). In some tax systems, personal earnings may be
strictly defined where labor, skill, or investment is required (e.g. wages); in
others, they may be defined broadly to include windfalls (e.g. gambling wins).
Tax rates may be progressive, regressive, or proportional. A progressive tax
applies progressively higher tax rates as earnings reach higher levels. For
example, the first $10,000 in earnings may be taxed at 7%, the next $10,000 at
10%, and any more income at 30%. Alternatively, a proportional tax takes all
earnings at the same rate. A regressive income tax may apply to income up to a
certain amount, such as taxing only the first $90,000 earned. A tax system may
use different taxation methods for different types of income. Personal income
tax is often collected on a pay-as-you-earn basis, with small corrections made
soon after the end of the tax year. These corrections take one of two forms:
payments to the government by taxpayers who did not pay enough during the tax
year; and tax refunds from the government to those who overpaid. Income tax
systems often have deductions available that lessen the total tax liability by
reducing total taxable income. They may allow losses from one type of income to
be counted against another. For example, a loss on the stock market may be
deducted against taxes paid on wages. Other tax systems may isolate the loss,
such that business losses can only be deducted against business tax by carrying
forward the loss to later tax years. Income taxes are used in most countries
around the world, but are not without criticism. Frank Chodorov wrote "... you
come up with the fact that it gives the government a prior lien on all the
property produced by its subjects." The government "unashamedly proclaims the
doctrine of collectivized wealth.Â ... That which it does not take is a
concession." Some have argued that the economic effects of an income tax system
penalize work, discourage saving and investing, and hinder the competitiveness
of business and economic growth. Income taxes are also not border-adjustable;
meaning the tax component embedded into products via taxes imposed on companies
cannot be removed when exported to a foreign country "(see Effect of taxes and
subsidies on price)". Alternate tax systems such as a national sales tax or
value added tax remove the tax component when goods are exported and apply the
tax component on imports. Types. Personal. A personal or individual income tax
is levied on the total income of the individual (with some deductions
permitted). It is often collected on a pay-as-you-earn basis, with small
corrections made soon after the end of the tax year. These corrections take one
of two forms: payments to the government, for taxpayers who have not paid
enough during the tax year; and tax refunds from the government for those who
have overpaid. Income tax systems will often have deductions available that
lessen the total tax liability by reducing total taxable income. They may allow
losses from one type of income to be counted against another. For example, a
loss on the stock market may be deducted against taxes paid on wages.
Corporate. Corporate tax refers to a direct tax levied on the profits made by
companies or associations and often includes capital gains of a company.
Earnings are generally considered gross revenue minus expenses. Corporate
expenses related to capital expenditures are usually deducted in full (for
example, trucks are fully deductible in the Canadian tax system, while a
corporate sports car is only partly deductible) over their useful lives by
using percentage rates based on the class of asset they belong to. Accounting
principles and tax rules about recognition of expenses and revenue will vary at
times, giving rise to book-tax differences. If the book-tax difference is
carried over more than a year, it is referred to as a deferred tax. Future
assets and liabilities created by a deferred tax are reported on the balance
sheet. Payroll. A payroll tax generally refers to two kinds of taxes: employee
and employer payroll taxes. Employee payroll taxes are taxes which employers
are required to withhold from employees' pay, also known as withholding, pay-
as-you-earn (PAYE) or pay-as-you-go (PAYG) tax. These withholdings contribute
to the payment of an employee's personal income tax obligation; if the payments
exceed this obligation, the employee may be eligible for a tax refund or
carryforward to future periods. Employer payroll taxes are paid from the
employer's own funds, either as a fixed charge per employee or as a percentage
of each employee's pay. Payroll taxes often cover government social insurance
programs, such as social security, health care, unemployment, and disability.
These payments do not count toward the income taxes of employees and employers,
but are normally deductible by the employer as a business expense. Inheritance.
The inheritance tax, estate tax and death duty are the names given to various
taxes which arise on the death of an individual. In international tax law,
there is a distinction between an estate tax and an inheritance tax: the former
taxes the personal representatives of the deceased, while the latter taxes the
beneficiaries of the estate. However, this distinction is not universally
recognized. For example, the "inheritance tax" in the UK is a tax on personal
representatives, and is therefore, strictly speaking, an excise tax. Capital
gains tax. A capital gains tax is the tax levied on profits from the sale of
capital assets. In many cases, the amount of a capital gain is treated as
income and subject to the marginal rate of income tax. In an inflationary
environment, capital gains may be, to some extent, illusory. If prices in
general have doubled over five years, then selling an asset for twice the price
it was purchased at five years earlier represents no gain at all. Partly to
compensate for such changes in the value of money over time, some
jurisdictions, such as the United States, give a favorable capital gains tax
rate based on the length of holding. European jurisdictions have a similar rate
reduction to nil on certain property transactions that qualify for the
participation exemption. In Canada, 20â€“50% of the gain is taxable income. In
India, Short Term Capital Gains Tax (arising before one year) is 10% % from F.Y
2008-09 as per Finance Act 2008 flat rate of the gains and Long Term Capital
Gains Tax is nil for stocks and mutual fund units held one year or more,
provided the sale of shares involved payment of the Securities Transaction Tax,
and 20% for any other assets held three years or more History. The concept of
taxing income is a modern innovation and presupposes several things: a money
economy, reasonably accurate accounts, a common understanding of receipts,
expenses and profits, and an orderly society with reliable records. For most of
the history of civilization, these preconditions did not exist, and taxes were
based on other factors. Taxes on wealth, social position, and ownership of the
means of production (typically land and slaves) were all common. Practices such
as tithing, or an offering of firstfruits, existed from ancient times, and can
be regarded as a precursor of the income tax, but they lacked precision and
certainly were not based on a concept of net increase. China. In the year 10
AD, Emperor Wang Mang of the Xin Dynasty instituted an unprecedented taxâ€”the
income taxâ€”at the rate of 10 percent of profits, for professionals and
skilled labor. (Previously, all taxes were either head tax or property tax.) He
was overthrown 13 years later in 23 AD and earlier laissez-faire policies were
restored during the Later Han. United Kingdom. One of the first recorded taxes
on income was the Saladin tithe introduced by Henry II in 1188 to raise money
for the Third Crusade. The tithe demanded that each layperson in England be
taxed a tenth of their personal income and moveable property. However, the
inception date of the modern income tax is typically accepted as 1799. Income
tax was announced in Britain by William Pitt the Younger in his budget of
December 1798 and introduced in 1799, to pay for weapons and equipment in
preparation for the Napoleonic wars. Pitt's new graduated income tax began at a
levy of 2d in the pound (0.8333%) on annual incomes over Â£60 and increased up
to a maximum of 2s in the pound (10%) on incomes of over Â£200 (Â£170,542 in
2007). Pitt hoped that the new income tax would raise Â£10 million
(Â£8,527,100,000 in 2007), but actual receipts for 1799 totaled just over Â£6
million. The tax was repealed in 1816 and opponents of the tax, who thought it
should only be used to finance wars, wanted all records of the tax destroyed
along with its repeal. Records were publicly burned by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer but copies were retained in the basement of the tax court. United
States. In order to help pay for its war effort in the American Civil War, the
US federal government imposed its first personal income tax, on August 5, 1861,
as part of the Revenue Act of 1861 (3% of all incomes over US $800) ($ in
dollars). This tax was repealed and replaced by another income tax in 1862. In
1894, Democrats in Congress passed the Wilson-Gorman tariff, which imposed the
first peacetime income tax. The rate was 2% on income over $4000 ($ in
dollars), which meant fewer than 10% of households would pay any. The purpose
of the income tax was to make up for revenue that would be lost by tariff
reductions. Also, the Panic of 1893 is said to have something to do with the
passage of Wilson-Gorman. In 1895 the United States Supreme Court, in its
ruling in "Pollock v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co.," held a tax based on receipts
from the use of property to be unconstitutional. The Court held that taxes on
rents from real estate, on interest income from personal property and other
income from personal property (which includes dividend income) were treated as
direct taxes on property, and therefore had to be apportioned. Since
apportionment of income taxes is impractical, this had the effect of
prohibiting a federal tax on income from property. However, the Court affirmed
that the Constitution did not deny Congress the power to impose a tax on real
and personal property, and it affirmed that such would be a direct tax. Due to
the political difficulties of taxing individual wages without taxing income
from property, a federal income tax was impractical from the time of the
"Pollock" decision until the time of ratification of the 16th Amendment in
1913. In 1913, the Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution made
the income tax a permanent fixture in the U.S. tax system. The United States
Supreme Court in its ruling "Stanton v. Baltic Mining Co." stated that the
amendment conferred no new power of taxation but simply prevented the courts
from taking the power of income taxation possessed by Congress from the
beginning out of the category of indirect taxation to which it inherently
belongs. In fiscal year 1918, annual internal revenue collections for the first
time passed the billion-dollar mark, rising to $5.4 billion by 1920. With the
advent of World War II, employment increased, as did tax collectionsâ€”to $7.3
billion. The withholding tax on wages was introduced in 1943 and was
instrumental in increasing the number of taxpayers to 60 million and tax
collections to $43 billion by 1945. Around the world. Income taxes are used in
most countries around the world. The tax systems vary greatly and can be
progressive, proportional, or regressive, depending on the type of tax.
Comparison of tax rates around the world is a difficult and somewhat subjective
enterprise. Tax laws in most countries are extremely complex, and tax burden
falls differently on different groups in each country and sub-national unit. Of
course, services provided by governments in return for taxation also vary,
making comparisons all the more difficult. Countries that tax income generally
use one of two systems: territorial or residential. In the territorial system,
only local income â€“ income from a source inside the country â€“ is taxed. In
the residential system, residents of the country are taxed on their worldwide
(local and foreign) income, while nonresidents are taxed only on their local
income. In addition, a very small number of countries, notably the United
States, also tax their nonresident citizens on worldwide income. Countries with
a residential system of taxation usually allow deductions or credits for the
tax that residents already pay to other countries on their foreign income. Many
countries also sign tax treaties with each other to eliminate or reduce double
taxation. Countries do not necessarily use the same system of taxation for
individuals and corporations. For example, France uses a residential system for
individuals but a territorial system for corporations,International tax -
France Highlights 2012, Deloitte. while Singapore does the
opposite,International tax - Singapore Highlights 2012, Deloitte. and Brunei
taxes corporate but not personal income.International tax - Brunei Darussalam
Highlights 2012, Deloitte. Transparency/public disclosure. Public disclosure of
personal income tax filings occurs in Finland and Norway.
