Income inequality metrics The concept of inequality is distinct from that of
poverty and fairness. Income inequality metrics or income distribution metrics
are used by social scientists to measure the distribution of income, and
economic inequality among the participants in a particular economy, such as
that of a specific country or of the world in general. While different theories
may try to explain how income inequality comes about, income inequality metrics
simply provide a system of measurement used to determine the dispersion of
incomes. Income distribution has always been a central concern of economic
theory and economic policy. Classical economists such as Adam Smith, Thomas
Malthus and David Ricardo were mainly concerned with factor income
distribution, that is, the distribution of income between the main factors of
production, land, labour and capital. It is often related to wealth
distribution although separate factors influence wealth inequality. Modern
economists have also addressed this issue, but have been more concerned with
the distribution of income across individuals and households. Important
theoretical and policy concerns include the relationship between income
inequality and economic growth. The article Economic inequality discusses the
social and policy aspects of income distribution questions. Defining income.
All of the metrics described below are applicable to evaluating the
distributional inequality of various kinds of resources. Here the focus is on
income as a resource. As there are various forms of "income", the investigated
kind of income has to be clearly described. One form of income is the total
amount of goods and services that a person receives, and thus there is not
necessarily money or cash involved. If a subsistence farmer in Uganda grows his
own grain it will count as income. Services like public health and education
are also counted in. Often expenditure or consumption (which is the same in an
economic sense) is used to measure income. The World Bank uses the so-called
"living standard measurement surveys" to measure income. These consist of
questionnaires with more than 200 questions. Surveys have been completed in
most developing countries. Applied to the analysis of income inequality within
countries, "income" often stands for the taxed income per individual or per
household. Here income inequality measures also can be used to compare the
income distributions before and after taxation in order to measure the effects
of progressive tax rates. Properties of inequality metrics. Anonymity. This
assumption states that an inequality metric does not depend on the "labeling"
of individuals in an economy and all that matters is the distribution of
income. For example, in an economy composed of two people, Mr. Smith and Mrs.
Jones, where one of them has 60% of the income and the other 40%, the
inequality metric should be the same whether it is Mr. Smith or Mrs. Jones who
has the 40% share. This property distinguishes the concept of inequality from
that of fairness where who owns a particular level of income and how it has
been acquired is of central importance. An inequality metric is a statement
simply about how income is distributed, not about who the particular people in
the economy are or what kind of income they "deserve". Scale independence. This
property says that richer economies should not be automatically considered more
unequal by construction. In other words, if every person's income in an economy
is doubled (or multiplied by any positive constant) then the overall metric of
inequality should not change. Of course the same thing applies to poorer
economies. The inequality income metric should be independent of the aggregate
level of income. Population independence. Similarly, the income inequality
metric should not depend on whether an economy has a large or small population.
An economy with only a few people should not be automatically judged by the
metric as being more equal than a large economy with lots of people. This means
that the metric should be independent of the level of population. Transfer
principle. The Pigouâ€“Dalton, or transfer, principle is the assumption that
makes an inequality metric actually a measure of inequality. In its weak form
it says that if some income is transferred from a rich person to a poor person,
while still preserving the order of income ranks, then the measured inequality
should not increase. In its strong form, the measured level of inequality
should decrease. Common income inequality metrics. Among the most common
metrics used to measure inequality are the Gini index (also known as Gini
coefficient), the Theil index, and the Hoover index. They have all four
properties described above. An additional property of an inequality metric that
may be desirable from an empirical point of view is that of 'decomposability'.
This means that if a particular economy is broken down into sub-regions, and an
inequality metric is computed for each sub region separately, then the measure
of inequality for the economy as a whole should be a weighted average of the
regional inequalities (in a weaker form, it means that it should be an explicit
function of sub-regional inequalities, though not necessarily linear). Of the
above indexes, only the Theil index has this property. Because these income
inequality metrics are summary statistics that seek to aggregate an entire
distribution of incomes into a single index, the information on the measured
inequality is reduced. This information reduction of course is the goal of
computing inequality measures, as it reduces complexity. A weaker reduction of
complexity is achieved if income distributions are described by shares of total
income. Rather than to indicate a single measure, the society under
investigation is split into segments, e.g. into quintiles (or any other
percentage of population). Usually each segment contains the same share of
income earners. In case of an unequal income distribution, the shares of income
available in each segment are different. In many cases the inequality indices
mentioned above are computed from such segment data without evaluating the
inequalities within the segments. The higher the amount of segments (e.g.
deciles instead of quintiles), the closer the measured inequality of
distribution gets to the real inequality. (If the inequality within the
segments is known, the total inequality can be determined by those inequality
metrics which have the property of being "decomposable".) Quintile measures of
inequality satisfy the transfer principle only in its weak form because any
changes in income distribution outside the relevant quintiles are not picked up
by this measures; only the distribution of income between the very rich and the
very poor matters while inequality in the middle plays no role. Details of the
three inequality measures are described in the respective Wikipedia articles.
The following subsections cover them only briefly. Gini index. The range of the
Gini index is between 0 and 1 (0% and 100%), where 0 indicates perfect equality
and 1 (100%) indicates maximum inequality. The Gini index is the most
frequently used inequality index. The reason for its popularity is that it is
easy to understand how to compute the Gini index as a ratio of two areas in
Lorenz curve diagrams. As a disadvantage, the Gini index only maps a number to
the properties of a diagram, but the diagram itself is not based on any model
of a distribution process. The "meaning" of the Gini index only can be
understood empirically. Additionally the Gini does not capture where in the
distribution the inequality occurs. As a result two very different
distributions of income can have the same Gini index. Hoover index. The Hoover
index is the simplest of all inequality measures to calculate: It is the
proportion of all income which would have to be redistributed to achieve a
state of perfect equality. In a perfectly equal world, no resources would need
to be redistributed to achieve equal distribution: a Hoover index of 0. In a
world in which all income was received by just one family, almost 100% of that
income would need to be redistributed (i.e., taken and given to other families)
in order to achieve equality. The Hoover index then ranges between 0 and 1 (0%
and 100%), where 0 indicates perfect equality and 1 (100%) indicates maximum
inequality. Theil index. A Theil index of 0 indicates perfect equality. A Theil
index of 1 indicates that the distributional entropy of the system under
investigation is almost similar to a system with an 82:18 distribution. This is
slightly more unequal than the inequality in a system to which the "80:20
Pareto principle" applies. The Theil index can be transformed into an Atkinson
index, which has a range between 0 and 1 (0% and 100%), where 0 indicates
perfect equality and 1 (100%) indicates maximum inequality. The Theil index is
an entropy measure. As for any resource distribution and with reference to
information theory, "maximum entropy" occurs once income earners cannot be
distinguished by their resources, i.e. when there is perfect equality. In real
societies people can be distinguished by their different resources, with the
resources being incomes. The more "distinguishable" they are, the lower is the
"actual entropy" of a system consisting of income and income earners. Also
based on information theory, the gap between these two entropies can be called
"redundancy". It behaves like a negative entropy. For the Theil index also the
term "Theil entropy" had been used. This caused confusion. As an example,
Amartya Sen commented on the Theil index, "given the association of doom with
entropy in the context of thermodynamics, it may take a little time to get used
to entropy as a good thing." It is important to understand that an increasing
Theil index "does not" indicate an increasing entropy, instead it indicates an
increasing redundancy (decreasing entropy). High inequality yields high Theil
redundancies. High redundancy means low entropy. But this does not necessarily
imply that a very high inequality is "good", because very low entropies also
can lead to explosive compensation processes. Neither does using the Theil
index necessarily imply that a very low inequality (low redundancy, high
entropy) is "good", because high entropy is associated with slow, weak and
inefficient resource allocation processes. There are three variants of the
Theil index. When applied to income distributions, the first Theil index
relates to systems within which incomes are stochastically distributed to
income earners, whereas the second Theil index relates to systems within which
income earners are stochastically distributed to incomes. A third "symmetrized"
Theil index is the arithmetic average of the two previous indices.
Interestingly, the formula of the third Theil index has some similarity with
the Hoover index (as explained in the related articles). As in case of the
Hoover index, the symmetrized Theil index does not change when swapping the
incomes with the income earners. How to generate that third Theil index by
means of a spreadsheet computation directly from distribution data is shown
below. An important property of the Theil index which makes its application
popular is its decomposability into the between-group and within-group
component. For example, the Theil index of overall income inequality can be
decomposed in the between-region and within region components of inequality,
while the relative share attributable to the between-region component suggests
the relative importance of spatial dimension of income inequality. Comparison
of the Theil index and the Hoover index. Theil index indicates the
distributional redundancy of a system, within which incomes are assigned to
income earners in a stochastic process. In comparison, the Hoover index
indicates the minimum size of the income share of a society, which would have
to be redistributed in order to reach maximum entropy. Not to exceed that
minimum size would require a perfectly planned redistribution. Therefore the
Hoover index is the "non-stochastic" counterpart to the "stochastic" Theil
index. Applying the Theil index to allocation processes in the real world does
"not" imply that these processes are stochastic: the Theil yields the
"distance" between an ordered resource distribution in an observed system to
the final stage of stochastic resource distribution in a closed system.
Similarly, applying the Hoover index does "not" imply that allocation processes
occur in a perfectly planned economy: the Hoover index yields the "distance"
between the resource distribution in an observed system to the final stage of a
planned "equalization" of resource distribution. For both indices, such an
equalization only serves as a reference, not as a goal. In order to increase
the redundancy in the distribution category of a society as a closed system,
entropy needs to be exported from the subsystem operating in the that economic
category to other subsystems with other entropy categories in the society. For
example, social entropy may increase. However, in the real world, societies are
open systems, but the openness is restricted by the entropy exchange
capabilities of the interfaces between the society and the environment of that
society. For societies with a resource distribution which entropywise is
similar to the resource distribution of a reference society with a 73:27 split
(73% of the resources belong to 27% of the population and vice versa), the
point where the Hoover index and the Theil index are equal, is at a value of
around 46% (0.46) for the Hoover index and the Theil index. Ratios. Another
common class of metrics is to take the ratio of the income of two different
groups, generally "higher over lower". This compares two "parts" of the income
distribution, rather than the distribution as a whole; equality between these
parts corresponds to 1:1, while the more unequal the parts, the greater the
ratio. These statistics are easy to interpret and communicate, because they are
relative (this population earns twice as much as this population), but, since
they do not fall on an absolute scale, do not provide an absolute measure of
inequality. Ratio of percentiles. Particularly common to compare a given
percentile to the median, as in the chart at right; compare seven-number
summary, which summarizes a distribution by certain percentiles. While such
ratios do not represent the "overall level" of inequality in the population as
a whole, they provide measures of the "shape" of income distribution. For
example, the attached graph shows that in the period 1967â€“2003, US income
ratio between median and 10th and 20th percentile did not change significantly,
while the ratio between the median and 80th, 90th, and 95th percentile
increased. This reflects that the increase in the Gini coefficient of the US in
this time period is due to gains by upper income earners (relative to the
median), rather than by losses by lower income earners (relative to the
median). Share of income. A related class of ratios is "income share" â€“ what
percentage of national income a subpopulation accounts for. Taking the ration
of income share to subpopulation size corresponds to a ratio of "mean"
subpopulation income relative to "mean" income. Because income distribution is
generally positively skewed, mean is higher than median, so ratios to mean are
lower than ratios to median. This is particularly used to measure that fraction
of income accruing to top earners â€“ top 10%, 1%, .1%, .01% (1 in 10, in 100,
in 1,000, in 10,000), and also "top 100" earners or the like; in the US top 400
earners is .0002% of earners (2 in 1,000,0000) â€“ to study concentration of
income â€“ wealth condensation, or rather income condensation. For example, in
the chart at right, US income share of top earners was approximately constant
from the mid 1950s to the mid 1980s, then increased from the mid-1980s through
2000s; this increased inequality was reflected in the Gini coefficient. For
example, in 2007 the top decile (10%) of US earners accounted for 49.7% of
total wages (formula_1 times fraction under equality), and the top 0.01% of US
earners accounted for 6% of total wages (600 times fraction under equality).
Spreadsheet computations. The Gini coefficient, the Hoover index and the Theil
index as well as the related welfare functions can be computed together in a
spreadsheet. The welfare functions serve as alternatives to the median income.
In the table, fields with a yellow background are used for data input. From
these data inequality measures as well as the related welfare functions are
computed and displayed in fields with green background. In the example given
here, "Theil index" stands for the arithmetic mean of a Theil index computed
for the distribution of income within a society to the individuals (or
households) in that society and a Theil index computed for the distribution of
the individuals (or households) in the society to the income of that society.
The difference between the Theil index and the Hoover index is the weighting of
the relative deviation D. For the Hoover index the relative deviation D per
group is weighted with its own sign. For the Theil index the relative deviation
D per group is weighted with the information size provided by the income per
individual in that group. For the computation the society usually is divided
into income groups. Often there are four or five groups consisting of a similar
amount of individuals in each group. In other cases the groups are created
based on income ranges which leads to having different amounts of individuals
in the different groups. The table above shows a computation of inequality
indices for four groups. For each group the amount of individuals (or
households) per group A and the total income in that group E is specified. The
parameter pairs A and E need to be sorted for the computation of the Gini
coefficient. (For the Theil index and the Hoover index no sorting is required.)
A and E has the be sorted so that the values in the column "Income per
individual" are lined up in ascending order. Proper use of income inequality
metrics. Keeping these points in mind helps to understand the problems caused
by the improper use of inequality measures. However, they do not render
inequality coefficients invalid. If inequality measures are computed in a well
explained and "consistent" way, they can provide a good tool for quantitative
comparisons of inequalities. Inequality, growth, and progress. There is
evidence from a broad panel of recent academic studies shows that there is a
nonlinear relation between income inequality and the rate of growth and
investment. Very high inequality slows growth; moderate inequality encourages
growth. Studies differ on the effect of very low inequality. Robert J. Barro,
Harvard University found in his study "Inequality and Growth in a Panel of
Countries" that higher inequality tends to retard growth in poor countries and
encourage growth in well-developed regions. In their study for the World
Institute for Development Economics Research, Giovanni Andrea Cornia and Julius
Court (2001) reach slightly different conclusions. The authors therefore
recommend to pursue moderation also as to the distribution of wealth and
particularly to avoid the extremes. Both very high egalitarianism and very high
inequality cause slow growth. Considering the inequalities in economically well
developed countries, public policy should target an â€˜efficient inequality
rangeâ€™. The authors claim that such efficiency range roughly lies between the
values of the Gini coefficients of 0.25 (the inequality value of a typical
Northern European country) and 0.40 (that of countries such as the USA, France,
Germany and the UK). Another researcher (W.Kitterer) has shown that in perfect
markets inequality does not influence growth. The precise shape of the
inequality-growth curve obviously varies across countries depending upon their
resource endowment, history, remaining levels of absolute poverty and available
stock of social programs, as well as on the distribution of physical and human
capital.
