Independent Australian Jewish Voices Independent Australian Jewish Voices
(IAJV) is an Australian Jewish advocacy organisation. IAJV was launched on
March 5, 2007 following the emergence of similar groups overseas in Britain
(Independent Jewish Voices) and Germany (Schalom 5767), and earlier in the US
(Jewish Voice for Peace), and Netherlands (Een Ander Joods Geluid). The IAJV
statement of principles was published in the leading Australian newspapers with
120 signatories, including prominent Australian academics, writers and lawyers.
Only three weeks after the launch, the number of signatories was over 450 and
more than that of the British group. In common with other such groups, IAJV is
concerned about the narrow range of opinion and fact that is available in the
mainstream media on Israel/Palestine and also with the uncritical stance of the
leadership of the organized Jewish community. The original statement criticized
the vilification of dissenting Jews as self-hating or disloyal. Response. Colin
Rubenstein, executive director of the Australia/Israel & Jewish Affairs
Council, described IAJV as "dangerous and unrepresentative" and said that "some
of the individuals are clearly committed to the delegitimization of Israel."
IAJV's statement of principles states "that Israel's right to exist must be
recognised and that Palestinians' right to a homeland must also be
acknowledged". , IAJV says its search for peace in the Middle East represents a
legitimate opinion "and should be met by reasoned argument rather than
vilification and intimidation".
