Indirect election Indirect election is a process in which voters in an election
do not actually choose between candidates for an office but rather elect
persons who will then make the choice. It is one of the oldest form of
elections and is still used today for many upper houses and presidents. This
process is also used in many union elections and sometimes in professional,
civic, and fraternal organizations. Many countries with parliamentary systems
elect their president indirectly (Germany, Italy, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Latvia, Hungary, India, Israel). In a Westminster system, the leader of the
majority party in the parliament almost always becomes the prime minister.
Therefore, it could be said that the prime minister is elected indirectly. In
Spain, the Congress of Deputies votes on a motion of confidence of the king's
nominee (customarily the party leader whose party controls the Congress) and
the nominee's political manifesto, an example of an indirect election of the
Prime Minister of Spain. Indirect political elections have been used for lesser
national offices, as well. In the United States, the Senate was elected by the
legislatures of the states until 1913, when the Seventeenth Amendment
instituted direct elections for those office-holders. In France, election to
the upper house of Parliament, the Sénat, is indirect, with the electors
(called "grands électeurs") being local elected representatives. The Electoral
College of the United States, whose task is to elect a president, is a form of
indirect election. However, electors rarely change their actual vote from their
pledged vote. Although historically some electors have changed their pledge
vote (referred to as faithless electors), including in the 2000 election, this
factor has never made the difference in an election.
