Indifference curve In microeconomic theory, an indifference curve is a graph
showing different bundles of goods between which a consumer is "indifferent."
That is, at each point on the curve, the consumer has no preference for one
bundle over another. One can equivalently refer to each point on the
indifference curve as rendering the same level of utility (satisfaction) for
the consumer. Utility is then a device to represent preferences rather than
something from which preferences come. The main use of indifference curves is
in the representation of potentially observable demand patterns for individual
consumers over commodity bundles. There are infinitely many indifference
curves: one passes through each combination. A collection of (selected)
indifference curves, illustrated graphically, is referred to as an indifference
map. History. The theory of indifference curves was developed by Francis Ysidro
Edgeworth, who explained in his book "Mathematical Psychics: an Essay on the
Application of Mathematics to the Moral Sciences‚Äù, 1881, the mathematics
needed for its drawing; later on, Vilfredo Pareto was the first author to
actually draw these curves, in his book "Manual of Political Economy", 1906;
and others in the first part of the 20th century. The theory can be derived
from William Stanley Jevons's ordinal utility theory, which posits that
individuals can always rank any consumption bundles by order of preference. Map
and properties of indifference curves. A graph of indifference curves for an
individual consumer associated with different utility levels is called an
indifference map. Points yielding different utility levels are each associated
with distinct indifference curves and is like a contour line on a topographical
map. Each point on the curve represents the same elevation. If you move "off"
an indifference curve traveling in a northeast direction (assuming positive
marginal utility for the goods) you are essentially climbing a mound of
utility. The higher you go the greater the level of utility. The non-satiation
requirement means that you will never reach the "top", or a "bliss point", a
consumption bundle that is preferred to all others The negative slope of the
indifference curve implies that the marginal rate of substitution is always
negative; Assumptions of consumer preference theory. It also implies that the
commodities are good rather than bad. Examples of bad commodities can be
disease, pollution etc. because we always desire less of such things.
Application. Consumer theory uses indifference curves and budget constraints to
generate consumer demand curves. For a single consumer, this is a relatively
simple process. First, let one good be an example market e.g., carrots, and let
the other be a composite of all other goods. Budget constraints give a straight
line on the indifference map showing all the possible distributions between the
two goods; the point of maximum utility is then the point at which an
indifference curve is tangent to the budget line (illustrated). This follows
from common sense: if the market values a good more than the household, the
household will sell it; if the market values a good less than the household,
the household will buy it. The process then continues until the market's and
household's marginal rates of substitution are equal. Now, if the price of
carrots were to change, and the price of all other goods were to remain
constant, the gradient of the budget line would also change, leading to a
different point of tangency and a different quantity demanded. These price /
quantity combinations can then be used to deduce a full demand curve. A line
connecting all points of tangency between the indifference curve and the budget
constraint is called the expansion path. Examples of indifference curves. File:
Simple-indifference-curves.svg|Figure 1: An example of an indifference map with
three indifference curves represented File:Indifference-curves-perfect-
substitutes.svg|Figure 2: Three indifference curves where Goods X and Y are
perfect substitutes. The gray line perpendicular to all curves indicates the
curves are mutually parallel. File:Indifference-curves-perfect-
complements.svg|Figure 3: Indifference curves for perfect complements X and Y.
The elbows of the curves are collinear.  In Figure 1, the consumer would rather
be on "I3" than "I2", and would rather be on "I2" than "I1", but does not care
where he/she is on a given indifference curve. The slope of an indifference
curve (in absolute value), known by economists as the marginal rate of
substitution, shows the rate at which consumers are willing to give up one good
in exchange for more of the other good. For "most" goods the marginal rate of
substitution is not constant so their indifference curves are curved. The
curves are convex to the origin, describing the negative substitution effect.
As price rises for a fixed money income, the consumer seeks less the expensive
substitute at a lower indifference curve. The substitution effect is reinforced
through the income effect of lower real income (Beattie-LaFrance). An example
of a utility function that generates indifference curves of this kind is the
Cobb-Douglas function formula_1. The negative slope of the indifference curve
incorporates the willingness of the consumer to make trade offs. If two goods
are perfect substitutes then the indifference curves will have a constant slope
since the consumer would be willing to switch between at a fixed ratio. The
marginal rate of substitution between perfect substitutes is likewise constant.
An example of a utility function that is associated with indifference curves
like these would be formula_2. If two goods are perfect complements then the
indifference curves will be L-shaped. Examples of perfect complements include
left shoes compared to right shoes: the consumer is no better off having
several right shoes if she has only one left shoe - additional right shoes have
zero marginal utility without more left shoes, so bundles of goods differing
only in the number of right shoes they includes - however many - are equally
preferred. The marginal rate of substitution is either zero or infinite. An
example of the type of utility function that has an indifference map like that
above is formula_3. Preference relations and utility. Choice theory formally
represents consumers by a preference relation, and use this representation to
derive indifference curves showing combinations of equal preference to the
consumer. Preference relations. Let In the language of the example above, the
set formula_4 is made of combinations of apples and bananas. The symbol
formula_5 is one such combination, such as 1 apple and 4 bananas and formula_6
is another combination such as 2 apples and 2 bananas. A preference relation,
denoted formula_11, is a binary relation define on the set formula_4. The
statement is described as 'formula_5 is weakly preferred to formula_6.' That
is, formula_5 is at least as good as formula_6 (in preference satisfaction).
The statement is described as 'formula_5 is weakly preferred to formula_6, and
formula_6 is weakly preferred to formula_5.' That is, one is "indifferent" to
the choice of formula_5 or formula_6, meaning not that they are unwanted but
that they are equally good in satisfying preferences. The statement is
described as 'formula_5 is weakly preferred to formula_6, but formula_6 is not
weakly preferred to formula_5.' One says that 'formula_5 is strictly preferred
to formula_6.' The preference relation formula_11 is complete if all pairs
formula_33 can be ranked. The relation is a transitive relation if whenever
formula_13 and formula_35 then formula_36. For any element formula_37, the
corresponding indifference curve, formula_38 is made up of all elements of
formula_4 which are indifferent to formula_40. Formally, formula_38=formula_42.
Formal link to utility theory. In the example above, an element formula_5 of
the set formula_4 is made of two numbers: The number of apples, call it
formula_45 and the number of bananas, call it formula_46 In utility theory, the
utility function of an agent is a function that ranks "all" pairs of
consumption bundles by order of preference ("completeness") such that any set
of three or more bundles forms a transitive relation. This means that for each
bundle formula_47 there is a unique relation, formula_48, representing the
utility (satisfaction) relation associated with formula_47. The relation
formula_50 is called the utility function. The range of the function is a set
of real numbers. The actual values of the function have no importance. Only the
ranking of those values has content for the theory. More precisely, if
formula_51, then the bundle formula_47 is described as at least as good as the
bundle formula_53. If formula_54, the bundle formula_47 is described as
strictly preferred to the bundle formula_53. where formula_61 is the partial
derivative of formula_48 with respect to its first argument, evaluated at
formula_47. (Likewise for formula_64) Thus, the ratio of marginal utilities
gives the absolute value of the slope of the indifference curve at point
formula_57. This ratio is called the marginal rate of substitution between
formula_67 and formula_69. Examples. Linear utility. If the utility function is
of the form formula_76 then the marginal utility of formula_67 is formula_78
and the marginal utility of formula_69 is formula_80. The slope of the
indifference curve is, therefore, Observe that the slope does not depend on
formula_67 or formula_69: the indifference curves are straight lines. Cobb-
Douglas utility. If the utility function is of the form formula_84 the marginal
utility of formula_67 is formula_86 and the marginal utility of formula_69 is
formula_88.Where formula_89. The slope of the indifference curve, and therefore
the negative of the marginal rate of substitution, is then CES utility. A
general CES (Constant Elasticity of Substitution) form is where formula_92 and
formula_93. (The Cobb-Douglas is a special case of the CES utility, with
formula_94.) The marginal utilities are given by and Therefore, along an
indifference curve, These examples might be useful for modelling individual or
aggregate demand. Biology. As used in Biology, the indifference curve is a
model for how animals 'decide' whether to perform a particular behavior, based
on changes in two variables which can increase in intensity, one along the x-
axis and the other along the y-axis. For example, the x-axis may measure the
quantity of food available while the y-axis measures the risk involved in
obtaining it. The indifference curve is drawn to predict the animal's behavior
at various levels of risk and food availability.
