Indybay Indybay is the San Francisco Bay Area Independent Media Center, an all-
volunteer organization which operates a community news website, "Indybay.org",
and in June 2004, began publishing a free news magazine, "Fault Lines".
Foundation. Indybay was established in early 2000; the domain name was
registered on March 23, 2000; and by August 23, 2000, the website was online
and functional. Focus. Indybay was initially closely tied to Media Alliance, a
San Francisco based media resource and advocacy center for media workers, non-
profit organizations, and social justice activists. One early Indybay project
was a page exposing bad landlords. Another event that helped pull in many early
Indybay volunteers was the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB)
Conference that took place in September 2000 in San Francisco. Indybay soon
broadened its coverage. Local labor struggles, forest activism in Northern
California and police brutality were quickly a focus of the early site. After
2001, Indybay developed more of a focus on antiwar protests and immigration
issues. In 2002 new pages were added focusing on LGBT issues, Women's Rights,
Local Electoral Issues and specific international conflicts. Animal Liberation
was added as a page a year later. In 2004 Regional Pages were added and the
Central Valley became a page partly run by its own collective. Santa Cruz
Independent Media Center started as its own separate site, but regionally
integrated with Indybay in January 2006 as an autonomous page run by its own
collective. Local reporters regularly post from the South Bay, the North Bay
and the North Coast.
