Group conflict Group conflict, or hostilities between different groups, is a
pervasive feature common to all levels of social organization (e.g., sports
teams, ethnic groups, nations, religions, gangs). Although group conflict is
one of the most complex phenomena studied by social scientists, the history of
the human race evidences a series of group-level conflicts that have gained
notoriety over the years. For example, from 1820 to 1945, it has been estimated
that at least 59 million persons were killed during conflicts between groups of
one type or another. Literature suggests that the number of fatalities nearly
doubled between the years 1914 to 1964 as a result of further group conflict.
Group conflict can be separated into two sub-categories of conflict: inter-
group conflict (in which distinct groups of individuals are at odds with one
another), and intra-group conflict (in which select individuals a part of the
same group clash with one another). Although both forms of conflict have the
ability to spiral upward in severity, it has been noted that conflict present
at the group level (i.e., inter-group rivalries) is generally considered to be
more powerful than conflict present at an individual level â€“ a phenomenon
known as the discontinuity effect. Intergroup conflict. Sources of intergroup
conflict. Social psychology, specifically the discontinuity effect of inter-
group conflict, suggests that 'groups are generally even more competitive and
aggressive than individuals'. Two main sources of intergroup conflict have been
identified: 'competition for valued material resources, according to realistic
conflict theory, or for social rewards like respect and esteem...as described
by relative deprivation theory ' Group conflict can easily enter an escalating
spiral of hostility marked by polarisation of views into black and white, with
comparable actions viewed in diametrically opposite ways: 'we offer
concessions, but they attempt to lure us with ploys. We are steadfast and
courageous, but they are unyielding, irrational, stubborn, and blinded by
ideology'. It is widely believed that intergroup and intragroup hostility are
(at least to some degree) inversely related: that 'there is, unhappily, an
inverse relationship between external wars and internal strife'. Thus 'in
politics, for example, everyone can get an extraordinarily comforting feeling
of mutual support from their group by focussing on an enemy'. Freud described a
similarly quasi-benign version, whereby 'it is precisely communities with
adjoining territories, and related to each other in other ways as well, who are
engaged in constant feuds and ridiculing each other - like the Spaniards and
Portuguese, for instance... a convenient and relatively harmless satisfaction
of the inclination to aggression, by means of which cohesion between the
members of the community is made easier'. The harder version of the theory
would suggest that 'pent-up sub-group aggression, if it cannot combine with the
pent-up aggression of other sub-groups to attack a common, foreign enemy, will
vent itself in the form of riots, persecutions and rebellions'. Belief domains
that contribute to intergroup conflict. Superiority: At an individual level,
this belief revolves around a person's enduring notion that he or she is better
than other people in important ways. At the group level, this translates into
the belief that one's own group has a superior cultural heritage (e.g.,
history, values, language, tradition). The development of Hitler's ideology of
Aryans as a 'master' race is one example of this belief. Injustice: At the
individual level, this belief revolves around perceived mistreatment by others,
and/or the world at large. At the group level, this translates to a worldview
that the ingroup has significant and legitimate grievances against an outgroup.
This belief is seen as contributing greatly to the impetus for war over the
past two centuries, as the majority of wars in that time period have centered
on issues of "justice" rather than security or power (Welch, 1993).
Vulnerability: At the individual level, vulnerability refers to a person's
belief that he or she is living perpetually in harm's way. At the group level,
this belief is manifested in the form of fears about the future. Chirot (2001)
notes that the genocides of Armenia, Germany, Cambodia, and Rwanda shared a
common belief that "if they did not destroy their real or imagined enemies
first, they would themselves be annihilated" (p.Â 10). Distrust: At the
individual level, this belief focuses on the presumed intent of others to cause
harm and/or exhibit hostility. The notion of trust is often seen by
psychologists as the first challenge of psychsocial development. At the group
level, this worldview focuses specifically on the perspective that outgroups
and dishonest and untrustworthy. In more extreme manifestations, this belief is
similar to "collective paranoia", which is defined as collectively held
beliefs, either false or exaggerated that cluster around ideas of being harmed,
harassed, threatened, or otherwise disaparaged by malevolent outgroups
Helplessness: At the individual level, helplessness focuses on the belief that
even carefully planned and executed actions will fail to produce the desired
outcome. When taken at the group level, it translates into a collective mindset
of powerlessness and dependency. Helplessness, when it exists as a shared
belief within a group, serves as a constraint on organized political movement,
as those who participate in a social movement must see themselves as capable of
righting the wrongs they perceive. Intragroup conflict (infighting). Sources of
intragroup conflict. Task Conflict: Task conflict arises when intra-group
members disagree on issues that are relevant to meeting shared goals. Effective
groups and organizations make use of these conflicts to make plans, foster
creativity, solve problems and resolve misunderstandings. However, people who
disagree with the group do so at their own peril, even when their position is
reasonable. Dissenters often receive a high level of animosity from other group
members, are less well-liked, assigned low-status tasks, and are sometimes
ostracized. Process Conflict: Process conflict refers to disagreement over the
methods or procedures the group should use in order to complete its tasks. It
occurs when strategies, policies, and procedures clash. For example, some group
members may suggest discussing conflicting ideas, while other group members
prefer to put conflicting ideas to a vote. In essence, during procedural
conflicts, group members disagree on "how" to disagree. Situations of
procedural conflict can be preemptively minimized by adopting formal rules
(e.g., bylaws, constitutions, statements of policies) that specify goals,
decisional processes, and responsibilities. Personal Conflict: Personal
conflicts, also known as affective conflicts, personality conflicts, emotional
conflicts, or relationship conflicts, are conflicts that occur when group
members dislike one another. Personal dislikes do not always result in
conflict, but people often mention their negative feelings toward another group
member when complaining about their groups. Also, there is evidence that a
large proportion of group conflicts are indeed personal conflicts. One study of
high level corporate executives revealed that 40% of disputes were due to
"individual enmity between the principals without specific reference to other
issues" (Morrill, 1995, p.Â 69). Criticism, when one person evaluates another,
or his/her work negatively, is one common cause of personal conflict.
Political. Opinion is divided about the merits of infighting in political
movements. Whereas 'the majority of scholars view infighting as sapping
political potency', others argue that 'infighting's value lay in its potential
to generate strategic possibilities and promote...accountability', and that (at
least with respect to identity politics) 'infighting is a key site for
culture...concretizes cultural conversations'. Among extremists 'threatened by
the existence of "anyone" else, unless that other person's views seem identical
to his own', however, infighting and group fissions become the destructive
norm: 'they're all splitting up so fast...they seem to attack each other more
than they attack their "real enemies" on the other side of the political
spectrum'. Small group. Within small goups, the same dichotomy exists. Granted
that both constructive and destructive conflict occurs in most small groups, it
is very important to accentuate the constructive conflict and minimize the
destructive conflict. Conflict is bound to happen, but if used constructively
need not be a bad thing. Using constructive conflict within small groups by
bringing up problems and alternative solutions (while still valuing others)
allows the group to work forward. While 'conflict may involve interpersonal as
well as task issues', keeping a window open for dissent can prove very
advantageous, as where a company 'reaped big benefits because it did not simply
try to suppress conflict, but allowed minority influence to prevail'. On the
other hand, there is evidence that an organizational culture of disrespect
unproductively 'generates a morass of status games and infighting..."it's made
people turn against each other"' - so that for example 'sexual harassment
becomes a chronic accompaniment to broader patterns of infighting'.
Perspectives. Psychology. Lacan saw the roots of intra-group aggression in a
regression to the 'narcissistic moment in the subject', highlighting 'the
aggressivity involved in the effects of all regression, all arrested
development, all rejection of typical development in the subject'. Neville
Symington also saw narcissism as a key element in group conflict, singling out
'organizations so riven by narcissistic currents that...little creative work
was done'. Such settings provide an opening for 'many egoistic instinct-
feelings - as the desire to dominate and humiliate your fellow, the love of
conflict - your courage and power against mine - the satisfaction of being the
object of jealousy, the pleasures derived from the exercise of cunning, deceit
and concealment'. Nevertheless, for all their insights, psychologists have not
been able to evade the constraints of group conflict themselves: 'Envy,
rivalry, power conflicts, the formation of small groups, resulting in discord
and intrigue, are a matter of course' in the psychoanalytic world, for example,
with institutions being 'caught up in the factionalism of the ...struggle
between the ins and the outs'. Girard. RenÃ© Girard saw 'collective violence as
sacred... the "great remedy" for communal life'. He saw the violence directed
at the group scapegoat as 'absorbing all the internal tensions, feuds, and
rivalries pent up within the community...a deliberate act of collective
substitution'. His view parallels the Freudian approach, rooted in Totem and
Taboo, which considers that 'transgression... is at the origin of a higher
complexity, something to which the realm of civilization owes its development'.
Freud saw violence as standing at the root of the social bond - 'what prevails
is no longer the violence of an individual but that of a community' - and thus
'politics made out of delinquency...the social contract establishes corporate
virtue as an asylum for individual sin'. Girard concluded therefore that
regression and 'the dissolution of differences encourages the proliferation of
the double bind...spells the disintegration of social institutions', to reveal
the group conflict latent at their core.
