Information economics Information economics or the economics of information is
a branch of microeconomic theory that studies how information affects an
economy and economic decisions. Information has special characteristics. It is
easy to create but hard to trust. It is easy to spread but hard to control. It
influences many decisions. These special characteristics (as compared with
other types of goods) complicate many standard economic theories.ย ย  โข
_____, 1996. "The Economics of Information: An Exposition," "Empirica", 23(2),
pp.ย 119-128.ย ย  โข _____, 1984. "Collected Papers of Kenneth J. Arrow", v.
4, "The Economics of Information". Description and chapter-preview links.ย ย 
โข Jean-Jacques Laffont, 1989. "The Economics of Uncertainty and Information",
MIT Press. Description and chapter-preview links. The subject of "information
economics" is treated under "Journal of Economic Literature" classification
code . The present article reflects topics included in that code. There are
several subfields of information economics. Information as signal has been
described as kind of negative measure of uncertainty It includes complete and
scientific knowledge as special cases. The first insights in information
economics related to the economics of information goods. In recent decades,
there have been influential advances in the study of information asymmetries
and their implications for contract theory, including market failure as a
possibility.ย ย  โข Armen A. Alchian and Harold Demsetz, 1972. "Production,
Information Costs, and Economic Organization," "American Economic Review", 62
(5), pp. 777-795. ย ย  โข Sanford J. Grossman and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980.
"On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets," "American Economic
Review", 70(3), pp. 393-408.ย ย  โข Joseph E. Stiglitz, 2008. "Information."
"The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics". Library of Economics and Liberty.ย ย 
โข _____, 1987. "The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence of Quality on
Prices," "Journal of Economic Literature", 25(1), pp.1-48.ย ย  โข _____, 2000.
"The Contributions of the Economics of Information to Twentieth Century
Economics," "Quarterly Journal of Economics", 115(4) , pp. 1441-1478.ย ย  โข
_____, 2002. "Information and the Change in the Paradigm in Economics,"
"American Economic Review", 92(3), pp. 460-501. from "Nobel Prize Lecture",
December 8, 2001. Information economics is formally related to game theory as
to different types of games that may apply, including games with perfect
information, complete information,ย ย  โข Sylvain Sorin, 1992. "Repeated Games
with Complete Information," "Handbook of Game Theory with Economic
Applications", v. 1, Elsevier, ch. 4, pp. 71-107. and incomplete
information.ย ย  โข Robert J. Aumann and Aviad Heifetz, 2002. "Incomplete
Information," "Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications", v. 3,
Elsevier, ch. 43, pp. 1665-1686.ย ย  โข Shmuel Zamir, 1992. "Repeated Games of
Incomplete Information: Zero-Sum," "Handbook of Game Theory with Economic
Applications", v. 1, Elsevier, ch. 5, pp. 109-154.ย ย  โข Franรงoise Forges,
1992. "Repeated Games of Incomplete Information: Non-Zero-Sum," "Handbook of
Game Theory with Economic Applications", v. 1, Elsevier, ch. 6, pp. 155-177.
Experimental and game-theory methods have been developed to model and test
theories of information economics,ย ย  โข Eric Rasmusen, 2007. "Games and
Information", 4th ed. Description and chapter-preview links.ย ย  โข Charles R.
Plott and Vernon L. Smith, 2008. "Handbook of Experimental Economics Results",
v. 1, Elsevier, Part 2: Market Economics of Uncertainty and Information and
Part 4: Games, respectively, chapters 34-40 & 45-66 preview links.ย ย  โข
Karl-Gustaf Lรถfgren, Torsten Persson, and Jรถrgen W. Weibull, 2002. "Markets
with Asymmetric Information: The Contributions of George Akerlof, Michael
Spence and Joseph Stiglitz," "Scandinavian Journal of Economics", 104(2), pp.
195-211. including potential public-policy applications such as mechanism
design to elicit information-sharing and otherwise welfare-enhancing
behavior.ย ย  โข _____, 2008. "revelation," principle," "The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics", 2nd Edition. Abstract.ย ย  โข _____, 2008.
"Perspectives on Mechanism Design in Economic Theory," "American Economic
Review", 98(3), pp. 586-603. Revised from Nobel-prize lecture.ย ย  โข Noam
Nisan and Amir Ronen, 2001. "Algorithmic Mechanism Design," "Games and Economic
Behavior", 35(1-2), pp. 166-196. Value of information. The starting point for
economic analysis is the observation that information has economic value
because it allows individuals to make choices that yield higher expected
payoffs or expected utility than they would obtain from choices made in the
absence of information. Information and the price mechanism. Much of the
literature in information economics was originally inspired by Friedrich
Hayek's "The Use of Knowledge in Society" on the uses of the price mechanism in
allowing information decentralization to order the effective use of
resources.ย ย  โข _____, 1948. "Individualism and Economic Order", Chicago.
Description and chapter-preview links. Although Hayek's work was intended to
discredit the effectiveness of central planning agencies over a free market
system, his proposal that price mechanisms communicate information about
scarcity of goods inspired Abba Lerner, Tjalling Koopmans, Leonid Hurwicz,
George Stigler and others to further develop the field of information
economics. Information asymmetry. Information asymmetry deals with the study of
decisions in transactions where one party has more or better information than
the other. This creates an imbalance in power in transactions which can
sometimes cause the transactions to go awry. Examples of this problem are
adverse selection and moral hazard. A classic paper on adverse selection is
George Akerlof's The Market for Lemons. There are two primary solutions to this
problem, signalling and screening. For moral hazard, contracting between
principal and agent may be describable as a second best solution where payoffs
alone are observable with information asymmmetry. Signaling. Michael Spence
originally proposed the idea of signaling. He proposed that in a situation with
information asymmetry, it is possible for people to signal their type, thus
believably transferring information to the other party and resolving the
asymmetry. This idea was originally studied in the context of looking for a
job. An employer is interested in hiring a new employee who is skilled in
learning. Of course, all prospective employees will claim to be skilled at
learning, but only they know if they really are. This is an information
asymmetry. Spence proposed that going to college can function as a credible
signal of an ability to learn. Assuming that people who are skilled in learning
can finish college more easily than people who are unskilled, then by attending
college the skilled people signal their skill to prospective employers. This is
true even if they didn't learn anything in school, and school was there solely
as a signal. This works because the action they took (going to school) was
easier for people who possessed the skill that they were trying to signal (a
capacity for learning). Screening. Joseph E. Stiglitz pioneered the theory of
screening. In this way the underinformed party can induce the other party to
reveal their information. They can provide a menu of choices in such a way that
the choice depends on the private information of the other party. Information
goods. First of all, information is non-rivalrous, which means that consuming
information does not exclude someone else from also consuming it. A related
characteristic that alters information markets is that information has almost
zero marginal cost. This means that once the first copy exists, it costs
nothing or almost nothing to make a second copy. This makes it easy to sell
over and over. However, it makes classic marginal cost pricing completely
infeasible. Second, exclusion is not a natural property of information goods,
though it is possible to construct exclusion artificially. However, the nature
of information is that if it is known, it is difficult to exclude others from
its use. Since information is likely to be both non-rivalrous and non-
excludable, it is frequently considered an example of a public good. Third is
that the information market does not exhibit high degrees of transparency. That
is, to evaluate the information, the information must be known, so you have to
invest in learning it to evaluate it. To evaluate a bit of software you have to
learn to use it; to evaluate a movie you have to watch it. The importance of
these properties is explained by De Long and Froomkin in The Next Economy.
Bundling. One method of taking advantage of information goods is bundling. That
is the strategy of grouping multiple items together and selling them as a
group. Bundling allows sellers to better predict the demand for the bundle.
While it is difficult to know which items in the group an individual person
wants, they are likely to value some of the items enough to purchase the
bundle, even if they don't value any of the items enough to buy it separately.
However, this only works when it doesn't cost much to sell extra items in a
bundle that are unwanted. Information goods fit this profile since it doesn't
cost anything to make extra copies. More information. In 2001, the Nobel prize
in economics was awarded to George Akerlof, Michael Spence, and Joseph E.
Stiglitz "for their analyses of markets with asymmetric information."
References. Press + for small-font links below.
