Information asymmetry In economics and contract theory, information asymmetry
deals with the study of decisions in transactions where one party has more or
better information than the other. This creates an imbalance of power in
transactions which can sometimes cause the transactions to go awry, a kind of
market failure in the worst case. Examples of this problem are adverse
selection, moral hazard, and information monopoly. Most commonly, information
asymmetries are studied in the context of principalâ€“agent problems.
Information asymmetry causes misinforming and is essential in every
communication process. In 2001, the Nobel Prize in Economics was awarded to
George Akerlof, Michael Spence, and Joseph E. Stiglitz for their "analyses of
markets with asymmetric information." Information asymmetry models. Information
asymmetry models assume that at least one party to a transaction has relevant
information whereas the other(s) do not. Some asymmetric information models can
also be used in situations where at least one party can enforce, or effectively
retaliate for breaches of, certain parts of an agreement whereas the other(s)
cannot. In adverse selection models, the ignorant party lacks information while
negotiating an agreed understanding of or contract to the transaction, whereas
in moral hazard the ignorant party lacks information about performance of the
agreed-upon transaction or lacks the ability to retaliate for a breach of the
agreement. An example of adverse selection is when people who are high risk are
more likely to buy insurance, because the insurance company cannot effectively
discriminate against them, usually due to lack of information about the
particular individual's risk but also sometimes by force of law or other
constraints. An example of moral hazard is when people are more likely to
behave recklessly after becoming insured, either because the insurer cannot
observe this behavior or cannot effectively retaliate against it, for example
by failing to renew the insurance. Adverse selection. The classic paper on
adverse selection is George Akerlof's "The Market for Lemons" from 1970, which
brought informational issues at the forefront of economic theory. It discusses
two primary solutions to this problem, signaling and screening. Signaling.
Michael Spence originally proposed the idea of signaling. He proposed that in a
situation with information asymmetry, it is possible for people to signal their
type, thus believably transferring information to the other party and resolving
the asymmetry. This idea was originally studied in the context of looking for a
job. An employer is interested in hiring a new employee who is "skilled in
learning." Of course, all prospective employees will claim to be "skilled at
learning", but only they know if they really are. This is an information
asymmetry. Skill in learning is malleable, and depends upon many factors,
including diet, exercise and money. Spence proposes, for example, that going to
college can function as a credible signal of an ability to learn. Assuming that
people who are skilled in learning can finish college more easily than people
who are unskilled, then by finishing college the skilled people signal their
skill to prospective employers. No matter how much or how little they may have
learned in college, finishing functions as a signal of their capacity for
learning. However, finishing college may merely function as a signal of their
ability to pay for college, it may signal the willingness of individuals to
adhere to orthodox views, or it may signal a willingness to comply with
authority. Screening. Joseph E. Stiglitz pioneered the theory of screening. In
this way the underinformed party can induce the other party to reveal their
information. They can provide a menu of choices in such a way that the choice
depends on the private information of the other party. Examples of situations
where the seller usually has better information than the buyer are numerous but
include used-car salespeople, mortgage brokers and loan originators,
stockbrokers and real estate agents. Examples of situations where the buyer
usually has better information than the seller include estate sales as
specified in a last will and testament, life insurance, or sales of old art
pieces without prior professional assessment of their value. This situation was
first described by Kenneth J. Arrow in an article on health care in 1963.
George Akerlof in "The Market for Lemons" notices that, in such a market, the
average value of the commodity tends to go down, even for those of perfectly
good quality. Because of information asymmetry, unscrupulous sellers can
"spoof" items (like replica goods such as watches) and defraud the buyer. As a
result, many people not willing to risk getting ripped off will avoid certain
types of purchases, or will not spend as much for a given item. It is even
possible for the market to decay to the point of nonexistence. Application of
information asymmetry in research. Since the seminal contributions of Akerlof,
Spence, and Stiglitz, the pervasive effects of information asymmetry in markets
have been documented and studied in numerous contexts. In particular, a
substantial portion of research in the field of accounting can be framed in
terms of information asymmetry, since accounting involves the transmission of
an enterprise's information from those who have it to those who need it for
decision-making. Likewise, financial economists apply information asymmetry in
studies of differentially informed financial market participants (insiders,
stock analysts, investors, etc.).
