International Foundation for Electoral Systems The International Foundation for
Electoral Systems (IFES) is an international, non-profit organization founded
in 1987. This Washington, D.C.-based development organization provides
assistance and support for elections in new and emerging democracies. Since
1987, IFES has provided assistance in 135 countries and it currently has
programs in over 30 countries throughout Asia, Africa, Europe, and the
Americas. −Providing technical assistance to election officials;
−Empowering the under-represented to participate in the political process;
−Applying field-based research to improve the electoral cycle. To underscore
its independent approach, IFES is supervised by a Board of Directors made up of
equal parts Democrats, Republicans and members of the international community.
The president of IFES is Bill Sweeney. He replaced Jean-Pierre Kingsley in
2009. IFES maintains a number of field offices in country led by Chiefs of
Party, who supervise and organize IFES's activities in each region. IFES is a
non-governmental organization; registered as a 501(c)(3) in the United States.
History. IFES was founded by F. Clifton White on September 19, 1987 as a direct
response to Ronald Reagan’s 1982 Westminster speech in which he stressed the
importance of promoting democracy. IFES was established along with other
organizations focusing on democracy promotion, including the National Endowment
for Democracy (NED), the National Democratic Institute for International
Affairs (NDI), and the International Republican Institute (IRI), all
established in 1983.
