International Socialist Organization The International Socialist Organization
(ISO) is a revolutionary socialist organization in the United States that
identifies with Trotskyism, and the Marxist political tradition of "socialism
from below." Ideology. The ISO advocates replacing the capitalist system with
socialism, a system in which society's collective wealth and resources would be
democratically controlled to meet human need by those who produce that wealth:
the working class. To achieve socialism, the ISO argues that the working class
majority must lead a revolutionary transformation of society into a workers'
democracy.Â As an anti-Stalinist left organization, the ISO opposes state
bureaucracy and all forms of "top-down" socialism. Because capitalism is a
global system, the ISO argues that the struggle for socialism must be
international in scope. The ISO holds that the former Soviet Union and Eastern
Bloc, as well as China and Cuba, are examples of bureaucratic class-stratified
societies rather than socialism. While the ISO supports struggles for economic,
political, and social reforms, it also maintains that exploitation, oppression,
war, and environmental destruction cannot be eliminated until capitalism is
overthrown and replaced with socialism. Strategy. The ISO identifies itself as
a Marxist organization, and advocates the emancipation of the working class and
the oppressed through a revolutionary transformation of society. It advocates
democratic control of the economy via grassroots networks of representative
workplace and community councils. While it supports existing trade unions as
essential components of workers' struggles, it maintains that workers need to
organize themselves independently of the trade union officialdom. The ISO also
maintains that racism, sexism, homophobia, and other forms of oppression are
perpetuated by the capitalist system to keep the working class divided against
itself, and therefore participates in a wide range of social movements and
struggles for social equality and civil rights. The ISO identifies itself as a
Leninist organization because it calls for the formation of a revolutionary
party by the most militant workers, and states that it is committed to playing
a role in helping to build the foundations for such a party. History. The ISO
originated in 1976 among a number of groups in the International Socialists
(IS) that were growing increasingly critical of the organization's leadership.
Among them was the self-identified "Left Faction," which was led by Cal and
Barbara Winslow and supported by the IS's Canadian and British members. The
Left Faction and its international supporters maintained that the IS's
leadership had acquired a top-down style of operating that depoliticized the
organization and placed too much emphasis on sending student activists into
working class employment (a tactic referred to as "industrialization"). These
disputes followed the disagreements over the 1974 revolution in Portugal. In
1977, the Left Faction was expelled from the IS, and immediately formed the
International Socialist Organization. The ISO began publication of its paper,
Socialist Worker, shortly after its formation, and continues to produce a
monthly print version, as well as a daily updated web site,
Socialistworker.org. Some of the political theories adopted by the ISO had been
developed in the British Socialist Workers Party (SWP), including that of state
capitalism. State capitalist theory identifies the former Soviet Union and
Eastern Bloc as exploitative class societies driven by military competition
with private Western capitalism, rather than as the deformed workers' states
that Trotsky maintained they were in "The Revolution Betrayed". Having a small
membership in the 1980s, the ISO found that its primary organizing efforts
toward rank and file work in the unions was unsustainable. From the early
1980s, the group began organizing and recruiting on university campuses. The
decision to focus primarily on students was regarded as a necessary retreat,
given the conservative nature of the Reagan era. In the 1990s the ISO expanded
and participated in a series of movements and campaigns, including the movement
against the first Gulf War and other US military interventions, against racism,
and for abortion rights. and has been active in opposing what it refers to as
"US imperialism" connected with the "war on terror" in the wake of September
11th, including the invasion of Afghanistan as well as the Iraq War. The group
has also been active in opposing Israel's occupation of Palestine. In 2001 the
ISO was expelled from the International Socialist Tendency (IST) after a
dispute with the British SWP. This dispute was framed by the SWP as a critique
of the ISO's conservative approach to the anti-corporate/anti-capitalist
movement. The ISO disputed this claim and criticized the SWP for maintaining
what the ISO viewed as an exaggerated perspective for the 1990s, which the SWP
characterized as 'the 1930s in slow motion.' After some years with very little
contact between the ISO and the British SWP, relations have improved. Ahmed
Shawki, a leading member of the ISO, was invited in 2010 to speak at the SWP's
Marxism festival while SWP National Secretary Martin Smith spoke at the ISO's
Socialism 2010 conference. Alex Callinicos, leading member of the SWP, also
spoke at the Socialism 2012 conference. The ISO also maintains friendly
relations with the Fourth International, currently holding permanent observer
status in the FI. Publications. The ISO publishes a daily online and monthly
print newspaper, "Socialist Worker," with a bi-monthly Spanish language
supplement, "Obrero Socialista.". The ISO also distributes the International
Socialist Review and titles from the publishing house Haymarket Books, both of
which are run by the Center for Economic Research and Social Change.
Activities. The ISO participates in several local and national progressive
movements. These include the antiwar movement, efforts to end the death
penalty, support for gay marriage and abortion rights, the struggle for
immigration rights, among others. The ISO does not support the Republican party
or Democratic party, both of which it views as political representatives of
corporate power. The group has, however, campaigned for the Green Party in
various races and assisted Ralph Nader's presidential campaigns in 2000 and
2004. In California in 2006, ISO member Todd Chretien challenged Diane
Feinstein for a seat in the United States Senate on the Green Party ticket,
receiving 139,425 votes (1.8 percent). The ISO has participated in the Occupy
movement, starting with the "general assemblies" used to plan New York City's
Occupy Wall Street and its Summer 2011 predecessor, "Bloombergville". The
organization views Occupy as having "shown the potential to build a mass,
activist left in the U.S. for the first time in decades." Socialism conference.
The ISO is the co-sponsor, along with the Center for Economic Research and
Social Change, of an annual conference entitled "Socialism." Speakers at past
Socialism conferences include filmmaker and author Tariq Ali, actor Wallace
Shawn, "The Nation" sportswriter Dave Zirin, writer Glenn Greenwald, journalist
Amy Goodman, environmental writer John Bellamy Foster, "The Nation" contributor
Jeremy Scahill, Iraq Veterans Against the War member Camilo MejÃ­a, and
Palestinian rights activists Omar Barghouti and Ali Abunimah.
