International International mostly means something (a company, language or
organization) involving more than one country. The term international as a word
means involvement of, interaction between or encompassing more than one nation,
or generally beyond national boundaries. For example, international law, which
is applied by more than one country and usually everywhere on Earth, and
international language which is a language spoken by residents of more than one
country. In American English, "International" is also commonly used as a
euphemism for "foreign" or even "foreigner." Origin of the word. The term
"international" was coined by the utilitarian philosopher Jeremy Bentham in his
"Introduction to Principles of Morals and Legislation," which was printed for
publication in 1780 and published in 1789. Bentham wrote: "The word
"international", it must be acknowledged, is a new one; though, it is hoped,
sufficiently analogous and intelligible. It is calculated to express, in a more
significant way, the branch of law which goes commonly under the name of the
"law of nations". The word was adopted in French in 1801. Thomas Erskine
Holland noted in his article on Bentham in the 11th edition of the
"Encyclopedia Britannica" that "Many of Bentham's phrases, such as
'international,' 'utilitarian,' 'codification,' are valuable additions to our
language; but the majority of them, especially those of Greek derivation, have
taken no root in it." Meaning in particular fields. "International" is not the
same as "global"; the latter implies "one world" as a single unit, while
"international" recognizes the differences between different places.
