Invisible Party The Invisible Party ("Osynliga partiet") was a Swedish
conceptual anti-capitalist media campaign masquerading as an "organization"
with the purpose of connecting all anti-capitalist action, however small or
without actual realization, to an "invisible" political party. Although it
called itself a party, it did not have official members but instead had
"participants". It could not, and did not wish to, participate in elections.
The professed goal of the group was to undermine the capitalist system. It was
founded by different parts of the Swedish extra-parliamentary left, in
particular the Swedish Anarcho-syndicalist Youth Federation. Ideology. The
Invisible Party can been seen as a shared concept, a symbol for a struggle
against capitalism and the perceived exploitation of the workforce.
Participation in the party has involved strikes, blockades, flyposting,
sabotage, shoplifting, riots, and other radical tactics. Methods. After the
Centre Party proposed a special youth contract for those under 26 (similar to
France's First Employment Contract policy), activists claiming to be members of
the Invisible Party responded by vandalizing Centre Party offices throughout
Sweden. The Centre Party was in opposition at the time, with the Invisible
Party thus supporting the policies of the sitting Social Democrat government.
Activists under the banner of the Invisible Party continued the vandalism
throughout the 2006 Swedish general election campaign, hitting the offices of
the Christian Democrats, another opposition party, as well. As of 2006, the
Swedish Security Service (SÃ¤po) was gathering information about the Invisible
Party and its supporters. Controversy. The Invisible Party was widely
misunderstood outside the extra-parliamentary left. Media presented the party
as an actual organization with members in the strict and traditional sense.
Because of the actions against the Centre Party the party was vilified by
Swedish media and presented as a violent and anti-democratic organization. This
led to the true purpose of the campaign becoming even more obscure than before.
The winner of the Swedish political reality show "Toppkandidaterna" (The Top
Candidates), Petter Nilsson, donated 100,000 of his 250,000 SEK prize-money to
the project. After the actions against the Centre Party, the party demanded
that the license-funded public broadcaster SVT should ask Nilsson to repay the
money, and the Centre Party Youth claimed that SVT was "responsible for the
attacks", but SVT chose not to take any action against Nilsson.
