Ion Sancho Ion Voltaire Sancho (born December 6, 1950 in New York City) is an
elected public official serving Leon County, Florida, USA as Supervisor of
Elections. His family first moved to Louisiana and then to Columbus, Ohio. As
the eldest child, he cared for his younger siblings. He moved to Florida after
high school. Sancho resides in northeastern Leon County 2 miles west of Lake
Miccosukee. Background. Sancho received his A.A. degree from Valencia Community
College in 1973. He then received his B.A. in Social Science from Stetson
University in 1978. Sancho completed his education with a J.D. from Florida
State University College of Law in 1987. In 1984 Sancho, a Democrat, was the
Leon County leader for Presidential candidate Gary Hart. Sancho is a State
Certified Supervisor of Elections and nationally certified by the Elections
Center as a Certified Elections/Registration Administrator (CERA). He's a
former staff member of the Florida House of Representatives, Corrections,
Probation & Parole Committee. He is a member of the Center for Policy
Alternatives, Voter Participation Advisory Board and member of The Elections
Center. Supervisor of Elections. After a bid as county commissioner in 1986
Sancho took courses in election machine management and became certified in
their use. In November 1988, Sancho was elected to his first term as the
Supervisor of Elections for Leon County, Florida. He ran and was re-elected in
1992, 1996, 2000, and 2004, serving his fifth term as of January 2, 2005. He
was unopposed in each election since 1992. National recognition. In the 2000
presidential recount, Sancho (No Party Affiliation) was chosen to lead the
Florida hand count of ballots in dispute in Miami-Dade County. The U.S. Supreme
Court stopped the hand count in a 7-2 vote just as it got underway. Later the
Court ruled 5â€“4 that no constitutionally valid recount could be completed by
a December 12 "safe harbor" deadline. "(Most voters (99%) in Leon County use
the opti-scan equipment, but federal law requires one electronic machine per
precinct for visually impaired voters)." Hacking a Diebold machine. In 2005,
Sancho invited Bev Harris, founder of Black Box Voting, Kathleen Wynne, Black
Box Voting Associate Director, Harri Hursti, computer programmer and security
expert, Dr. Hugh Thompson, application security expert and Ph.D. in math, Susan
Bernecker, former Republican candidate for New Orleans city council and Susan
Pynchon, Director of Florida Fair Elections Coalition to Tallahassee. There,
they performed what is now known as the Hursti Hack which became the center
piece of an HBO documentary titled Hacking Democracy. Results of Sancho's
actions. As a result, Diebold, Election Systems & Software and Sequoia Voting
Systems, the only 3 companies certified to do business in Florida would not
sell Sancho voting machines. Automark was contacted by Sancho but the Secretary
of State would not certify their voting equipment. ES&S said, "did not believe
it could have a smooth working relationship with Sancho". In Florida, Volusia
County joined Leon County in dumping Diebold. Elections officials in the states
of Maryland, North Carolina, Texas, and California have called into question
the security and accuracy of new voting machines. Opposition. After the test
election, Secretary of State Sue Cobb (R) accused Sancho of "undermining voter
confidence" and the Federal Government and demanded the return of a $564,000 in
grant money given to Sancho through the state to purchase voting machines that
would comply with ADA standards as mandated in the Help America Vote Act
(HAVA), a United States federal law passed on October 29, 2002. At Leon County
Commission meetings on February 14 and February 28, 2006 the only two
Republicans in the local governments of either the city of Tallahassee or Leon
County government, Tony Grippa and Ed Depuy of Leon County's seven-member
county commission blasted Sancho for failing to provide Leon County with
accessible voting machines in attacks that Sancho believes were politically
motivated. At a Leon County Commission meeting on February 28, 2006, county
staff revealed that Chuck Owen, Division Counsel for Diebold Election Systems,
met with county staff behind closed doors on February 27. According to staff,
Owen stated that Diebold would sell its touch-screen voting machines to the
county if, and only if, the county removed Supervisor Sancho from office. That
same day, Commissioner DePuy offered a motion, seconded by Commissioner Grippa
to request the State Attorney to convene a grand jury to investigate why Leon
County is not in compliance with the voting regulations. Tony Grippa left the
Leon County Commission in April 2006. Ed DePuy was defeated in 2008 by Democrat
Akin Akinyemi. Legal action. On March 8, 2006 Sancho initiated legal
proceedings against Diebold Election Systems for breach of contract. Attorney
Lida Rodriguez Taseff with Duane Morris in Miami filed the suit. Diebold
refused to return phone calls to Sancho and staff, refused to honor its
existing contract with Leon County for the maintenance and upgrades of its
voting system. Further, Diebold refused to sell Leon County touch-screen voting
machines to meet state and federal requirements for disabled accessibility. In
the media. Sancho has been on National Public Radio and is familiar to readers
of the "New York Times", the "Washington Post", "St. Petersburg Times" and
appears in the 2006 HBO documentary "Hacking Democracy."
