Is It Fair? Isitfair was founded in 2002 by Christine and John Melsom of
Headley, East Hampshire. They were outraged by the proposed huge increase in
Council Tax due for April 2003 (12.9% on average) and decided to launch a
campaign to protest about this. The spirit of the campaign caught the public
mood and it quickly grew to become a nationwide campaign. The campaign is truly
'grass roots' and the only one of its type in the UK. It is non party political
and is entirely funded through voluntary donations of time, resources and
money. A nationwide petition was launched and was signed by 100,000 council tax
payers. In October 2004, the petition was handed in to the then Prime Minister
Tony Blair at 10 Downing Street. A march was held in London followed by a rally
in Trafalgar Square that resulted in nationwide media coverage. Since that
time, the efforts of Isitfair have continued with all three main political
parties to bring about a change to the current system. During the latest
Government inquiry (the Lyons Inquiry), Isitfair made submissions and met with
Sir Michael to press home our case for reform. To date, the British government
has steadfastly refused to acknowledge Isitfair's claims of the gross
unfairness of the current system and did not modify their legislative policies.
The Position of "Is It Fair?". Isitfair has always wanted Council Tax to be
reformed and based on ability to pay, not based on the value of the home in
which the owner resides or the surrounding land on which the home is located.
Their position is that the home does not pay Council Tax, but the taxpayer does
out of earned income that has already been taxed, or savings income which has
also been taxed.
