James Hansen James E. Hansen (born March 29, 1941) heads the NASA Goddard
Institute for Space Studies in New York City, a part of the Goddard Space
Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. He has held this position since 1981. He
is also an adjunct professor in the Department of Earth and Environmental
Sciences at Columbia University. After graduate school, Hansen continued his
work with radiative transfer models, attempting to understand the Venusian
atmosphere. Later he applied and refined these models to understand the Earth's
atmosphere, in particular, the effects that aerosols and trace gases have on
Earth's climate. Hansen's development and use of global climate models has
contributed to the further understanding of the Earth's climate. Hansen is best
known for his research in the field of climatology, his testimony on climate
change to congressional committees in 1988 that helped raise broad awareness of
global warming, and his advocacy of action to avoid dangerous climate change.
In recent years, Hansen has become an activist for action to mitigate the
effects of climate change, which on a few occasions has led to his arrest. In
2009 his first book, "Storms of My Grandchildren", was published. Early life
and education. Hansen was born in Denison, Iowa. He was trained in physics and
astronomy in the space science program of James Van Allen at the University of
Iowa. He obtained a B.A. in Physics and Mathematics with highest distinction in
1963, an M.S. in Astronomy in 1965 and a Ph.D. in Physics, in 1967, all three
degrees from the University of Iowa. He participated in the NASA graduate
traineeship from 1962 to 1966 and, at the same time, between 1965 and 1966, he
was a visiting student at the Institute of Astrophysics at the University of
Kyoto and in the Department of Astronomy at the University of Tokyo. Hansen
then began work at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies in 1967. Research
and publications. As a college student at the University of Iowa, Hansen was
attracted to science and the research done by James Van Allen's space science
program in the physics and astronomy department. A decade later, his focus
shifted to planetary research that involved trying to understand the climate
change on earth that will result from anthropogenic changes of the atmospheric
composition. Hansen has stated that one of his research interests is radiative
transfer in planetary atmospheres, especially the interpretation of remote
sensing of the Earth's atmosphere and surface from satellites. Because of the
ability of satellites to monitor the entire globe, they may be one of the most
effective ways to monitor and study global change. His other interests include
the development of global circulation models to help understand the observed
climate trends, and diagnosing human impacts on climate. Atmosphere of Venus.
In the late 1960s and early 1970s, following his Ph.D. dissertation, Hansen
published several papers on the planet Venus. Venus has a high brightness
temperature in the radio frequencies compared to the infrared. Hansen proposed
that the hot surface was the result of aerosols trapping the internal energy of
the planet. More recent studies have suggested that several billion years ago,
Venus's atmosphere was much more like Earth's than it is now, and that there
were probably substantial quantities of liquid water on the surface, but a
runaway greenhouse effect was caused by the evaporation of that original water,
which generated a critical level of greenhouse gases in its atmosphere. Hansen
continued his study of Venus by looking at the composition of its clouds. He
looked at the near-infrared reflectivity of ice clouds, compared them to
observations of Venus, and found that they qualitatively agreed. He also was
able to use a radiative transfer model to establish an upper limit to the size
of the ice particles if the clouds were actually made of ice. Evidence
published in the early 1980s showed that the clouds consist mainly of sulfur
dioxide and sulfuric acid droplets. By 1974, the composition of Venus' clouds
had not yet been determined, with many scientists proposing a wide variety of
compounds, including liquid water and aqueous solutions of ferrous chloride.
Hansen and Hovenier used the polarization of sunlight reflected from the planet
to establish that the clouds were spherical, and had a refractive index and
cloud drop effective radius which eliminated all of the proposed cloud types
except sulfuric acid. Kiyoshi Kawabata and Hansen expanded upon this work by
looking at the variation of polarization on Venus. They found that the visible
clouds are a diffuse haze rather than a thick cloud, confirming the same
results obtained from transits across the sun. The Pioneer Venus project was
launched in May 1978 and reached Venus late that same year. Hansen collaborated
with Larry Travis and other colleagues in a 1979 "Science" article that
reported on the development and variability of clouds in the ultraviolet
spectrum. They conclude that there are at least three different cloud materials
that contribute to the images: a thin haze layer, sulfuric acid clouds, and an
unknown ultraviolet absorber below the sulfuric acid cloud layer. The linear
polarization data obtained from the same mission confirmed that the low- and
mid-level clouds were sulfuric acid with radius of about 1 micrometer. Above
the cloud layer was a layer of submicrometre haze. Global temperature analysis.
The first GISS (NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies) global temperature
analysis was published in 1981. Hansen and his co-author analyzed the surface
air temperature at meteorological stations focusing on the years from 1880 to
1985. Temperatures for stations closer together than 1000 kilometers were shown
to be highly correlated, especially in the mid-latitudes, providing a way to
combine the station data to provided accurate long-term variations. They
conclude that global mean temperatures can be determined even though
meteorological stations are typically in the Northern hemisphere and confined
to continental regions. Warming in the past century was found to be , with
warming similar in both hemispheres. When the analysis was updated in 1988, the
four warmest years on record were all in the 1980s. The two warmest years were
1981 and 1987. With the 1991 eruption of Mount Pinatubo, 1992 saw a cooling in
the global temperatures. There was speculation that this would cause the next
couple years to be cooler because of the large serial correlation in the global
temperatures. Bassett and Lin found the statistical odds of a new temperature
record to be small. Hansen countered by saying that having insider information
shifts the odds to those who know the physics of the climate system, and that
whether there is a new temperature record depends upon the particular data set
used. The temperature data was updated in 1999 to report that 1998 was the
warmest year since the instrumental data began in 1880. They also found that
the rate of temperature change was larger than at any time in instrument
history, and conclude that the recent El Nino was not totally responsible for
the large temperature anomaly in 1998. In spite of this, the United States had
seen a smaller degree of warming, and a region in the eastern U.S. and the
western Atlantic Ocean had actually cooled slightly. 2001 saw a major update to
how the temperature was calculated. It incorporated corrections due to the
following reasons: time-of-observation bias; station history changes;
classification of rural/urban station; the urban adjustment based on satellite
measurements of night light intensity, and relying more on rural station than
urban. Evidence was found of local urban warming in urban, suburban and small-
town records. The anomalously high global temperature in 1998 due to El Ni√±o
resulted in a brief drop in subsequent years. However, a 2001 Hansen report in
the journal "Science" states that global warming continues, and that the
increasing temperatures should stimulate discussions on how to slow global
warming. The temperature data was updated in 2006 to report that temperatures
are now warmer than a century ago, and conclude that the recent global warming
is a real climate change and not an artifact from the urban heat island effect.
The regional variation of warming, with more warming in the higher latitudes,
is further evidence of warming that is anthropogenic in origin. In 2007,
Stephen McIntyre notified GISS that many of the U.S. temperature records from
the Historical Climatology Network (USHCN) displayed a discontinuity around the
year 2000. NASA corrected the computer code used to process the data and
credited McIntyre with pointing out the flaw. Hansen indicated that he felt
that several news organizations had overreacted to this mistake. In 2010,
Hansen published a paper entitled "Global Surface Temperature Change"
describing current global temperature analysis. Black carbon. Hansen has also
contributed toward the understanding of black carbon on regional climate. In
recent decades, northern China has experienced increased drought, and southern
China has received increased summer rain resulting in a larger number of
floods. Southern China has had a decrease in temperatures while most of the
world has warmed. In a paper with Menon and colleagues, through the use of
observations and climate models results, they conclude that the black carbon
heats the air, increases convection and precipitation, and leads to larger
surface cooling than if the aerosols were sulfates. A year later, Hansen teamed
with Makiko Sato to publish a study on black carbon using the global network of
AERONET sun photometers. While the location of the AERONET instruments did not
represent a global sample, they could still be used to validate global aerosol
climatologies. They found that most aerosol climatologies underestimated the
amount of black carbon by a factor of at least 2. This corresponds to an
increase in the climate forcing of around , which they hypothesize is partially
offset by the cooling of non-absorbing aerosols. Estimations of trends in black
carbon emissions show that there was a rapid increase in the 1880s after the
start of the Industrial Revolution, and a leveling off from 1900-1950 as
environmental laws were enacted. China and India have recently increased their
emissions of black carbon corresponding to their rapid development. The
emissions from the United Kingdom were estimated using a network of stations
that measured black smoke and sulfur dioxide. They report that atmospheric
black carbon concentrations have been decreasing since the beginning of the
record in the 1960s, and that the decline was faster than the decline in black-
carbon-producing fuel use. A 2007 paper used the GISS climate model in an
attempt to determine the origin of black carbon in the arctic. Much of the
arctic aerosol comes from south Asia. Countries such as the United States and
Russia have a lower contribution than previously assumed. Dangerous
anthropogenic interference. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change is an international environmental treaty that has the objective of
stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that
would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. In
2003 Hansen wrote a paper called "Can We Defuse the Global Warming Time Bomb?"
in which he argues that human-caused forces on the climate are now greater than
natural ones, and that this, over a long time period, can cause large climate
changes. He further states that a lower limit on ‚Äúdangerous anthropogenic
interference‚Äù is set by the stability of the Greenland and Antarctic ice
sheets. His view on actions to mitigate climate change is that "halting global
warming requires urgent, unprecedented international cooperation, but the
needed actions are feasible and have additional benefits for human health,
agriculture and the environment." In a 2004 presentation at the University of
Iowa, Hansen announced that he was told by high-ranking government officials
not to talk about how anthropogenic influence could have a dangerous effect on
climate because it's not understood what 'dangerous' means, or how human are
actually affecting climate. He describes this as a Faustian bargain because
atmospheric aerosols have health risks, and should be reduced, but doing so
will effectively increase the warming effects from . Hansen and coauthors
propose that the global mean temperature is a good tool to diagnose dangerous
anthropogenic interference with the climate system. Two elements are
particularly important when discussing dangerous anthropogenic interference:
sea level rise and the extinction of species. They describe a business-as-usual
scenario, which has greenhouse gases growing at approximately 2% per year; and
an alternate scenario, in which greenhouse gases concentrations decline. Under
the alternate scenario, sea levels could rise by 1 meter per century, causing
problems due to the dense population in coastal areas. But this would be minor
compared to the 10-meter increase in sea level under the business-as-usual
scenario. Hansen describes the situation with species extinction similarly to
that of sea level rise. Assuming the alternate scenario, the situation is not
good, but it is much worse for business as usual. The concept of dangerous
anthropogenic interference was clarified in a 2007 paper, finding that further
warming of 1 ¬∞C would be highly disruptive to humans. An alternate scenario
would keep the warming to below this if climate sensitivity were below 3 ¬∞C
for doubled . The conclusion is that levels above 450 ppm are considered
dangerous, but that reduction in non- greenhouse gases can provide temporary
relief from drastic cuts. Further findings are that arctic climate change has
been forced by non- constituents as much as by . The 2007 paper cautions that
prompt action is needed to slow growth and to prevent a dangerous anthropogenic
interference. Climate model development and projections. Vilhelm Bjerknes began
the modern development of the general circulation model in the early 20th
century. The progress of numerical modeling was slow due to the slow speed of
early computers and the lack of adequate observations. It wasn't until the
1950s that the numerical models were getting close to being realistic. Hansen's
first contribution to numerical climate models came with the 1974 publication
of the GISS model. He and his colleagues claimed that the model was successful
in simulating the major features of sea-level pressure and 500mb heights in the
North American region. A 1981 "Science" publication by Hansen and a team of
scientists at Goddard concluded that carbon dioxide in the atmosphere would
lead to warming sooner than previously predicted. They used a one-dimensional
radiative-convective model that calculates temperature as a function of height.
They reported that the results from the 1D model are similar to those of the
more complex 3D models, and can simulate basic mechanisms and feedbacks. Hansen
predicted that temperatures would rise out of the climate noise by the 1990s,
much earlier than predicted by other researches. He also predicted that it
would be difficult to convince politicians and the public to react. By the
early 1980s, the computational speed of computers, along with refinements in
climate models, allowed longer experiments. The models now included physics
beyond the previous equations, such as convection schemes, diurnal changes, and
snow-depth calculations. The advances in computational efficiency, combined
with the added physics, meant the GISS model I could be run for five years. It
was shown that global climate can be simulated reasonably well with a grid-
point resolution as coarse as 1000 kilometers. The first climate prediction
computed from a general circulation model that was published by Hansen was in
1988, the same year as his well-known Senate testimony. The second generation
of the GISS model was used to estimate the change in mean surface temperature
based on a variety of scenarios of future greenhouse gas emissions. Hansen
concluded that global warming would be evident within the next few decades, and
that it would result in temperatures at least as high as during the Eemian. He
argued that, if the temperature rises above the 1950-1980 mean for a few years,
it is the "smoking gun" pointing to human-caused global warming. In 2006,
Hansen and colleagues compared the observations with the projections made by
Hansen in his 1988 testimony before the United States Congress. They described
the intermediate scenario as the most likely, and that real-world greenhouse
gas forcing has been closest to this scenario. It contained the effects of
three volcanic eruptions in the fifty-year projections, with one in the 1995,
whereas the recent Mount Pinatubo eruption was in 1991. They found that the
observed warming was similar to two of the three scenarios. The warming rates
of the two most modest warming scenarios are nearly the same through the year
2000, and they were unable to provide a precise model assessment. They did note
that the agreement between the observations and the intermediate scenario was
accidental because the climate sensitivity used was higher than current
estimates. A year later, Hansen joined with Rahmstorf and colleagues comparing
climate projections with observations. The comparison is done from 1990 through
January 2007 against physics-based models that are independent from the
observations after 1990. They show that the climate system may be responding
faster than the models indicate. Rahmstorf and coauthors show concern that sea
levels are rising at the high range of the IPCC projections, and that it is due
to thermal expansion and not from melting of the Greenland or Antarctic ice
sheets. Following the launch of spacecraft capable of determining temperatures,
Roy Spencer and John Christy published the first version of their satellite
temperature measurements in 1990. Contrary to climate models and surface
measurements, their results showed a cooling in the troposphere. However, in
1998, Wentz and Schabel determined that orbital decay had an effect on the
derived temperatures. Hansen compared the corrected troposphere temperatures
with the results of the published GISS model, and concluded that the model is
in good agreement with the observations, noting that the satellite temperature
data had been the last holdout of global warming denialists, and that the
correction of the data would result in a change from discussing whether global
warming is occurring to what is the rate of global warming, and what should be
done about it. Hansen has continued the development and diagnostics of climate
models. For instance, he has helped look at the decadal trends in tropopause
height, which could be a useful tool for determining the human "fingerprint" on
climate. , the current version of the GISS model is Model E. This version has
seen improvements in many areas, including upper-level winds, cloud height, and
precipitation. This model still has problems with regions of marine
stratocumulus clouds. A later paper showed that the model's main problems are
having too weak of an ENSO-like variability, and poor sea ice modeling,
resulting in too little ice in the Southern Hemisphere and too much in the
Northern Hemisphere. Climate forcings, feedbacks, and sensitivity. In 2000
Hansen authored a paper called "Global warming in the twenty-first century: an
alternative scenario" in which he presents a more optimistic way of dealing
with global warming, focusing on non-CO2 gases and black carbon in the short
run, giving more time to make reductions in fossil fuel emissions. He notes
that the net warming observed to date is roughly as big as that expected from
non-CO2 gases only. This is because CO2 warming is offset by climate-cooling
aerosols emitted with fossil fuel burning and because at that time non-CO2
gases, taken together, were responsible for roughly 50% of the anthropogenic
greenhouse gas warming. In a paper published May 18, 2007, Hansen discussed the
potential danger of "fast-feedback" effects causing ice sheet disintegration,
based on paleoclimate data. George Monbiot reports "The IPCC predicts that sea
levels could rise by as much as this century. Hansen‚Äôs paper argues that the
slow melting of ice sheets the panel expects doesn‚Äôt fit the data. The
geological record suggests that ice at the poles does not melt in a gradual and
linear fashion, but flips suddenly from one state to another. When temperatures
increased to 2‚Äì3¬∞C (3.6‚Äì5.4¬∞F) above today‚Äôs level 3.5 million years
ago, sea levels rose not by 59 centimeters but by . The ice responded
immediately to changes in temperature." Hansen stresses the uncertainties
around these predictions. "It is difficult to predict time of collapse in such
a nonlinear problem ... An ice sheet response time of centuries seems probable,
and we cannot rule out large changes on decadal time-scales once wide-scale
surface melt is underway." He concludes that "present knowledge does not permit
accurate specification of the dangerous level of human-made gases. However, it
is much lower than has commonly been assumed. If we have not already passed the
dangerous level, the energy infrastructure in place ensures that we will pass
it within several decades." Responsibility for climate change. Hansen notes
that in determining responsibility for climate change, the effect of greenhouse
gas emissions on climate is determined not by current emissions, but by
accumulated emissions over the lifetime of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
By this measure, the U.K. is still the largest single cause of climate change,
followed by the U.S. and Germany, even though its current emissions are
surpassed by the Peoples Republic of China. On public policy, Hansen is
critical of what he sees as efforts to mislead the public on the issue of
climate change. He points specifically to the Competitive Enterprise
Institute's commercials with the tagline "carbon dioxide‚Äîthey call it
pollution, we call it life", and politicians who accept money from fossil-fuel
interests and then describe global warming as "a great hoax." He also says that
changes needed to reduce global warming do not require hardship or reduction in
the quality of life, but will also produce benefits such as cleaner air and
water, and growth of high-tech industries. He was a critic of both the Clinton
and George W. Bush Administrations' stances on climate change. Addressing the
potential effects of climate change, Hansen has stated in an interview in
January, 2009, "We cannot now afford to put off change any longer. We have to
get on a new path within this new administration. We have only four years left
for Obama to set an example to the rest of the world. America must take the
lead." Hansen has been particularly critical of the coal industry, stating that
coal contributes the largest percentage of anthropogenic carbon dioxide into
the atmosphere. He acknowledges that a molecule of carbon dioxide emitted from
burning coal has the same effect as a molecule emitted from burning oil. The
difference is where the fuel originally resides. He says that most oil comes
from Russia and Saudi Arabia, and that no matter how fuel-efficient automobiles
become, the oil will eventually be burned and the emitted. In a 2007 testimony
before the Iowa Utilities Board, he stated that the United States has a large
reservoir of coal, which makes it a resource that can be controlled through
action by U.S. politicians, unlike oil which is controlled by other countries.
He has called for phasing out coal power completely by the year 2030. During
his testimony before the Iowa Utilities Board in 2007, Hansen likened coal
trains to "death trains" and asserted that these would be "no less gruesome
than if they were boxcars headed to crematoria, loaded with uncountable
irreplaceable species." In response, the National Mining Association stated
that his comparison "trivialized the suffering of millions" and "undermined his
credibility." Citing the reactions of "several people" and "three of his
scientific colleagues" as his primary motivation, Hansen stated that he
certainly did not mean to trivialize suffering by the families who lost
relatives in the Holocaust and then apologized, saying he regretted that his
words caused pain to some readers. Hansen in his 2009 open letter to President
Obama advocates a "Moratorium and phase-out of coal plants that do not capture
and store CO2". In his first book "Storms of My Grandchildren", similarly,
Hansen discusses his "Declaration of Stewardship", the first principle of which
requires "a moratorium on coal-fired power plants that do not capture and
sequester carbon dioxide". Hansen also has spoken against cap and trade,
advocating instead what he believes would be a progressive carbon tax at source
carbon as oil, gas or coal, with a 100% dividend returned to citizens in equal
shares. Proposed solutions. At the end of 2008, Hansen stated five priorities
that he felt then President-elect Obama should adopt "for solving the climate
and energy problems, while stimulating the economy": efficient energy use,
renewable energy, a smart grid, generation IV nuclear reactors and carbon
capture and storage. Regarding nuclear, he expressed opposition to the Yucca
Mountain nuclear waste repository, stating that the $25 Billion (US) surplus
held in the Nuclear Waste Fund "should be used to develop fast reactors that
consume nuclear waste, and thorium reactors to prevent the creation of new
long-lived nuclear waste." Honors and awards. Hansen was elected to the
National Academy of Sciences in 1996 for his "development of pioneering
radiative transfer models and studies of planetary atmospheres; development of
simplified and three-dimensional global climate models; explication of climate
forcing mechanisms; analysis of current climate trends from observational data;
and projections of anthropogenic impacts on the global climate system." In
2001, he received the 7th Annual Heinz Award in the Environment (endowed with
US$250,000) for his research on global warming, and was listed as one of Time
Magazine's 100 Most Influential People in 2006. Also in 2006, the American
Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) selected James Hansen to
receive its Award for Scientific Freedom and Responsibility "for his courageous
and steadfast advocacy in support of scientists' responsibilities to
communicate their scientific opinions and findings openly and honestly on
matters of public importance." In 2007, Hansen shared the US $1-million Dan
David Prize for "achievements having an outstanding scientific, technological,
cultural or social impact on our world". In 2008, he received the PNC Bank
Common Wealth Award of Distinguished Service for his "outstanding achievements"
in science. At the end of 2008, Hansen was named by EarthSky Communications and
a panel of 600 scientist-advisors as the "Scientist Communicator of the Year",
citing him as an "outspoken authority on climate change" who had "best
communicated with the public about vital science issues or concepts during
2008." In 2009, Hansen was awarded the 2009 Carl-Gustaf Rossby Research Medal,
the highest honor bestowed by the American Meteorological Society, for his
"outstanding contributions to climate modeling, understanding climate change
forcings and sensitivity, and for clear communication of climate science in the
public arena." Hansen won the 2010 Sophie Prize, set up in 1997 by Norwegian
Jostein Gaarder, the author of the 1991 best-selling novel and teenagers' guide
to philosophy "Sophie's World", for his " key role for the development of our
understanding of human-induced climate change." Controversies. Allegations of
censorship. Hansen has stated that NASA administrators once attempted to
influence his public statements about the causes of climate change. Hansen said
that NASA public relations staff were ordered to review his public statements
and interviews after a December 2005 lecture at the American Geophysical Union
in San Francisco. NASA responded that its policies are similar to those of any
other federal agency in requiring employees to coordinate all statements with
the public affairs office without exception. Two years after Hansen and other
agency employees described a pattern of distortion and suppression of climate
science by political , the agency‚Äôs inspector general found that the NASA
Office of Public Affairs had mischaracterized the science of climate change
intended for the public. Hansen has also appeared on "60 Minutes" stating that
the George W. Bush White House edited climate-related press releases reported
by federal agencies to make global warming seem less threatening. He also
stated that he was unable to speak freely without the backlash of other
government officials, and that he had not experienced that level of
restrictions on communicating with the public during his career. Trials for
fossil fuel chiefs. In 2008 interviews with "ABC News", "The Guardian", and in
a separate op-ed, Hansen has called for putting fossil fuel company executives,
including the CEOs of ExxonMobil and Peabody Coal, on trial for "high crimes
against humanity and nature", on the grounds that these and other fossil-fuel
companies had actively spread doubt and misinformation about global warming, in
the same way that tobacco companies tried to hide the link between smoking and
cancer. Arrests. On June 23, 2009, James Hansen, along with 30 other protesters
including actress Daryl Hannah, was arrested on misdemeanor charges of
obstructing police and impeding traffic, during a protest against mountaintop
removal mining in Raleigh County, West Virginia. The protesters intended to
enter the property of Massey Energy Company, but were blocked by a crowd of
several hundred coal miners and supporters. Hansen said that mountaintop
removal for coal mining " only a small fraction of our energy" and "should be
abolished." Hansen called on President Barack Obama to abolish mountaintop coal
mining. Hansen and about 100 other people were arrested in September 2010 in
front of the White House in Washington, DC. The group was seeking a ban on
mountaintop removal or surface mining. Hansen and 142 other activists were
arrested in August 2011, at another demonstration in front of the White House.
Hansen urged President Obama to reject the Keystone pipeline extension intended
to carry more synthetic crude oil from Canada's Athabasca Oil Sands to US
markets. Criticism. Andrew Freedman, an environmental journalist and columnist
at the "Washington Post", believes the American Meteorological Society erred in
giving Hansen its 2009 Carl-Gustaf Rossby Research Medal: "His body of work is
not at issue... Rather, the problem arises due to the AMS' recognition of
Hansen's public communication work on climate change." Former AMS member Joseph
D'Aleo, a skeptic of human-caused climate change, also criticized the award.
Physicist Freeman Dyson is critical of Hansen's climate-change activism. "The
person who is really responsible for this overestimate of global warming is Jim
Hansen. He consistently exaggerates all the dangers... Hansen has turned his
science into ideology." Dyson "doesn't know what he‚Äôs talking about", Hansen
responded. "He should first do his homework." Dyson stated in an interview that
the argument with Hansen was exaggerated by the "New York Times", stating that
he and Hansen are "friends, but we don't agree on everything." After Hansen's
arrest in West Virginia, "New York Times" columnist Andrew Revkin wrote: "Dr.
Hansen has pushed far beyond the boundaries of the conventional role of
scientists, particularly government scientists, in the environmental policy
debate." In 2009, Hansen advocated the participation of citizens at a March 2
protest at the Capitol Power Plant in Washington, D.C. Hansen stated, "We need
to send a message to Congress and the president that we want them to take the
actions that are needed to preserve climate for young people and future
generations and all life on the planet". "New Yorker" journalist Elizabeth
Kolbert believes Hansen is "increasingly isolated among climate activists."
Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, said
that "I view Jim Hansen as heroic as a scientist... But I wish he would stick
to what he really knows. Because I don't think he has a realistic idea of what
is politically possible..." "New York Times" climate columnist Christa Marshall
asks if Hansen still matters in the ongoing climate debate, noting that he "has
irked many longtime supporters with his scathing attacks against President
Obama's plan for a cap-and-trade system." "The right wing loves what he's
doing," said Joseph Romm, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress,
a think tank. Hansen said that he had to speak out, since few others could
explain the links between politics and the climate models. "You just have to
say what you think is right," he said.
