Jan Wong controversy On September 16, 2006, three days after the shooting at
Dawson College in Montreal, Canada‚Äôs nationally distributed newspaper of
record, "The Globe & Mail", published a front-page article titled, ‚ÄúGet under
the desk,‚Äù by Jan Wong. In the article, Ms. Wong controversially linked all
three Quebec school shootings of the last two decades‚Äî1989 √âcole
Polytechnique Massacre (15 deaths), 1992 Concordia University Massacre (4
deaths), and 2006 Dawson College Shooting (2 deaths)‚Äîto the purported
alienation brought about by ‚Äúthe decades-long linguistic struggle‚Äù within
the province. Public outcry and political condemnation soon followed in many
venues. In response, a "Globe and Mail" editorial attempted to minimize the
controversy as a "small uproar" over journalistic freedom, but this caused
further condemnation. Jan Wong maintained her perspective and wrote extensively
about the whole experience in her book "Out of the Blue, A Memoir of Workplace
Depression, Recovery, Redemption and, Yes, Happiness". Article. Wong suggested
that the school shootings might have been related to the fact that the
perpetrators were not old-stock French Qu√©b√©cois: (Marc L√©pine was half-
Algerian, Valery Fabrikant was a Russian Jew, and Kimveer Gill was of Indian
heritage); and they had been alienated by a Quebec society concerned with
‚Äúracial purity.‚Äù Citing the history of the use of the antiquated term
‚Äúpure laine,‚Äù (‚Äúpure wool‚Äù), Wong postulated the existence of a
uniquely Qu√©b√©cois brand of racism, writing: ‚ÄúElsewhere, to talk of racial
‚Äòpurity‚Äô is repugnant. Not in Quebec.‚Äù The article also portrayed school
shootings in Canada as a Quebec phenomenon, citing Jan Bryan, columnist for the
"Montreal Gazette", saying, ‚ÄúThree doesn‚Äôt mean anything. But three out of
three in Quebec means something.‚Äù It also presented the Montreal anglophone
community as a small-town, close-knit community. Public reaction. Hundreds of
letters of complaints were received by "The Globe and Mail". As in Barbara
Kay's case, the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society (SSJB) lodged a complaint to the
Quebec Press Council. SSJB president Jean Dorion declared "There is no
obsession for racial purity in Quebec, definitely not. [...] The expression
'pure laine' is absolutely obsolete." The blogosphere soon saw a flood of posts
against Wong's allegations. Wong received hate mail, including racist comments
about her Chinese ethnicity and post containing excrement. She also received a
death threat that resulted in Wong's family contacting the police. Journalistic
reaction. A number of Quebec journalists denounced Wong's article. French-born
journalist Michel Vastel, in his blog for the news magazine "L'actualit√©",
called the article "deceitful racism" and the interpretation "repugnant". His
opposition was advanced again in a following "Journal de Qu√©bec" piece by
Vastel. Wong's article was condemned by federalist "La Presse" editorialist
Andr√© Pratte (in a letter to the "Globe" and a "La Presse" editorial),
journalists Michel C. Auger of "Le Journal de Montr√©al", Michel David and
Michel Venne (sovereigntist) of "Le Devoir", Alain Dubuc (federalist), Vincent
Marissal, Yves Boisvert and St√©phane Laporte of "La Presse", Jos√©e Legault
(sovereigntist) of "The Gazette", Jean-Jacques Samson of "Le Soleil",
sovereigntist militant and author Patrick Bourgeois of "Le Qu√©b√©cois",
G√©rald Leblanc, retired journalist of "La Presse" and Joseph Facal, "Journal
de Montr√©al" columnist and former Parti Qu√©b√©cois minister. Although the
"Gazette" called it "nonsense" in an editorial, it found the reaction to be out
of proportion, as did Lysiane Gagnon from "La Presse", who nonetheless called
the theory "delirious". "Gazette" journalist Don Macpherson wrote: "By the
standards of Wong‚Äôs article, one could just as easily blame the shootings on
federalism, since all three happened to occur while the Quebec Liberals were in
power". He advanced that, on the contrary, the tragedy and the controversy
around Wong's article had shown a remarkable unity between French and English-
speaking Quebecers. Barbara Kay, author of the "Quebecistan" controversy,
herself criticized Wong, calling the analysis "bullshit". Jack Jedwab,
Executive Director of the Association for Canadian Studies in Montreal and
former Executive Director of the Quebec Region of the Canadian Jewish Congress,
noted that the expression "pure laine" was "no longer quite common". He also
called the analysis "nonsense". "The Globe and Mail" remarked that "[in English
Canada, unsurprisingly, the response has been considerably more muted".
However, on September 28, 2006, Warren Kinsella wrote a harsh criticism of
Wong's work in "The National Post". Kinsella was born in Montreal, Quebec.
Critics of the piece contend that linguistic factors were never claimed by the
assassins. According to them, L√©pine had a grudge against women and feminists;
Fabrikant against rival scholars; and Gill, a bullied child, targeted students
and said in his notorious internet blog that Quebec was a ‚Äúgood place to live
in.‚Äù These critics maintain that it is incorrect to consider L√©pine as not
having been part of Francophone, Qu√©b√©cois society given that, while he may
have been estranged from his Algerian-born father, he was raised mainly by his
French-speaking, Qu√©b√©coise mother, whose name he had adopted (he was born
Gamil Gharbi). Moreover, they note that both Fabrikant and Gill targeted
anglophones, not francophones. Political reaction. Micheline Labelle, director
of the "Centre de recherche sur l‚Äôimmigration, l‚Äôethnicit√© et la
citoyennet√©" (CRIEC, "Centre for research on immigration, ethnicity and
citizenship") at the Universit√© du Qu√©bec √  Montr√©al stated that she saw in
the arguments something akin to "neoracism", that is to say, a generalization
of a cultural trait applied to a given population. "For less than that,
minorities go to the courts", she said. On September 19, 2006, the Canadian
Press reported that federalist Premier of Quebec Jean Charest demanded an
apology, calling the article a "disgrace". He sent an open letter to the
"Globe" vigorously defending Quebec's society and its language protection.
Conservative Prime Minister of Canada Stephen Harper called Wong's argument
"prejudiced", "absurd", "irresponsible" and "without foundation". He sent the
"Globe" a similar letter. "These actions (the killings) deserve our unqualified
moral condemnation, not an excuse for printing prejudices masked in the
language of social theory," Harper wrote. Parti Qu√©b√©cois leader Andr√©
Boisclair declared that the journalist had, on the intellectual level, "slipped
into the dregs" (""gliss√© dans les bas fonds""). Former Premier of Quebec
Bernard Landry declared to "La Tribune" "if she is of good faith, she will have
to apologize [...] It is incredible that it is still possible today to convey
such delirious opinions on Quebec. Especially in an era when Quebec is more
cosmopolitan than ever. [...] It is insulting for Quebec and dishonouring for
Canada. In the same way as if I saw a similar article about Ontario in La
Tribune, I would be ashamed for La Tribune." Cameroon-born Bloc Qu√©b√©cois
Member of Parliament Maka Kotto issued a declaration at the Canadian House of
Commons stating "to pretend that there could be a link of any kind of cause-
and-effect between the dramatic episode of Dawson College and Bill 101 ‚Äî
described as infamous by the journalist ‚Äî pertains of a defamatory delirium
disconnected from the Quebec reality. [...] Quebec is an inclusive, welcoming
society where it is pleasant to live. As an immigrant, I felt very rapidly
welcome there and I deplore that the openness of the Quebec people can be put
into question." He invited the federal government to denounce the writings of
Jan Wong as well. On September 20 the House of Commons unanimously passed a
motion requesting an apology "to the Quebec people" for the column. Denis
Coderre, the Liberal MP who tabled the motion, called the column "classless".
"People feel there's a sort [...] of trend.", he said. "I think that it's
enough. We're not "Quebecistan", we're not a people that ostracizes, we're a
model of integration." Coderre was in the group of politicians attacked by
Barbara Kay in the "Quebecistan" controversy, also accused of "Quebec bashing".
Marie-H√©l√®ne Paradis, press attach√© of Quebec Minister of Immigration Lise
Th√©riault, said "No data can support what Ms. Wong advances." She declared
that such allegations feed "the type of fast judgements that lead to
discrimination." Despite having voted for the motion, Conservative Member of
Parliament Daniel Petit declared that there might be a link, as Wong suggested.
"I think that the billion (dollars) that we put in Canadian gun registry should
have been put into education and integration of immigrants in Montreal", Petit
said. Dimitri Soudas, press attach√© for Conservative Prime Minister Harper,
said "The comments of Mr. Petit are unacceptable, he should retract them and it
does not reflect in any case the position of the government", adding that Petit
was met by the Prime Minister's cabinet on the subject. MPs of the House of
Commons criticized him for his statements, including Michel Gauthier, of the
Bloc Qu√©b√©cois, and Denis Coderre, of the Liberal Party of Canada, who
demanded apologies. He offered them promptly. "I made inappropriate remarks,"
Petit said in a statement. "I withdraw them entirely because you cannot draw
any link between the integration of immigrants in Quebec and the terrible
tragedy at Dawson College." Globe and Mail editorial response. On September 21,
2006, "The Globe and Mail" published an editorial on the affair. Calling the
controversy a "small uproar", it defended the right of the journalist to
question such phenomena, the "need to ask hard questions and explore
uncomfortable avenues", saying that it "merely wondered". The editor claimed
not to be surprised by the hundreds of letters of protest received, including
those of First Ministers Charest and Harper. The editorial validated Wong's
claims of alienation in Quebec, which the "Globe" called "politics of
exclusion". Asking whether this exclusion led to marginalization and perhaps
alienation, it said that the answer is "arguable". However, it called the
marginalization and alienation of the three shooters "obvious". About whether
it could be associated with the murders, it answered that "o such evidence
exists". In a sentence apparently intended to balance the assertions, it
implied at the same time that an even worse discrimination existed in the
Quebec of the past, as it wrote: "By the same token, it would be remiss to
forget that today‚Äôs Quebec is not the Quebec of yesteryear." "The Globe and
Mail" did not issue an apology for Jan Wong's piece, as requested by many,
including the unanimous House of Commons. Reactions to the editorial. Leader of
the Bloc Qu√©b√©cois Gilles Duceppe declared that he considered the editorial
an attempt at justification. "It even suggests there might be some problems in
Quebec because of the language laws. It's unacceptable and it's deplorable and
it's shameful for a newspaper of that stature", he said. "Try imagining the
opposite ‚Äî If I'd made such nonsensical, absurd remarks (about English
Canada). Then all the editorial writers across Canada would get involved."
Premier of Quebec Jean Charest was said to be disappointed by the "Globe and
Mail" response. He was also said to be offended by the little consideration the
paper gave his open letter, that was published in the readers' opinion page
(like the one from Prime Minister Harper). "The (House of Commons) motion is
totally ignored", said the Premier's press attach√©. On September 23, 2006, the
Canadian Press reported that Edward Greenspon, editor of "The Globe and Mail",
expressed regrets. In a "Globe and Mail" column, without making formal
apologies, he wrote that the personal opinions of Wong should have been excised
from the piece, not because they were unacceptable, but because they
constituted a "thesis", not a "statement of fact". He wrote that "they should
have been put into a separate piece clearly marked opinion". He however
believed the reaction to be clearly disproportionate. Despite Greenspon's
insinuation that the piece was not "clearly marked opinion", it had in fact
been accompanied by a headshot of Wong, the traditional means of designating
opinion pieces. Jan Wong's response. Jan Wong declined the invitation of host
Guy A. Lepage to explain herself at the popular Qu√©b√©cois talk show "Tout le
monde en parle". She has declared: "I brought forward a point of view [...] and
I maintain it." She has claimed that, during the controversy, she was the
target of sexist and racist attacks, citing a "Le Devoir" cartoon that
caricatured Wong with thick glasses and buck teeth opening a fortune cookie
that said "Beware of Bill 101". The newspaper claimed that it was a reference
to the Chinese restaurants of her well-known father, Bill Wong, not her
ethnicity. Jan Wong wrote extensively about the whole experience in her book
"Out of the Blue, A Memoir of Workplace Depression, Recovery, Redemption and
Yes, Happiness". In it, Jan Wong described in detail the backlash she received
immediately after her article published, how the Globe and Mail management, in
her view, abandoned her in front of the torrent of negative reactions from all
sides, and how she spiraled down into depression. She described when she found
the ‚Äòexact moment I began my descent into depression‚Äô when she was
shattered by racial attack. This book was self-published after Doubleday, the
publisher of her previous books, pulled out mere days before print although
Doubleday denied any legal interference from "The Globe". It was released on
May 5, 2012.
