Jean Schmidt Jeannette Marie Hoffman Schmidt, (born November 29, 1951) is the
U.S. Representative for , serving since 2005. She is a member of the Republican
Party. The district stretches from eastern Cincinnati to Portsmouth. Schmidt is
the second female Ohio Republican to be elected to Congress without succeeding
her husband and the first woman to represent the Cincinnati area in the House.
She won the Ohio 2nd congressional district seat in a special election on
August 2, 2005, by 3.5 percentage points over Democrat and Iraq War veteran
Paul Hackett, amid national attention to the race because of Hackett's strong
views on the war. The margin of her victory led many Democrats to claim a
victory for their party, since the district had been reliably Republican for
the past 30 years, and to forecast trouble for the Republicans in 2006. Despite
these forecasts, Schmidt defeated former representative Bob McEwen in a
Republican primary in May 2006 and Democrat Victoria Wells Wulsin, a medical
doctor, in 2006 with 50.4% of the vote. She was re-elected in 2008, winning
with 45% of the vote, and in 2010, winning with 58.6%. On March 6, 2012,
Schmidt was defeated for re-election in the GOP primary by Brad Wenstrup. Early
life, education, and early political career. Schmidt, born in Cincinnati, Ohio,
is a lifelong resident of Clermont County's Miami Township, along the eastern
shore of Little Miami River near Milford and Loveland. One of four children
(two daughters, two sons) of Augustus ("Gus") and Jeannette Hoffman, she has a
twin sister, Jennifer Black. Her father made his money in the savings and loan
industry, then ran an auto racing team that competed in the Indianapolis 500.
She earned a B.A. in political science from the University of Cincinnati in
1974. Schmidt worked in her father's bank, the Midwestern Savings Association,
as a branch manager from 1971 to 1978. Schmidt was a delegate to the Republican
National Convention in 1984. She was a fitness instructor from 1984 to 1986,
when she began a four-year career as a schoolteacher. Schmidt was elected as a
Miami Township trustee in 1989, finishing first of three candidates for two
seats and winning 4,362 votes. When Clermont County Commissioner Jerry McBride
resigned in 1991 to become a judge, Schmidt was one of four candidates to
replace him, but was not appointed by the Clermont County Republican Party. In
her 1993 bid for reelection, she finished first in a field of four, taking
3,644 votes. In 1995, she traveled to Russia to offer instruction about
political campaigning in a country that had little experience of free
elections. On her trip she ran in Moscow's Red Square: "Did I ever feel unsafe?
No. And would I jog through Central Park in New York? No way." One major issue
during her service on the Board of Trustees was one common in Ohio: a city, in
this case Milford, was annexing parts of the township. She and other trustees
lobbied the Ohio General Assembly for new laws to protect townships from such
annexations. In 1993, a panel of Miami Township residents recommended the
township incorporate to protect itself from annexations, to have greater
control over its territory, and to obtain more money from the state. However,
Schmidt as a trustee was not a participant in this effort, saying she had to be
a "cheerleader" on the sides. (The incorporation effort failed.) Schmidt was
reelected to a third term in 1997, finishing first in a field of three with
5,110 votes. "Jean has been an excellent trustee and has done so much for this
community. It is going to be hard to find someone that's as committed to the
township as she has been," said David Duckworth, Miami Township administrator,
when she resigned her trustee seat to enter the Ohio House. The remaining two
trustees appointed Mary Makley Wolff to the remainder of the term. Ohio House
of Representatives. Elections. 2000 she ran for the Ohio House of
Representatives seat being vacated by Sam Bateman, who was prevented by term
limits from running again. She told "The Cincinnati Post" that before Bateman
had been appointed to the seat in the early 1980s, Clermont County Republican
leaders "offered me the job on a silver platter" but she turned them down
because her daughter was only four years old at the time. But in 2000, her
daughter was in college and she decided to run. Unopposed in the March primary,
"The Cincinnati Enquirer" endorsed her in the general election, writing "Seldom
has a choice been more obvious than that between Republican Jean Schmidt and
Democrat Sherrill Callahan." Schmidt was easily elected to the 124th Ohio
General Assembly from the 71st House District by defeating Callahan, a retired
high school principal from Pierce Township. Schmidt received 36,433 votes (70.4
percent) to Callahan's 15,327 (29.6 percent). Her district was entirely within
Clermont County, containing Miami Township as well as Batavia, Goshen, Pierce,
Stonelick and Union Townships, plus the cities of Amelia, Batavia and Milford,
and the Clermont County part of the city of Loveland. After the redistricting
necessitated by the 2000 census, her district became the 66th and contained the
same territory minus Pierce and Stonelick Townships." Tenure. "The Cincinnati
Enquirer" wrote she introduced and passed bills "remarkable in number and
quality for a neophyte lawmaker." She sponsored legislation on the Clermont
County courts, limiting the ability of public employees to collect both pension
and salary simultaneously ("double dipping"), urban townships, and protecting
townships from annexations of their territory by cities, all of which were
passed into law. She also pushed legislation on the health of women, suicide
prevention, abstinence education, and to "lock killers away for good" by making
it easier for judges to sentence murderers to life terms. Schmidt also
supported Ohio's concealed carry law. Committee assignments. In the House she
served on the Finance and Appropriations; Human Services and Aging; Banking,
Pensions and Securities; and Public Utilities Committees. She was excited to be
in the Statehouse: "Oh my God, I'm really a state representative" she was
overheard telling a fellow freshman. In 2002, she was elected to the 125th
General Assembly without opposition in both the primary and general elections.
2004 Ohio state senatorial election. In 2004, she ran for the 14th District
seat in the Ohio Senate to replace Senate President Doug White, who was
retiring. The Senate seat included Clermont, Brown, Adams and Scioto counties
and part of Lawrence County. Her opponent for the Republican nomination was Tom
Niehaus, a fellow member of the Ohio House from New Richmond whose 88th
District represented the half of Clermont County outside her district plus
Brown and Adams Counties to the east. Schmidt told the "Enquirer" "The fear
from many of the people I meet is that because the next senator will come from
Clermont County, they will be underrepresented. But if you know anything about
me, I don't under-represent anybody." She also said she worried about the state
budget: "We do have a history of overspending in Ohio. But it's not just recent
history. It's a 40-year-old habit." "The Enquirer" was dismayed by
advertisements from the Ohio Taxpayers Association "twisting the two
candidates' voting records to Schmidt's advantage" and endorsed Niehaus.
Schmidt had endorsements from key state leaders such as Ohio State Treasurer
Joe Deters and Speaker of the Ohio House Larry Householder. The campaign was
marred by allegations that Householder's staff had improperly tried to obtain
Niehaus's withdrawal from the race and that Householder had told Niehaus's
supporters to donate money to Schmidt's campaign. In the initial count of the
Republican primary vote on March 2, 2004, she led by just 62 votes. A recount
was automatically ordered, which reversed the outcome. Schmidt ultimately lost
by just 22 votes: 17,076 (49.97%) to Niehaus's 17,098 (50.03%). She told "The
Cincinnati Enquirer" on election night "This is the way my whole life has been
â€” one tough race after another." U.S. House of Representatives. Elections.
When President George W. Bush nominated Rob Portman, who had just been elected
to a sixth full term, to be U.S. Trade Representative on March 17, 2005, eleven
Republicans entered the race for his seat. Schmidt launched her campaign for
Congress in Montgomery on April 11, the first candidate from outside Hamilton
County to declare. She emphasized the need for all parts of the district to be
represented: "We must always balance the interests of Hamilton County, which is
more urban, with those of the more rural part of our district." She said of her
predecessor, "While I know that I cannot fill Rob's shoes, I know that I am the
right person to continue the tradition of leadership and character." Early
polling showed Hamilton County Commissioner Pat DeWine leading at 42%, with
Schmidt tied for third at 7%. In her campaign, Schmidt ran on a conservative
platform. In one mailing to voters, she promised to "reduce our taxes", "keep
our nation safe", advocated "a responsible energy policy", and for "promoting
family values." The tag line on the mailer was "continuing a tradition of
character and leadership." Schmidt's campaign literature noted her pro-life
voting record, her opposition to same-sex marriage, her high ratings from the
National Rifle Association, and that she "opposes an activist court system that
acts against our conservative values." The literature also featured her
endorsement by Phil Fulton, a pastor who fought the court ordered removal of
tablets containing the Ten Commandments from the grounds of schools in Adams
County. A major factor in the primary campaign was DeWine's marriage. In 2004,
DeWine's opponent ran ads calling attention to DeWine leaving his pregnant wife
and their two children for a mistress working as a lobbyist. Schmidt made it a
point in her stump speech to emphasize how long she had been married to her
husband: "I am a woman of character who has been married for twenty-nine
years." Despite being far outspent by DeWine, on June 14, 2005, Schmidt
finished first in the Republican primary, with 31 percent of the vote. McEwen
finished second with 25 percent, Brinkman was third with 20 percent, and DeWine
had 12 percent. Two days after the primary, an editorial cartoon in the "The
Cincinnati Enquirer", commenting on DeWine's marriage being such a factor in
the primary, showed Schmidt asking Paul Hackett, who had won the Democratic
primary, "You have a good marriage. I have a good marriage. What the heck are
we going to campaign about?" Many politicos blame Dewine's barrage of attacks
on McEwen as the main reason for Schmidt's win. Schmidt faced Democratic
nominee Paul Hackett, described by "The New York Times" as six foot four and
"garrulous, profane, and quick with a barked retort or a mischievous joke" in
the August 2, 2005, special election. Hackett had organized the recall of a
councilman in Milford in 1995 and was elected to the council in his place,
serving three years. He had also just returned from a tour of duty in Iraq and
referred to his combat experiences in the campaign. The district was reliably
Republican, the "Cook Political Report" calling the Second District the fifty-
seventh most Republican in America. Among Ohio's congressional districts, only
the 4th District is considered more Republican. The district had been in
Republican hands for all but nine years since 1879, and no Democrat had held
the seat since Thomas A. Luken's narrow loss to Willis D. Gradison in 1974. The
last Democrat to win a full term in the district was John J. Gilligan, who held
the seat for one term after being swept into office in the giant Democratic
landslide of 1964. John Green, a political science professor at the University
of Akron told "USA Today" "It's a real steep uphill climb for Hackett. It is
such a Republican district." Jane S. Anderson, an adjunct professor of
political science at the University of Cincinnati who has unsuccessfully run
for the Cincinnati city council and the Ohio House as a Democrat, told the
Associated Press   Hackett criticized Schmidt as a "rubber stamp" for Governor
Bob Taft's "failed policies", and claimed she would continue in that role for
George W. Bush if elected. At their debate at Chatfield College, Hackett said
"If you think America is on the right track and we need more of the same, I'm
not your candidate" and asked "Are you better off today than you were five
years ago?", echoing Ronald Reagan's question in his debate with Jimmy Carter
in 1980. "Rubber stamp" was Hackett's catchphrase throughout the campaign.
Hackett even appeared in front of the Hathaway Rubber Stamp store in downtown
Cincinnati on July 27 to emphasize the point. "If you think America needs
another career politician steeped in a culture of corruption who does as she's
told and toes the line on failed policies, then I'm not your candidate," he
wrote in a guest column for "The Cincinnati Post". However, Schmidt said that
she was proud to be associated with Bush, sending campaign mail with a
photograph of them together in the Oval Office. A month before the election the
inspector general of the Ohio General Assembly announced he was investigating
three legislators for accepting gifts and failing to report them. Schmidt was
implicated in this, but could not be investigated because she was no longer a
member of the Ohio house. (The others were Representatives Jim Raussen of
Springdale, Michelle G. Schneider of Madeira, and Diana M. Fessler of New
Carlisle.) On October 24, 2004, the legislators had accepted dinner at Nicola's
Ristorante on Sycamore Street in Cincinnati's Over-the-Rhine neighborhood and
Cincinnati Bengals tickets from a lobbyist for pharmaceutical company Chiron.
Schmidt said she thought her $644 gift was from former Bengals player Boomer
Esiason, who was, like Chiron, interested in cystic fibrosis. Schmidt repaid
the lobbyist for the cost of the entertainment. Her spokesman told "The
Columbus Dispatch" "Jean specifically asked if this was a reportable gift. We
immediately corrected it by paying the full price of the tickets." Her former
colleague Raussen blamed the lobbyist. "Here we have a lobbyist who was
extremely sloppy." Hackett hammered on Schmidt's ethics. When she denied she
knew or ever met Thomas Noe, at the center of the Coingate investment scandal
at the Ohio Bureau of Workers Compensation, Hackett produced minutes from a
meeting of the Ohio Board of Regents that showed Schmidt had indeed met with
Noe, once a regent. On July 29, the "Toledo Blade" reported on a 2001 e-mail
from Taft's assistant Jon Allison complaining Schmidt was "bugging" him about
setting up an Internet lottery for Cincinnati businessman Roger Ach, who gave
her a $1,000 contribution the next year. Schmidt spokesman Fritz Wenzel said
the candidate did not recall any conversations with the governor about Ach's
business. The candidates participated in only two debates. The first was held
on July 7 at Chatfield College in St. Martin in Brown County, moderated by Jack
Atherton of WXIX-TV, the Fox Network affiliate in Cincinnati. Hackett told the
audience his opponent was "a rubber stamp for failed policies" and "if you
think America is on the right track and we need more of the same, I'm not your
candidate." The second debate was held July 26 at the Ohio Valley Career and
Technical Center in West Union in Adams County. Howard Wilkinson of "The
Cincinnati Enquirer" said Hackett in the second debate was "trying to paint
Schmidt as a Taft-Bush robot." The two also made joint appearances on WCET-TV's
"Forum" on July 28 and WKRC-TV's "Newsmakers" on July 31. "The Cincinnati
Enquirer" ran a front page story on July 2 reporting on the candidates
financial disclosure statements that revealed both were millionaires. Schmidt
was worth between $1,700,000 and $6,800,000; most of her wealth was her share
of RTJJ, LLC, a real estate company owned with her three siblings. Hackett was
worth between $650,000 and $1,600,000. (These figures did not include the value
of either's home. The Clermont County Auditor valued Schmidt's home on at
$138,510 and the Hamilton County Auditor valued Hackett's home on at $552,800.)
Schmidt used her own wealth in the campaign. She told "The Cincinnati Post" the
week before the election she put $200,000 of her money in the campaign that she
had planned to use to buy a condominium in Florida. The paper noted the median
household income in the district was $46,813. Hackett attracted national
attention in newspapers, and expenditures by both parties at the national
level. The National Republican Congressional Committee announced on July 28 it
was spending $265,000 for television ads in the Cincinnati market, covering the
western part of the district, and $250,000 for ads in the Huntington, West
Virginia, market, covering the eastern half. The Democratic Congressional
Campaign Committee (DCCC) responded with commercials noting that Schmidt had
voted to raise the sales tax by 20% and the excise tax on gasoline by 30
percent when she was in the legislature. A DCCC mailing to voters reiterated
these charges under the headline "Who Voted for the Taft Sales Tax Increase â€”
the Largest in Ohio History?" and asked "can we trust Jean Schmidt to protect
middle-class families in Washington?"  Schmidt faced Democrat Victoria Wells
Wulsin, a doctor from Indian Hill in the November general election. During
Schmidt's re-election bid there were several controversies, which affected her
campaign. One was a March 2006 report about Schmidt's past claims that she had
a B.A. in secondary education from the University of Cincinnati, awarded in
1986. Schmidt's defenders pointed out that neither her current official or
campaign website had the second degree posted, and said that Schmidt had
completed the requirements for the degree but never filed the paperwork to be
awarded a diploma. On April 27, five days before the May 2 primary, the Ohio
Elections Commission voted 7-0 to issue Schmidt a public reprimand for "false
statements" for her claiming to have that second degree. The Commission also
found that Schmidt had made false claims of being endorsed by several
organizations, but that these did not warrant any reprimand. Schmidt won the
Republican primary defeating former U.S. Congressman Bob McEwen 48%-43%. She
defeated Wulsin 51%-49%, a difference of 2,865 votes, and a margin of 1.3%.
This was the closest a Republican had come to losing the seat in 42 years.
Schmidt held her seat by winning her home base in Clermont County by almost
8,000 votes. On January 20, 2008, Schmidt received the Hamilton County
Republican Party's endorsement for the March 4 Republican primary. In the
Republican primary, she defeated State Representative Tom Brinkman Jr. 58%-40%.
The Schmidt campaign sent out a fundraising letter accusing her Democratic
opponent, Victoria Wulsin of harboring a "contempt for the culture of life"
that led her to "participate in grotesque medical experiments" involving
injections of "malaria virus" into AIDS patients in Africa and China without
their consent. The Wulsin campaign vigorously denied the charges. The
"grotesque medical experiments" charge appears to be a reference to 2004 work
that Wulsin did with the Heimlich Institute in Ohio. She examined data that was
supplied to her as part of a literature review, taken from ongoing studies, of
experimental AIDS therapies that Wulsin concluded had potential. "She never
participated in any of the studies," said Wulsin communications director Kevin
Franck. "She was never in a position to stop any of them while they were in
progress ... Jean Schmidt knew that those complaints and those allegations had
no merit when she mailed the letter." There is also no such thing as a malaria
virus, as malaria is caused by protozoans. Schmidt was struck by a hit and run
driver while jogging, and was diagnosed with two broken ribs and two fractured
vertebrae. The injuries were not diagnosed immediately after the accident.
However, the week following the accident she was embarking on a weekend fact-
finding visit to Afghanistan when severe pain caused her to pass out while
landing at a U.S. Air Force Base in Germany. As a sign of respect, her
Democratic opponent, Victoria Wulsin, suspended her campaign while Schmidt
rested at home. Schmidt defeated Wulsin and David Krikorian 45%-37%-18%. She
underperformed Republican presidential nominee John McCain, who received 59% of
the vote in the district. Obama garnered 40% in the district, performing
slightly better than Wulsin. In the Republican primary, she defeated County
Commissioner Mike Kilburn, Debbi Alsfelder, and Tim Martz 62%-22%-9%-7%. In the
general election, she won re-election to a third term by defeating Surya
Yalamanchili 58%-35%. In the March Republican primary, Schmidt was unexpectedly
defeated by Iraq war veteran Brad Wenstrup 49%-43%. She carried six counties
(all located in eastern part of the CD), while Wenstrup only won two counties
(both located in the western part of CD): Hamilton County (59%) and Clermont
County (50%). Tenure. In Congress, Schmidt sponsored non-binding resolutions
that states hit by Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita should adopt a uniform
statewide building code (H. Con. Res. 285); that the words "under God" in the
Pledge of Allegiance were not an unconstitutional endorsement of religion (H.
Res. 453); and supporting Gold Star Mothers (H. J. Res. 61). As of 2005, she
was the original sponsor of one bill, H.R. 4180, a campaign finance reform
measure "to require communications that consist of prerecorded telephone calls
to meet the disclosure and disclaimer requirements applicable to general public
campaign communications transmitted through radio." She cosponsored bills to
provide ultrasounds to pregnant mothers (H.R. 216); to require women having
abortions be "fully informed regarding the pain experienced by their unborn
child" (H.R. 356); to allow free mail from families to servicemen in Iraq and
Afghanistan (H.R. 923); to require the Food and Drug Administration withdraw
its approval of the abortifacient drug RU-486 because of safety concerns (H.R.
1079); the "District of Columbia Personal Protection Act", which would repeal
District of Columbia law forbidding residents from owning guns (H.R. 1288); to
ban human cloning (H.R. 1357); to repeal the excise tax on telephones (H.R.
1898); to forbid federal courts from hearing cases on the constitutionality of
the Pledge of Allegiance (H.R. 2389); and to limit the use of eminent domain by
the states, a reaction to the Supreme Court ruling in "Kelo v. New London"
(H.R. 4128). Schmidt has called for reducing America's dependence on foreign
oil by increasing use of ethanol and drilling in Alaska's Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge. Schmidt told "The Cincinnati Post" "What's really important is
to adopt an environmental policy that advances the American economy and
national security. I supported the energy bill recently passed by the U.S.
House that will expand the use of alternative energy sources and additives like
ethanol." The League of Conservation Voters, a political action committee
advocating for environmental concerns, gave Jean Schmidt a lifetime average of
6 on a scale of 0 to 100. In 2005, she was rated at 0. Schmidt supported the
tax cuts championed by President George W. Bush. Schmidt called for additional
changes to the Internal Revenue Code, such as adopting a flat tax and repealing
the estate and capital gains taxes. Schmidt also professed to be a fiscal
conservative. A mailing sent to voters listed four examples of "wasteful
spending in Washington," which included "$45,000 to buy gold plated playing
cards for Air Force Two!" and "$1.2 million to study the breeding habits of a
woodchuck!" Schmidt made the Iraq War an issue in the race. She declared on
WCET-TV's "Forum" that "9/11 was a wakeup call. We lost our innocence" and
praised the Bush foreign policy. "The foundation of democracy that has been
planted in Afghanistan and Iraq", she said, has inspired reforms in Saudi
Arabia, Syria, Lebanon and elsewhere. At the Chatfield College debate on July
7, she said of Iraq and Saddam Hussein "We have toppled a terrorist regime, a
terrorist madman who now sits in a prison cell. This country has gone to the
ballot box and made its decision to become a democratic regime." Schmidt
appeared in public with a button in her lapel containing a photograph of Matt
Maupin, who was at the time the only prisoner of war of the Iraq campaign who
had not been freed and who was a native of Clermont County. Controversies.
"Coward" remarks. On November 18, 2005, the House debated a Republican-
sponsored resolution, H. Res. 572, calling for the immediate withdrawal of
troops from Iraq. It was prompted by the call of John P. Murtha, Jr., a
Democrat from Pennsylvania, who introduced H.J. Res. 73, which called for the
redeployment of American forces as soon as possible. In response, Armed
Services Committee chairman Duncan L. Hunter of California introduced H. Res.
572, which the Republican leadership admitted was intended to demonstrate that
calls for troop withdrawal were "out of the mainstream." Democrats in turn
roundly criticized the Hunter resolution as a sham that misstated Murtha's
position. October 21, 2006. Schmidt's remarks threw the House into an uproar
and earned her the sobriquet "Mean Jean". Many Democrats saw it as an
unwarranted attack against Murtha, a 38-year Marine Corps veteran. After she
said "cowards cut and run, Marines never do," angry Democrats nearly drowned
out her words. Victor F. Snyder, a former Marine, of Arkansas demanded that
Schmidt's remarks be "taken down." Under this disciplinary procedure, the House
clerk would have re-read Schmidt's words and the presiding officer (at the
time, Michael K. Simpson of Idaho) would have ruled whether they were
parliamentary. Had they been ruled unparliamentary, Schmidt would not have been
able to speak for the rest of the day without permission. After 10 minutes,
Schmidt asked for and received permission to withdraw her remarks and
apologized to Murtha. A spokeswoman for Bubp said that the state representative
"did not mention Congressman Murtha by name nor did he mean to disparage
Congressman Murtha" and that he felt "the words that Congresswoman Schmidt
chose did not represent their conversation." The "Cincinnati Enquirer" reported
Bubp said "he never mentioned. . . MurthaÂ .Â .Â . by name when talking with
Schmidt, and he would never call a fellow Marine a coward." Fake endorsements.
On March 8, 2006, "The Cincinnati Enquirer" reported Representatives Tom
Tancredo of Colorado and Steve Chabot of Ohio stated they had not endorsed
Schmidt even though Schmidt's campaign site claimed they had. Chabot later said
he had endorsed both Schmidt and her primary opponent. Schmidt also claimed an
endorsement from the Family Research Council, which was repudiated by the
organization. After a review, the Ohio Elections Commission found that the
Tancredo and Family Research Council endorsement claims were false but did not
warrant any reprimand. Second bachelor's degree. WLW-AM reported on March 28,
2006, that Schmidt had, since 1989, claimed a B.A. in secondary education from
the University of Cincinnati awarded in 1986. Schmidt had previously listed two
degrees on candidate guides, her official Ohio House bio, and past campaign
websites. But after her election to Congress, neither her current official or
campaign website had the second degree posted. Schmidt's chief of staff, Barry
Bennett, told "The Plain Dealer" Schmidt had completed the requirements for the
degree but never filed the paperwork to be awarded a diploma. "I think it's
fair to say that she earned it and never collected it," Bennett said. On April
27, five days before the May 2 primary against McEwen, the Ohio Elections
Commission voted 7-0 to issue Schmidt a public reprimand for "false statements"
for her claiming to have a second undergraduate degree from the University of
Cincinnati that she was not awarded. The Commission wrote in its letter of
reprimand that Schmidt had "reckless disregard for truth." Schmidt insisted the
error regarding her degrees was a mistake by her staff. On May 1, the day
before the election, Schmidt appeared on Bill Cunninham's show on WLW-AM in
Cincinnati and was asked by a caller about the OEC reprimand. Schmidt repeated
her insistence the error was caused by the designer of her website incorrectly
listing her teaching certificate as a degree in secondary education and social
studies. Obama's birth certificate. At the Voice of America Tea Party on
September 5, 2009, Schmidt, in response to a woman who said that Obama "cannot
be a president by our constitution," replied, "I agree with you, but the courts
don't." Schmidt's statement to the woman appeared to contradict a statement
Schmidt made in July 2009 to Loveland Magazine in which she said that "The
President is indeed a Citizen of this country" and that she "voted as a Member
of the House to certify the vote of the Electoral College electing him as our
President." "Obamacare" ruling. On June 28, 2012, a video was captured of
Schmidt believing reports from Fox News that the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act was overturned by the Supreme Court in the landmark
National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius ruling. The Armenian
Genocide issue. In 2009 Armenian-American candidate David Krikorian targeted
the congresswoman for her failure to publicly define what happened to the
Ottoman Armenians in 1915â€“1916 as "the Armenian Genocide." His concern arose
from a statement released by Schmidt's office noting that "at this time she
does not have enough information to characterize these deaths as genocide
especially since those responsible are long since dead." A few days before the
2008 congressional election, Krikorian published a controversial letter
alleging that "Jean Schmidt has taken $30,000 in blood money from Turkish
government sponsored political action committees to deny the slaughter of 1.5
million Armenian men, women and children by the Ottoman Turkish Government
during World War I." Finally, the flier asserted that the claims it contained
could be adequately verified by a visit to the Federal Election Commission's
website. He repeated the claim to the Ohio Elections Commission. The Ohio
Elections Commission issued a split decision on the case, failing to find that
all of the preceding three remarks had been published in violation of ORC
3517.21(B)(10) by clear and convincing evidence. In a series of 4 panel votes,
Commissioners affirmed that Turkish American funds are a primary source of
support for Rep. Schmidtâ€™s political campaign, but chided Krikorian for
statements related to Turkish Government funding of his opponent, because such
a funding would be illegal. The votes were taken after a panel decision to
disregard testimony provided regarding the Armenian "Genocide" and its "denial"
â€“ an integral component of the allegations and Krikorianâ€™s defense
â€”decision which was criticized by David Krikorian's party and supporters.
Schmidt also attempted, to no avail, to press criminal charges against
Krikorian for his statements. Sibyl Edmonds, a former FBI translator, testified
on behalf of Krikorian during the Ohio Elections Commission hearing and spoke
about Turkey's connections to Jean Schmidt. In October 2010, a federal court
rejected David Krikorian's appeal. In June 2010, Jean Schmidt filed a 6.8
million dollar lawsuit against David Krikorian. In July 2011, the House Ethics
Committee announced that it was investigating accusations that Schmidt had
accepted roughly $500,000 in free legal services from a Turkish-American
interest group. Schmidt said that she hadn't received a bill for the legal
services in question, and that she had been waiting for more than a year for
guidance from the ethics committee on the proper procedure to pay the bill. In
August 2011, the Ethics Committee rendered its decision, holding that the
interest group's payment for legal services in connection with her proceedings
against Krikorian had been improper, and ordering Schmidt to repay the group
$500,000. On September 21, 2011, the Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in
Washington added Schmidt to its "most corrupt" list for "accepthundreds of
thousands of dollars in free legal services from lawyers hired by an interest
group that appreciated her legislative assistance" as well as "fail[ure to
report the free legal services as gifts in her disclosure forms."[http://
www.citizensforethics.org/mostcorrupt/entry/Jean-Schmidt-report] In October
2011, CREW requested that the Office of Congressional Ethics investigate
whether Schmidt lied to the House Ethics Committee regarding inquiries into
free legal services. Personal life. Schmidt and her husband, Peter W. Schmidt
have one child, a daughter, Emilie (born in 1978). A Roman Catholic, she has
been a member of Elizabeth Ann Seton Church since 1978. She is a marathon
runner. Schmidt is a member of the Clermont County Chamber of Commerce, the
Clermont County 20/20 Committee, Clermont County League of Women Voters, the
Clermont County Agricultural Society, Clermont County Township Association, and
the Milford-Miami Township Chamber of Commerce. She was elected chairman of the
Greater Cincinnati Right to Life organization in 2005. Schmidt is a trustee of
the Clermont County Library, having previously served from 1980 to 1992 and
1994 to 2000. She was reappointed to the board in 2005. She is also a director
of the Mercy Hospital Clermont Foundation Board.
