Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs The Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs
(JCPA) is a public policy think tank devoted to research and analysis of
critical issues facing the Middle East. The center is located in Jerusalem,
Israel. Research focuses on international law, paradigms for regional
diplomacy, and the connections between local and global terrorism. History. The
JCPA was established in 1978 by Daniel Elazar as an umbrella organization
encompassing the Center for Jewish Community Studies and the Jerusalem
Institute for Federal Studies. As a policy research and education organization,
the center attracted leading scholars from a variety of geographical,
disciplinary, and political backgrounds. Elazar personally raised most of the
funds for the operation of the organization and the restoration of an imposing
building on Tel Hai Street in Jerusalem, named in honor of the Milken family.
The JCPA served as an adviser for Project Renewal, a major urban revitalization
program. In 1986, it organized an international conference in Jerusalem on
urban revitalization attended by over 500 participants from 30 countries. The
JCPA cofounded NGO Monitor with B'nai B'rith following the 2001 Durban
Conference. According to Dore Gold, the project was created "to promote
analysis, transparency and accountability regarding the NGO-led campaign to
label Israel as an 'apartheid state. Organizational goals. JCPA research
focuses on Israeli foreign policy and Israel's rights under international law
in the context of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The current president of the JCPA
is former Israeli ambassador Dore Gold who has represented Israel in several
diplomatic posts and served as adviser to prime ministers Ariel Sharon and
Benjamin Netanyahu. Points of view. JCPA is a pro-Israel organisation,
promoting a positive image of Israel, advocating Israels right to exist and
fighting anti-semitism. It advocates the Israeli annexation of East Jerusalem
and its lasting control of the West Bank and Golan Heights. It opposes a
unilateral Palestinian drive toward statehood. Programs. The "Institute for
Contemporary Affairs" (ICA) was founded in 2001 with the Wechsler Family
Foundation. The stated aim of the ICA is to provide "a forum for discussion of
Israelâ€™s strategic, defense and national security challenges". The Institute
hosts events and provides analyses and information on issues in Israel and the
Middle East for diplomats and foreign media representatives based in Israel and
visiting foreign government officials. The "Iran and the new threats to the
West" program involves the preparation of a legal document to initiate legal
proceedings against Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the President of the Islamic Republic
of Iran for "incitement to commit genocide and participate in genocide". The
"Global Law Forum" program supports academic writings, position papers,
workshops, conferences and symposia and public briefings that explain the legal
dimensions of current regional controversies of concern to Israel and the
Middle East. The "Defensible Borders Initiative" was created to outline a "set
of basic principles for a defense policy focused on Israel maintaining
defensible borders". The program was carried out by a group of senior Israeli
generals and included a conference, an informational video, a website and a
book distributed to politicians, academics and journalists. "Daily Alert" is a
newsletter and website produced for the Conference of Presidents of Major
American Jewish Organizations. The newsletter contains excepts of Israel-
related news and has been provided by JCPA since 2002. The "Institute for
Global Jewish Affairs" was established in 2008 and consists of several long-
running programs that deal with Jewish issues. The "Post-Holocaust and Anti-
Semitism Project" (PHAS) addresses "restitution, the academic boycott,
Holocaust denial, and anti-Semitism in the Arab world, European countries, and
post-Soviet states." The "Changing Jewish Communities" program investigates
recent developments in Jewish communities. The Institute also produces the
journal "Jewish Political Studies Review" which examines Jewish political
institutions and behavior. Landmark building. The JCPA is located in a landmark
building dating from 1932. From 1957 to 1980, it served as the Embassy of
Uruguay. In 1989, the 1,200-ton building was moved 16 meters to new foundations
on the southern side of the lot. A crew of experts was brought in from Poland
for this purpose. The building was raised by hydraulic jacks and pushed along
rails to reach its new location.
