Jesus Ledesma Aguilar Jesus Ledesma Aguilar (November 28, 1963 â€“ May 24,
2006) was a Mexican national who became the 365th person executed by the U.S.
state of Texas. His execution sparked an international incident between the
United States and Mexico, which led to a lawsuit filed by Mexico against the
United States in the International Court of Justice, in which the court found
that Texas prison officials had denied Aguilar his right to see a Mexican
consular official as specified in the Geneva Conventions. Crimes. Aguilar was
convicted by a Texas court of murdering two people, Leonardo Chavez and Annette
Chavez, on June 10, 1995 with a handgun and sentenced to death on July 5, 1995.
He did not know his victims. The couple's son said he witnessed the murders and
testified against Aguilar at trial. Aguilar filed numerous appeals and requests
for stays of execution, all of which were denied. He was executed on May 24,
2006 at 6:32 p.m. CST by lethal injection, despite his continued claims of
innocence and protests by the government of Mexico that he was denied his right
under the Geneva Conventions to a visit by a Mexican consular official. The ICJ
found that the United States "has breached its obligations to Mr. Avena and 50
other Mexican nationals and to Mexico under the Vienna Convention on Consular
Relations." As a result of the court's ruling, Texas officials now provide
official notification to the Mexican government if a Mexican national is
arrested and incarcerated in a Texas jail, and allow consular officials to
visit Mexican nationals in prison.
