John Mordaunt Trust The John Mordaunt Trust (JMT) was set up in 1996 to honour
the memory of a much loved and influential AIDS activist. Goals. JMT is an
advocacy project set up to campaign for the health and human rights of ex/
current injectors affected by HIV and other blood-borne infections (BBIs.)
Background. John was deported from China alone as a result of his HIV status;
when he had recovered from this trauma, he fought hard for the human rights of
other men, women and children affected by AIDS. Essentially John was a harm
reduction activist, who, towards the end of his life, began to speak publicly
of drugs-use as a human right. As an ex-injection drug user (IDU) he was only
too aware of how dangerous prohibition could be - risk of overdose deaths from
unknown purity of drugs, fatal blood borne infections, imprisonment, not to
mention the collateral damage of crimes committed against others in desperate
efforts to access illegal drugs day-in-day-out...including violence related to
drug-deals gone wrong. Harm Reduction strategies are essential within current
drug policy, as by definition users cannot and do not know the quality
(therefore dose) of the drugs they are buying. It keeps its members informed
via a news letter called the Users Voice Achievements. In June 1998, JMT's
founder, Andria (John's widow) arranged for the first ex-injector living with
HIV+ - Marsha B (RIP) to address the UN General Assembly Special Session on
Drugs about the failures of prohibition. Marsha was joined by Omarya Morales
(RIP) a Columbian cocalera, whose home had been burnt to the ground by US-
driven coca eradication policies.
