Reserved political positions in India In India, a certain number of political
positions and university posts are held for specific groups of the population,
including scheduled castes, backward castes, and women. Definition. An
electorate is a group of voters, namely, all the officially qualified voters
within a particular country or area or for a particular election. A joint
electorate is one where the entire voting population of a country or region is
part of a single electorate, and the entire electorate votes for the candidates
who contest elections. In the case of separate electorates, the voting
population of a country or region is divided into different electorates, based
on certain factors such as religion, caste, gender, and occupation. Here,
members of each electorate votes only to elect representatives for their
electorate. Separate electorates are usually demanded by minorities who feel it
would otherwise be difficult for them to get fair representation in government.
Sen Under the British Raj. In Indiaâ€™s pre-independence era, when the Muslims
in India demanded fair representation in power-sharing with the British
government along with the Hindus, the British government provided for a
separate electorate system for the Muslims. As a result, of the total 250 seats
of the Bengal Legislative Assembly, 117 seats were kept reserved for the
Muslims. Accordingly, the general elections of 1937 were held on the basis of
the extended separate electorates, where only the Muslims voted for the 117
seats, in Bengal. Again, in the Round Table Conferences in 1930-32, the concept
of separate electorates for the Untouchables (also called Dalits) was raised by
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, as a way to ensure sufficient representation for the
minority Dalits, in government. This provision was strongly opposed by Mahatma
Gandhi on the grounds that the move would disintegrate Hindu society. If the
Dalits were given a separate electorate, then certain constituencies would have
been reserved for them, and only the Dalits would have been able to vote for
the candidates contesting those seats, thus alienating the rest of the Hindus.
Finally, a compromise was reached where there were certain constituencies
reserved for the Dalits, where the Dalits could elect 4 candidates per
constituency who would then be candidates for election by the joint electorate.
After the Independence. Anglo-Indian seats. The Anglo-Indian community is the
only Indian community that has its own representatives nominated to the Lok
Sabha (Lower House) in India's Parliament. This right was secured from Nehru by
Frank Anthony, the first and longtime president of the All India Anglo-Indian
Association. The community is represented by two members. This is done because
the community has no native state of its own. States like Andhra Pradesh, Tamil
Nadu, Bihar, Karnataka and Kerala also have a nominated member each in their
respective State Legislatures. Scheduled Castes and tribes. 15% of seats in the
Parliament of the country, State Assemblies, Local Municipal Bodies and Village
level institutions are reserved for untouchable castes, also called Dalits or
Scheduled Castes. Similarly 7.5% are reserved for tribes or the aborigines. The
election of Untouchables and Tribes candidates is by a Joint or mixed
electorate, which includes all religions voters like Hindu, Muslim etc. and all
castes including Untouchables and tribes, vote. Women. Women get 50%
reservation in gram panchayat (meaning village assembly, which is a form of
local village government) and municipal elections. There is a long-term plan to
extend this reservation to parliament and legislative assemblies. The Women's
Reservation Bill was passed by the Rajya Sabha on 9 March 2010 by a majority
vote of 186 members in favor and 1 against. It will now go to the Lok Sabha,
and if passed there, would be implemented.
