Joseph de Maistre Joseph-Marie, comte de Maistre ( 1 April 1753 ‚Äì 26 February
1821) was a French-speaking Savoyard philosopher, writer, lawyer, and diplomat.
He defended hierarchical societies and a monarchical State in the period
immediately following the French Revolution. Maistre was a subject of the King
of Piedmont-Sardinia, whom he served as member of the Savoy Senate
(1787‚Äì1792), ambassador to Russia (1803‚Äì1817), and minister of state to the
court in Turin (1817‚Äì1821). Maistre, a key figure of the Counter-
Enlightenment, saw monarchy both as a divinely sanctioned institution and as
the only stable form of government. He called for the restoration of the House
of Bourbon to the throne of France and argued that the Pope should have
ultimate authority in temporal matters. Maistre also claimed that it was the
rationalist rejection of Christianity which was directly responsible for the
disorder and bloodshed which followed the French Revolution of 1789. Biography.
Maistre was born in 1753 at Chamb√©ry, in the Duchy of Savoy, which at that
time was part of the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia, ruled by the House of Savoy.
His family was of French origin. His grandfather Andr√© Maistre, who came from
Provence, had been a draper and councilman in Nice (then under the rule of the
House of Savoy), and his father Fran√ßois-Xavier, who moved to Chamb√©ry in
1740, became a magistrate and senator, eventually receiving the title of count
from the King of Piedmont-Sardinia. His mother's family, whose surname was
Desmotz, were from Rumilly. Joseph's younger brother, Xavier, who became an
army officer, was a popular writer of fiction. Joseph was probably educated by
the Jesuits. After the Revolution, he became an ardent defender of their Order,
increasingly associating the spirit of the Revolution with the Jesuits'
traditional enemies, the Jansenists. After completing his training in the law
at the University of Turin in 1774, he followed in his father's footsteps by
becoming a Senator in 1787. A member of the progressive Scottish Rite Masonic
lodge at Chamb√©ry from 1774 to 1790, Maistre originally favoured political
reform in France, supporting the efforts of the magistrates in the Parlements
to force King Louis XVI to convene the Estates General. As a landowner in
France, Maistre was eligible to join that body, and there is some evidence that
he contemplated that possibility. He was alarmed, however, by the decision of
the States-General to combine clergy, aristocracy, and commoners into a single
legislative body, which became the National Constituent Assembly. After the
passing of the August Decrees on 4 August 1789 he decisively turned against the
course of political events in France. Maistre fled Chamb√©ry when it was taken
by a French revolutionary army in 1792, but unable to find a position in the
royal court in Turin, he returned the following year. Deciding that he could
not support the French-controlled regime, he departed again, this time for
Lausanne, in Switzerland. There he discussed politics and theology at the salon
of Madame de Sta√´l, and began his career as a counter-revolutionary writer,
with works such as "Lettres d'un royaliste savoisien" ("Letters from a Savoyard
Royalist", 1793), "Discours √  Mme. la marquise Costa de Beauregard, sur la vie
et la mort de son fils" ("Discourse to the Marchioness Costa de Beauregard, on
the Life and Death of her Son", 1794) and "Cinq paradoxes √  la Marquise de
Nav..." ("Five Paradoxes for the Marchioness of Nav...", 1795). From Lausanne,
Maistre emigrated to Venice, and then Cagliari, where the King of Piedmont-
Sardinia was exiled after French armies took Turin in 1798. Maistre's relations
with the court at Cagliari were not always easy and in 1803 he was sent to
Saint Petersburg in Russia, as ambassador to Tsar Alexander I. His diplomatic
responsibilities were few, and he became a well-loved fixture in aristocratic
circles, converting some of his friends to Roman Catholicism, and writing his
most influential works on political philosophy. Maistre's observations on
Russian life, contained in his diplomatic memoirs and in his personal
correspondence, were among Tolstoy's sources for his novel "War and Peace".
After the defeat of Napoleon and the restoration of the House of Savoy's
dominion over Piedmont (under the terms of the Congress of Vienna), Maistre
returned in 1817 to Turin, and served there as magistrate and minister of state
until his death. He died on 26 February 1821 is buried in the Jesuit Church of
the Holy Martyrs ("Chiesa dei Santi Martiri"). Political and moral philosophy.
In "Consid√©rations sur la France" ("Considerations on France," 1796), Maistre
claimed that France has a divine mission as the principal instrument of good
and evil on Earth. He interpreted the Revolution of 1789 as a Providential
event: the monarchy, the aristocracy, and the "Ancien R√©gime" in general,
instead of directing the influence of French civilization to the benefit of
mankind, had promoted the atheistic doctrines of the eighteenth-century
philosophers. He claimed that the crimes of the Reign of Terror were the
logical consequence of Enlightened thought, as well as its divinely-decreed
punishment. In his short book "Essai sur le principe g√©n√©rateur des
constitutions politiques et des autres institutions humaines" ("Essay on the
Generative Principle of Political Constitutions and other Human Institutions,"
1809), Maistre argued that constitutions are not the product of human reason,
but come from God, who slowly brings them to maturity. After the appearance in
1816 of his French translation of Plutarch's treatise "On the Delay of Divine
Justice in the Punishment of the Guilty", in 1819 Maistre published "Du Pape"
("On the Pope"), the most complete exposition of his authoritarian conception
of politics. According to Maistre, any attempt to justify government on
rational grounds will only lead to unresolvable arguments about the legitimacy
and expediency of any existing government, and that this, in turn, will lead to
violence and chaos. Maistre therefore argued that the legitimacy of government
must be based on compelling but non-rational grounds, which its subjects must
not be allowed to question. Maistre went on to argue that authority in politics
should therefore derive from religion, and that in Europe this religious
authority must ultimately lie with the Pope. What was novel in Maistre's
writings was not his enthusiastic defense of monarchical and religious
authority "per se", but rather his arguments concerning the practical need for
ultimate authority to lie with an individual capable of decisive action, as
well as his analysis of the social foundations of that authority's legitimacy.
In his own words, which he addressed to a group of aristocratic French
√©migr√©s, "you ought to know how to be royalists. Before, this was an
instinct, but today it is a science. You must love the sovereign as you love
order, with all the forces of intelligence." Maistre's analysis of the problem
of authority and its legitimacy foreshadows some of the concerns of early
sociologists such as Comte and Saint-Simon. In addition to his voluminous
correspondence, Maistre left two books that were published posthumously.
"Soir√©es de St. P√©tersbourg" ("The Saint Petersburg Dialogues", 1821) is a
theodicy in the form of a Platonic dialogue, in which Maistre argues that evil
exists because of its place in the divine plan, according to which the blood
sacrifice of innocents returns men to God, via the expiation of the sins of the
guilty; Maistre saw this is a law of human history, as indubitable as it is
mysterious. "Examen de la philosophie de Bacon", ("An Examination of the
Philosophy of Bacon," 1836), is a critique of the thought of Francis Bacon,
whom Maistre considers to be the fountainhead of the destructive Enlightened
thought. Repute and influence. √âmile Faguet described Maistre as "a fierce
absolutist, a furious theocrat, an intransigent legitimist, apostle of a
monstrous trinity composed of pope, king and hangman, always and everywhere the
champion of the hardest, narrowest and most inflexible dogmatism, a dark figure
out of the Middle Ages, part learned doctor, part inquisitor, part
executioner." Isaiah Berlin in his "Freedom and Its Betrayal" notes that many
view his writings as "the last despairing effort of feudalism...to resist the
march of progress." but he claims that Maistre imposes "an official legitimist
Catholic framework upon what is really a deeply violent, deeply revolutionary,
ultimately Fascist inner passion" which rejects what it sees as the shallow
optimism of the Enlightenment. His fundamental doctrine according to Berlin is
that nature is red in tooth and claw and what really fascinates him is power.
Amongst those who admired him was the poet Charles Baudelaire, who described
himself a disciple of the Savoyard counter-revolutionary, claiming that he had
taught him "how to think." Maistre also exerted a powerful influence on the
Spanish political thinker Juan Donoso Cort√©s and, later, on the French
monarchist Charles Maurras and his counter-revolutionary political movement
"Action Fran√ßaise". According to Carolina Armenteros, Maistre's writings
influenced not only conservative political thinkers, but also the Utopian
socialists. Early sociologists such as Saint-Simon and Comte explicitly
acknowledged the influence of Maistre on their own thinking about the sources
of social cohesion and political authority.
