Karl Popper Sir Karl Raimund Popper, CH FRS FBA (28 July 1902Â â€“ 17 September
1994) was an Austro-British philosopher and professor at the London School of
Economics. He is generally regarded as one of the greatest philosophers of
science of the 20th century. He also wrote extensively on social and political
philosophy. In 1992 he was awarded the Kyoto Prize in Arts and Philosophy for
"symbolizing the open spirit of the 20th century" and for his "enormous
influence on the formation of the modern intellectual climate". Popper is known
for his attempt to repudiate the classical observationalist/inductivist form of
scientific method in favour of empirical falsification. He is also known for
his opposition to the classical justificationist account of knowledge which he
replaced with critical rationalism, "the first "non justificational philosophy
of criticism" in the history of philosophy". In political discourse, he is
known for his vigorous defence of liberal democracy and the principles of
social criticism that he came to believe made a flourishing "open society"
possible. Personal life. Karl Popper was born in Vienna (then in Austria-
Hungary) in 1902, to upper middle-class parents. All of Karl Popper's
grandparents were Jewish, but the Popper family converted to Lutheranism before
Karl was born, and so he received Lutheran baptism. They understood this as
part of their cultural assimilation, not as an expression of devout belief.
Karl's father Simon Siegmund Carl Popper was a lawyer from Bohemia and a doctor
of law at the Vienna University, and mother Jenny Schiff was of Silesian and
Hungarian descent. After establishing themselves in Vienna, the Poppers made a
rapid social climb in Viennese society: Simon Siegmund Carl became a legal
partner of Vienna's liberal mayor Raimond GrÃ¼bl and, after his death in 1898,
took over the firm (Karl received his middle name from the mayor). His father
was a bibliophile who had 12,000â€“14,000 volumes in his personal library.
Popper inherited both the library and the disposition from him. Popper left
school at the age of 16 and attended lectures in math, physics, philosophy,
psychology and the history of music as a guest student at the University of
Vienna. In 1919, Popper became attracted by Marxism and subsequently joined the
Association of Socialist School Students. He also became a member of the Social
Democratic Workers' Party of Austria, which was at that time a party that fully
adopted the Marxist ideology. After the June 15, 1919 street battle in the
HÃ¶rlgasse, when police shot eight of his unarmed party comrades, he became
disillusioned by what he saw to be the pseudo-scientific historical materialism
of Marx, abandoned the ideology, and remained a supporter of social liberalism
throughout his life. He worked in street construction for a short amount of
time, but was unable to cope with the heavy labour. Continuing to attend
university as a guest student, he started an apprenticeship as cabinetmaker,
which he completed as a journeyman. He was dreaming at that time of starting a
daycare facility for children, for which he assumed the ability to make
furniture might be useful. After that he did voluntary service in one of
psychoanalyst Alfred Adler's clinics for children. In 1922, he did his matura
by way of a second chance education and finally joined the University as an
ordinary student. He completed his examination as an elementary teacher in 1924
and started working at an after-school care club for socially endangered
children. In 1925 he went to the newly founded "PÃ¤dagogisches Institut" and
continued studying philosophy and psychology. Around that time he started
dating Josephine Anna Henninger, later to become his wife. In 1928, he earned a
doctorate in psychology, under the supervision of Karl BÃ¼hler. His
dissertation was entitled "Die Methodenfrage der Denkpsychologie" (The question
of method in cognitive psychology). In 1929 he obtained the authorization to
teach math and physics in secondary school, which he started doing. He married
in 1930. Fearing the rise of Nazism and the threat of the Anschluss, he started
to use the evenings and the nights to write his first book "Die beiden
Grundprobleme der Erkenntnistheorie". He needed to publish one in order to get
some academic position in a country that was safe for people of Jewish descent.
However, he ended up not publishing the two-volume work, but a condensed
version of it with some new material, "Logik der Forschung" ("The Logic of
Scientific Discovery"), in 1934. Here, he criticised psychologism, naturalism,
inductionism, and logical positivism, and put forth his theory of potential
falsifiability as the criterion demarcating science from non-science. In 1935
and 1936, he took unpaid leave to go to England for a study visit. In 1937,
Popper finally managed to get a position that allowed him to emigrate to New
Zealand, where he became lecturer in philosophy at Canterbury University
College of the New Zealand (at Christchurch). It was here that he wrote his
influential work "The Open Society and its Enemies". In 1946, after the Second
World War, he moved to England to become reader in logic and scientific method
at the London School of Economics. Three years later, he was appointed as
professor of logic and scientific method at the University of London in 1949.
Popper was president of the Aristotelian Society from 1958 to 1959. He retired
from academic life in 1969, though he remained intellectually active for the
rest of his life. In 1985, he returned to Austria to let his wife have her
relatives around her during the last months of her life. She died in November
that year. After the Ludwig Boltzmann Gesellschaft had failed to establish him
as the director of a newly founded branch researching the philosophy of
science, he went back again to the United Kingdom in 1986, settling in Kenley,
Surrey. Popper died in Croydon at the age of 92 on 17 September 1994. He had
been working continuously on his philosophy until two weeks before, when he
suddenly fell terminally ill. After cremation, his ashes were taken to Vienna
and buried at Lainzer cemetery adjacent to the ORF Centre, where his wife
Josefine Anna Henninger had already been buried. Popper's estate is managed by
his secretary and personal assistant Melitta Mew and her husband Raymond.
Popper's manuscripts went to the Hoover institution, partly during his lifetime
and partly as supplementary material after his death. Klagenfurt University
possesses Popper's library including his precious bibliophilia, as well as hard
copies of the original Hoover material and microfilms of the supplementary
material. The remaining parts of the estate were mostly transferred to The Karl
Popper Charitable Trust. In October 2008, Klagenfurt University acquired the
copyrights from the estate. Together with his wife, Popper chose not to have
children, because of the circumstances of war in the early years of their
marriage. Popper commented that this "was perhaps a cowardly but in a way a
right decision". Popper won many awards and honours in his field, including the
Lippincott Award of the American Political Science Association, the Sonning
Prize, the Otto Hahn Peace Medal of the United Nations Association of Germany
in Berlin and fellowships in the Royal Society, British Academy, London School
of Economics, King's College London, Darwin College, Cambridge, and Charles
University, Prague. Austria awarded him the Grand Decoration for Services to
the Republic of Austria in Gold. He received the Humanist Laureate Award from
the International Academy of Humanism. He was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in
1965, and was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1976. He was invested
with the Insignia of a Companion of Honour in 1982. Philosophy. Philosophy of
science. Falsifiability/problem of demarcation. Popper coined the term
"critical rationalism" to describe his philosophy. Concerning the method of
science, the term indicates his rejection of classical empiricism, and the
classical observationalist-inductivist account of science that had grown out of
it. Popper argued strongly against the latter, holding that scientific theories
are abstract in nature, and can be tested only indirectly, by reference to
their implications. He also held that scientific theory, and human knowledge
generally, is irreducibly conjectural or hypothetical, and is generated by the
creative imagination in order to solve problems that have arisen in specific
historio-cultural settings. Logically, no number of positive outcomes at the
level of experimental testing can confirm a scientific theory, but a single
counterexample is logically decisive: it shows the theory, from which the
implication is derived, to be false. The term "falsifiable" does not mean
something is made false, but rather that, if it is false, it can be shown by
observation or experiment. Popper's account of the logical asymmetry between
verification and falsifiability lies at the heart of his philosophy of science.
It also inspired him to take falsifiability as his criterion of demarcation
between what is, and is not, genuinely scientific: a theory should be
considered scientific if, and only if, it is falsifiable. This led him to
attack the claims of both psychoanalysis and contemporary Marxism to scientific
status, on the basis that their theories are not falsifiable. Popper also wrote
extensively against the famous Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics.
He strongly disagreed with Niels Bohr's instrumentalism and supported Albert
Einstein's realist approach to scientific theories about the universe. Popper's
falsifiability resembles Charles Peirce's nineteenth century fallibilism. In
"Of Clocks and Clouds" (1966), Popper remarked that he wished he had known of
Peirce's work earlier. formula_1 In response to a given problem situation
(formula_2), a number of competing conjectures, or tentative theories
(formula_3), are systematically subjected to the most rigorous attempts at
falsification possible. This process, error elimination (formula_4), performs a
similar function for science that natural selection performs for biological
evolution. Theories that better survive the process of refutation are not more
true, but rather, more "fit"â€”in other words, more applicable to the problem
situation at hand (formula_2). Consequently, just as a species' biological
fitness does not ensure continued survival, neither does rigorous testing
protect a scientific theory from refutation in the future. Yet, as it appears
that the engine of biological evolution has produced, over time, adaptive
traits equipped to deal with more and more complex problems of survival,
likewise, the evolution of theories through the scientific method may, in
Popper's view, reflect a certain type of progress: toward more and more
interesting problems (formula_6). For Popper, it is in the interplay between
the tentative theories (conjectures) and error elimination (refutation) that
scientific knowledge advances toward greater and greater problems; in a process
very much akin to the interplay between genetic variation and natural
selection. Falsification/problem of induction. Among his contributions to
philosophy is his claim to solve the philosophical problem of induction. He
states that while there is no way to prove that the sun will rise, it is
possible to formulate the theory that every day the sun will rise; if it does
not rise on some particular day, the theory will be falsified and will have to
be replaced by a different one. Until that day, there is no need to reject the
assumption that the theory is true. Neither is it rational according to Popper
to instead make the more complex assumption that the sun will rise until a
given day, but will stop doing so the day after, or similar statements with
additional conditions. Such a theory would be true with higher probability,
because it cannot be attacked so easily: to falsify the first one, it is
sufficient to find that sun has stopped rising; to falsify the second one, one
additionally needs the assumption that the given day has not yet been reached.
Popper held that it is the least likely, or most easily falsifiable, or
simplest theory (attributes which he identified as all the same thing) that
explains known facts that one should rationally prefer. His opposition to
positivism, which held that it is the theory most likely to be true that one
should prefer, here becomes very apparent. It is impossible, Popper argues, to
ensure a theory to be true; it is more important that their falsity can be
detected as easily as possible. Popper and David Hume agreed that there is
often a psychological belief that the sun will rise tomorrow, but both denied
that there is logical justification for the supposition that it will, simply
because it always has in the past. Popper writes, "I approached the problem of
induction through Hume. Hume, I felt, was perfectly right in pointing out that
induction cannot be logically justified." ("Conjectures and Refutations",
p.Â 55) Rationality. Popper held that rationality is not restricted to the
realm of empirical or scientific theories, but that it is merely a special case
of the general method of criticism, the method of finding and eliminating
contradictions in knowledge without ad-hoc-measures. According to this view,
rational discussion about metaphysical ideas, about moral and even about
purposes are possible. Popper's student Bartley tried to radicalize this idea
and made the controversial claim that not only can criticism go beyond
empirical knowledge, but that everything can be rationally criticized. To
Popper, who was an anti-justificationist, traditional philosophy is misled by
the false principle of sufficient reason. He thinks that no assumption can ever
be or needs ever to be justified, so a lack of justification is not a
justification for doubt. Instead, theories should be tested and scrutinized. It
is not the goal to bless theories with claims of certainty or justification,
but to eliminate errors in them. He writes, "there "are" no such things as good
positive reasons; nor do we need such things [...] But obviously cannot quite
bring [themselves to believe that this is my opinion, let alone that it is
right" ("The Philosophy of Karl Popper", p.Â 1043) Philosophy of arithmetic.
Popper's principle of falsifiability runs into "prima facie" difficulties when
the epistemological status of mathematics is considered. It is difficult to
conceive how simple statements of arithmetic, such as "2 + 2 = 4", could ever
be shown to be false. If they are not open to falsification they can not be
scientific. If they are not scientific, it needs to be explained how they can
be informative about real world objects and events. Popper's solution was an
original contribution in the philosophy of mathematics. His idea was that a
number statement such as "2 apples + 2 apples = 4 apples" can be taken in two
senses. In one sense it is irrefutable and logically true, in the second sense
it is factually true and falsifiable. Concisely, the pure mathematics "2 + 2 =
4" is always true, but, when the formula is applied to real world apples, it is
open to falsification. Political philosophy. In "The Open Society and Its
Enemies" and "The Poverty of Historicism", Popper developed a critique of
historicism and a defence of the 'Open Society'. Popper considered historicism
to be the theory that history develops inexorably and necessarily according to
knowable general laws towards a determinate end. He argued that this view is
the principal theoretical presupposition underpinning most forms of
authoritarianism and totalitarianism. He argued that historicism is founded
upon mistaken assumptions regarding the nature of scientific law and
prediction. Since the growth of human knowledge is a causal factor in the
evolution of human history, and since "no society can predict, scientifically,
its own future states of knowledge", it follows, he argued, that there can be
no predictive science of human history. For Popper, metaphysical and historical
indeterminism go hand in hand. In "After The Open Society", which was published
posthumously, a large collection of his previously unpublished and uncollected
essays on social and political topics was assembled. In this, one can trace his
ideas from material that pre-dated "The Open Society" to something that was
completed just as he died. In a 1992 lecture, Popper explained the connection
between his political philosophy and his philosophy of science. As he stated,
he was in his early years impressed by communism and also active in the
Austrian Communist party. What had a profound effect on him was an event that
happened in 1919: during a riot, caused by the Communists, the police shot
several people, including some of Popper's friends. When Popper later told the
leaders of the Communist party about this, they responded by stating that this
loss of life was necessary in working towards the inevitable workers'
revolution. This statement did not convince Popper and he started to think
about what kind of reasoning would justify such a statement. He later concluded
that there could not be any justification for it, and this was the start of his
later criticism of historicism. In 1947, Popper founded with Friedrich Hayek,
Milton Friedman, Ludwig von Mises and others the Mont Pelerin Society to defend
classical liberalism, in the spirit of the Open Society. Metaphysics. Truth. As
early as 1934, Popper wrote of the search for truth as "one of the strongest
motives for scientific discovery." Still, he describes in "Objective Knowledge"
(1972) early concerns about the much-criticized notion of truth as
correspondence. Then came the semantic theory of truth formulated by the
logician Alfred Tarski and published in 1933. Popper writes of learning in 1935
of the consequences of Tarski's theory, to his intense joy. The theory met
critical objections to truth as correspondence and thereby rehabilitated it.
The theory also seemed, in Popper's eyes, to support metaphysical realism and
the regulative idea of a search for truth. The first case belongs to the
metalanguage whereas the second is more likely to belong to the object
language. Hence, "it is true that" possesses the logical status of a
redundancy. "Is true", on the other hand, is a predicate necessary for making
general observations such as "John was telling the truth about Phillip." Upon
this basis, along with that of the logical content of assertions (where logical
content is inversely proportional to probability), Popper went on to develop
his important notion of verisimilitude or "truthlikeness". The intuitive idea
behind verisimilitude is that the assertions or hypotheses of scientific
theories can be objectively measured with respect to the amount of truth and
falsity that they imply. And, in this way, one theory can be evaluated as more
or less true than another on a quantitative basis which, Popper emphasizes
forcefully, has nothing to do with "subjective probabilities" or other merely
"epistemic" considerations. where formula_8 is the verisimilitude of "a",
formula_9 is a measure of the content of truth of "a", and formula_10 is a
measure of the content of the falsity of "a". Popper's original attempt to
define not just verisimilitude, but an actual measure on it, turned out to be
inadequate. However, it inspired a wealth of new attempts. Cosmological
pluralism. Knowledge, for Popper, was objective, both in the sense that it is
objectively true (or truthlike), and also in the sense that knowledge has an
ontological status (i.e., knowledge as object) independent of the knowing
subject ("Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach", 1972). He proposed
three worlds : World One, being the physical world, or physical states; World
Two, being the world of mind, or mental states, ideas, and perceptions; and
World Three, being the body of human knowledge expressed in its manifold forms,
or the products of the second world made manifest in the materials of the first
world (i.e., books, papers, paintings, symphonies, and all the products of the
human mind). World Three, he argued, was the product of individual human beings
in exactly the same sense that an animal path is the product of individual
animals, and that, as such, has an existence and evolution independent of any
individual knowing subjects. The influence of World Three, in his view, on the
individual human mind (World Two) is at least as strong as the influence of
World One. In other words, the knowledge held by a given individual mind owes
at least as much to the total accumulated wealth of human knowledge, made
manifest, as to the world of direct experience. As such, the growth of human
knowledge could be said to be a function of the independent evolution of World
Three. Many contemporary philosophers have not embraced Popper's Three World
conjecture, due mostly, it seems, to its resemblance to Cartesian dualism.
Origin and evolution of life. He also noted that theism, presented as
explaining adaptation, "was worse than an open admission of failure, for it
created the impression that an ultimate explanation had been reached." These
frequently quoted passages are only a very small part of what Popper wrote on
the issue of evolution, however, and give the wrong impression that he mainly
discussed questions of its falsifiability. Popper never invented this criterion
to give justifiable use of words like science. In fact, Popper says at the
beginning of "Logic of Scientific Discovery" that it is not his aim to define
science, and that science can in fact be defined quite arbitrarily. Popper had
his own sophisticated views on evolution that go much beyond what the
frequently-quoted passages say. In effect, Popper agreed with some of the
points of both creationists and naturalists, but also disagreed with both views
on crucial aspects. Popper understood the universe as a creative entity that
invents new things, including life, but without the necessity of something like
a god, especially not one who is pulling strings from behind the curtain. He
said that evolution must, as the creationists say, work in a goal-directed way
but disagreed with their view that it must necessarily be the hand of god that
imposes these goals onto the stage of life. Instead, he formulated the
spearhead model of evolution, a version of genetic pluralism. According to this
model, living organisms themselves have goals, and act according to these
goals, each guided by a central control. In its most sophisticated form, this
is the brain of humans, but controls also exist in much less sophisticated ways
for species of lower complexity, such as the amoeba. This control organ plays a
special role in evolution â€“ it is the "spearhead of evolution". The goals
bring the purpose into the world. Mutations in the genes that determine the
structure of the control may then cause drastic changes in behaviour,
preferences and goals, without having an impact on the organism's phenotype.
Popper postulates that such purely behavioral changes are less likely to be
lethal for the organism compared to drastic changes of the phenotype. Popper
contrasts his views with the notion of the "hopeful monster" that has large
phenotype mutations and calls it the "hopeful behavioral monster". After
behavior has changed radically, small but quick changes of the phenotype follow
to make the organism fitter to its changed goals. This way it looks as if the
phenotype were changing guided by some invisible hand, while it is merely
natural selection working in combination with the new behaviour. For example,
according to this hypothesis, the eating habits of the giraffe must have
changed before its elongated neck evolved. Popper contrasted this view as
evolution from within or active darwisim (the organism actively trying to
discover new ways of life and being on a quest for conquering new ecological
niches), with the naturalistic evolution from without (which has the picture of
a hostile environment only trying to kill the mostly passive organism, or
perhaps segregate some of its groups). Popper was a key figure encouraging
patent lawyer GÃ¼nter WÃ¤chtershÃ¤user to publish his Ironâ€“sulfur world
theory on abiogenesis and his criticism of "soup" theory. Free will. Popper and
John Eccles speculated on the problem of free will for many years generally
agreeing on an interactionist dualist theory of mind. However, although Popper
was a body-mind dualist, he did not think that the mind is a substance separate
from the body: he thought that mental or psychological properties or aspects of
people are distinct from physical ones. Popper called not for something between
chance and necessity but for a combination of randomness and control to explain
freedom, though not yet explicitly in two stages with random chance before the
controlled decision, saying, "freedom is not just chance but, rather, the
result of a subtle interplay between something almost random or haphazard, and
something like a restrictive or selective control." Other thinkers who have
formulated a two-stage model for free will include William James, Henri
PoincarÃ©, Arthur Compton, Henry Margenau, and Daniel Dennett. Religion and
God. In an interview that Popper gave in 1969 with the condition that it shall
be kept secret until after his death, he summarized his position on God as
follows: "I don't know whether God exists or not. ... Some forms of atheism are
arrogant and ignorant and should be rejected, but agnosticismâ€”to admit that
we don't know and to searchâ€”is all right. ... When I look at what I call the
gift of life, I feel a gratitude which is in tune with some religious ideas of
God. However, the moment I even speak of it, I am embarrassed that I may do
something wrong to God in talking about God." He objected to organized
religion, saying "it tends to use the name of God in vain", noting the danger
of fanaticism because of religious conflicts: "The whole thing goes back to
myths which, though they may have a kernel of truth, are untrue. Why then
should the Jewish myth be true and the Indian and Egyptian myths not be true?"
In a letter unrelated to the interview, he stressed his tolerant attitude:
"Although I am not for religion, I do think that we should show respect for
anybody who believes honestly." Influence. Popper played a vital role in
establishing the philosophy of science as a vigorous, autonomous discipline
within analytic philosophy, through his own prolific and influential works, and
also through his influence on his own contemporaries and students. Popper
founded in 1946 the Department of Philosophy, Logic and Scientific Method at
the London School of Economics and there lectured and influenced both Imre
Lakatos and Paul Feyerabend, two of the foremost philosophers of science in the
next generation of philosophy of science. (Lakatos significantly modified
Popper's position, and Feyerabend repudiated it entirely, but the work of both
is deeply influenced by Popper and engaged with many of the problems that
Popper set.) While there is some dispute as to the matter of influence, Popper
had a long-standing and close friendship with economist Friedrich Hayek, who
was also brought to the London School of Economics from Vienna. Each found
support and similarities in each other's work, citing each other often, though
not without qualification. In a letter to Hayek in 1944, Popper stated, "I
think I have learnt more from you than from any other living thinker, except
perhaps Alfred Tarski." Popper dedicated his "Conjectures and Refutations" to
Hayek. For his part, Hayek dedicated a collection of papers, "Studies in
Philosophy, Politics, and Economics", to Popper, and in 1982 said, "...ever
since his "Logik der Forschung" first came out in 1934, I have been a complete
adherent to his general theory of methodology." Popper also had long and
mutually influential friendships with art historian Ernst Gombrich, biologist
Peter Medawar, and neuro-scientist John Carew Eccles. Popper's influence, both
through his work in philosophy of science and through his political philosophy,
has also extended beyond the academy. One of Popper's students at the London
School of Economics was the billionaire investor George Soros, among whose
philanthropic foundations is the Open Society Institute, a think-tank named in
honor of Popper's "The Open Society and Its Enemies". Popperian philosophy also
inspired the creation of Taking Children Seriously, a libertarian movement
which noticed that Popper's general theory of knowledge creation does not
differentiate between adults and children. Criticism. Philosophy of science.
Most criticisms of Popper's philosophy are of the falsification, or error
elimination, element in his account of problem solving. It is intended as an
ideal, practical method of effective human problem solving; as such, the
current conclusions of science are stronger than pseudo-sciences or non-
sciences, insofar as they have survived this particularly vigorous selection
method. He does not argue that any such conclusions are therefore true, or that
this describes the actual methods of any particular scientist. Rather, it is a
recommended ideal method that, if enacted by a system or community, will over
time lead to slow but steady progress of a sort (relative to how well the
system or community enacts the method). It has been suggested that Popper's
ideas are often mistaken for a hard logical account of truth because of the
historical co-incidence of their appearing at the same time as logical
positivism, the followers of which mistook his aims for their own. The Quine-
Duhem thesis argues that it's impossible to test a single hypothesis on its
own, since each one comes as part of an environment of theories. Thus we can
only say that the whole package of relevant theories has been collectively
falsified, but cannot conclusively say which element of the package must be
replaced. An example of this is given by the discovery of the planet Neptune:
when the motion of Uranus was found not to match the predictions of Newton's
laws, the theory "There are seven planets in the solar system" was rejected,
and not Newton's laws themselves. Popper discussed this critique of naÃ¯ve
falsificationism in Chapters 3 & 4 of "The Logic of Scientific Discovery". For
Popper, theories are accepted or rejected via a sort of selection process.
Theories that say more about the way things appear are to be preferred over
those that do not; the more generally applicable a theory is, the greater its
value. Thus Newton's laws, with their wide general application, are to be
preferred over the much more specific "the solar system has seven planets".
Popper's student Imre Lakatos attempted to reconcile Kuhn's work with
falsificationism by arguing that science progresses by the falsification of
"research programs" rather than the more specific universal statements of
naÃ¯ve falsificationism. Another of Popper's students Paul Feyerabend
ultimately rejected any prescriptive methodology, and argued that the only
universal method characterizing scientific progress was "anything goes". Popper
claimed to have recognized already in the 1934 version of his "Logic of
Discovery" a fact later stressed by Kuhn, "that scientists necessarily develop
their ideas within a definite theoretical framework", and to that extent to
have anticipated Kuhn's central point about 'normal science'. (But Popper
criticised what he saw as Kuhn's relativism.) Also, in his collection
"Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge" (Harper &
Row, 1963), Popper writes, "Science must begin with myths, and with the
criticism of myths; neither with the collection of observations, nor with the
invention of experiments, but with the critical discussion of myths, and of
magical techniques and practices. The scientific tradition is distinguished
from the pre-scientific tradition in having two layers. Like the latter, it
passes on its theories; but it also passes on a critical attitude towards them.
The theories are passed on, not as dogmas, but rather with the challenge to
discuss them and improve upon them." Another objection is that it is not always
possible to demonstrate falsehood definitively, especially if one is using
statistical criteria to evaluate a null hypothesis. More generally it is not
always clear, if evidence contradicts a hypothesis, that this is a sign of
flaws in the hypothesis rather than of flaws in the evidence. However, this is
a misunderstanding of what Popper's philosophy of science sets out to do.
Rather than offering a set of instructions that merely need to be followed
diligently to achieve science, Popper makes it clear in "The Logic of
Scientific Discovery" that his belief is that the resolution of conflicts
between hypotheses and observations can only be a matter of the collective
judgment of scientists, in each individual case. Popper's falsificationism can
be questioned logically: it is not clear how Popper would deal with a statement
like "for every metal, there is a temperature at which it will melt." The
hypothesis cannot be falsified by any possible observation, for there will
always be a higher temperature than tested at which the metal may in fact melt,
yet it seems to be a valid scientific hypothesis. These examples were pointed
out by Carl Gustav Hempel. Hempel came to acknowledge that Logical Positivism's
verificationism was untenable, but argued that falsificationism was equally
untenable on logical grounds alone. The simplest response to this is that,
because Popper describes how theories attain, maintain and lose scientific
status, individual consequences of currently accepted scientific theories are
scientific in the sense of being part of tentative scientific knowledge, and
both of Hempel's examples fall under this category. For instance, atomic theory
implies that all metals melt at some temperature. An early adversary of so-
called critical rationalism, Karl-Otto Apel attempted a comprehensive
refutation of Popper's philosophy. In "Transformation der Philosophie" (1973),
Apel charged Popper with being guilty of, amongst other things, a pragmatic
contradiction. Other criticism. It has been argued that Popper's student Imre
Lakatos transformed Popper's philosophy using historicism and updated Hegelian
historiographic ideas. Ludwig Wittgenstein was accused of brandishing a poker
at Popper during a meeting of the Cambridge Moral Sciences Club, when they
argued about whether issues in philosophy were real or just linguistic puzzles.
Wittgenstein's friends say he was merely handling a poker, but Popper used the
situation to make a joke at Wittgenstein's expense. Charles Taylor accuses
Popper of exploiting his worldwide fame as an epistemologist to diminish the
importance of philosophers of the 20th century continental tradition. According
to Taylor, Popper's criticisms are completely baseless, but they are received
with an attention and respect that Popper's "intrinsic worth hardly merits".
William W. Bartley defended Popper against such allegations: "Sir Karl Popper
is not really a participant in the contemporary professional philosophical
dialogue; quite the contrary, he has ruined that dialogue. If he is on the
right track, then the majority of professional philosophers the world over has
wasted or is wasting their intellectual careers. The gulf between Popper's way
of doing philosophy and that of the bulk of professional philosophers is as
great as that between astronomy and astrology."(deposit account required) In
2004, philosopher and psychologist Michel ter Hark (Groningen, The Netherlands)
published a book, called "Popper, Otto Selz and the rise of evolutionary
epistemology", ISBN 0-521-83074-5, in which he claimed that Popper took some of
his ideas from his tutor, the German psychologist Otto Selz. Selz himself never
published his ideas, partly because of the rise of Nazism which forced him to
quit his work in 1933, and the prohibition of referring to Selz' work. Popper,
the historian of ideas and his scholarship, is criticized in some academic
quarters, for his rejection of Plato, Hegel and Marx. According to John N.
Gray, Popper held that "a theory is scientific only in so far as it is
falsifiable, and should be given up as soon as it is falsified." By applying
Popper's account of scientific method, Gray's "Straw Dogs" states that this
would have "killed the theories of Darwin and Einstein at birth." When they
were first advanced, Gray claims, each of them was "at odds with some available
evidence; only later did evidence become available that gave them crucial
support." Against this, Gray seeks to establish the irrationalist thesis that
"the progress of science comes from acting against reason."
