Keynesian formula The Keynesian formula is an economic theory developed by the
British economist John Maynard Keynes. Keynes argued that the level of output
and employment in the economy was determined by aggregate demand or effective
demand. In a reversal of Say's Law, Keynes in essence argued that "man creates
his own supply," up to the limit set by full employment. Adherents of the
Austrian and Monetarist and schools of economic thought are critical of this
theory. Composition of the Keynesian Formula. formula_1 Consumption +
Investment + Government Spending + Exports âˆ’ Imports = Gross Domestic Product
Consumption. In Keynesian economics aggregate consumption is total personal
consumption expenditure, i.e., the purchase of currently produced goods and
services out of income, out of savings (net worth), or from borrowed funds. It
refers to that part of disposable income (income after taxes paid and payments
received) that does not go to saving. Investment. Investment is a term with
several closely related meanings in business management, finance and economics,
related to saving or deferring consumption. An asset is usually purchased, or
equivalently a deposit is made in a bank, in hopes of getting a future return
or interest from it. Literally, the word means the "action of putting something
in to somewhere else" (perhaps originally related to a person's garment or
'vestment'). Government Spending. Government spending or government expenditure
consists of government purchases, which can be financed by seigniorage, taxes,
or government borrowing. It is considered to be one of the major components of
gross domestic product. John Maynard Keynes was one of the first economists to
advocate government deficit spending as part of a fiscal policy to cure an
economic contraction. In Keynesian economics, increased government spending is
thought to raise aggregate demand and increase consumption. Exports. In
economics, an export is any good or commodity, transported from one country to
another country in a legitimate fashion, typically for use in trade. Export is
an important part of international trade. Its counterpart is import. Export
goods or services are provided to foreign consumers by domestic producers.
Export of commercial quantities of goods normally requires involvement of the
Customs authorities in both the country of export and the country of import.
Imports. In economics, an import is any good or commodity, brought into one
country from another country in a legitimate fashion, typically for use in
trade. Import goods or services are provided to domestic consumers by foreign
producers. Import of commercial quantities of goods normally requires
involvement of the Customs authorities in both the country of import and the
country of export. GDP. A common measurement of national income. Economic
Consequences. If the rate of consumption, investment, government spending and/
or exports increases, there will be an overall increase in gross domestic
product. This will have a resulting effect on aggregate demand, causing it to
rise and, thus resulting in the aggregate demand curve shifting outwards.
Alternatively, if there was a decrease in the mentioned factors, the result
will be a fall in aggregate demand, thus causing and inward shift in the
aggregate demand curve. The Keynesian Formula can be used to track changes in
aggregate demand, gross domestic product and what consequence that will have on
the price level (inflation). This formula is a tool for analysing macroeconomic
performance.
