Kingmaker In game theory. In game theory, a kingmaker is a player who lacks
sufficient resources or position to win at a given game, but possesses enough
remaining resources to decide which of the remaining viable players will
eventually win. Contemporary usage. By analogy, "Kingmaker" is also used in
some countries to refer to those individuals with the ability to influence the
selection of political leaders. The term though always unofficial, has tended
to gain more importance in places of power struggle e.g. politics, sports
organizations etc. Consequently, bestowement of such a title is looked upon
significantly and more often as a means of indirect gratification for
individuals wanting to silently dictate the affairs of the organization. The
term is also occasionally used in a pejorative sense during elections, where a
small number of independent political candidate(s) who hold a sizeable sway in
the 'vote bank', can most likely decide the course of an outcome. Instead of
referring to an individual, the term can also be applied to an institution or
think tank(s) whose opinions are held in great regard by the interested
organization. The influence of the religious orders like the Roman Catholic
Church in running the affairs of the state during medieval times (through the
King) is a well known example. Kingdoms and Empires in the Indian sub-continent
often relied on their religious heads. Besides religious orders, even countries
can fit into this terminology when they can dicate the affairs of the other
country (either directly or indirectly). In current political scenarios across
the world the term can expand its scope to include powerful lobbying groups,
whose role is often seen as a defining factor on major issues.
