Klemens von Metternich Prince Klemens Wenzel von Metternich (full name ,
anglicised as Clement Wenceslas Lothar von Metternich-Winneburg-Beilstein; 15
May 1773Â â€“ 11 June 1859) was a German-born Austrian politician and statesman
and one of the most important diplomats of his era, serving as the Foreign
Minister of the Holy Roman Empire and its successor state, the Austrian Empire,
from 1809 until the liberal revolutions of 1848 forced his resignation. One of
his first tasks was to engineer a dÃ©tente with France that included the
marriage of Napoleon to the Austrian Arch-Duchess Marie Louise. Soon after,
however, he engineered Austria's entry into the War of the Sixth Coalition on
the Allied side, signed the Treaty of Fontainebleau that sent Napoleon into
exile and led the Austrian delegation at the Congress of Vienna which divided
post-Napoleonic Europe between the major powers. In recognition of his service
to the Austrian Empire he was raised to the title of Prince in October 1813.
Under his guidance, the "Metternich system" of international congresses
continued for another decade as Austria aligned herself with Russia and, to a
lesser extent, Prussia. This marked the high point of Austria's diplomatic
importance, and thereafter Metternich slowly slipped back into the periphery of
international diplomacy. At home, Metternich also held the post of Chancellor
of State from 1821 until 1848, under both Francis II of Austria and his son
Ferdinand I of Austria. After a brief period of exile in London, Brighton and
Brussels that lasted until 1851, he returned once more to the Viennese court,
this time to offer only advice to Ferdinand's successor, Franz Josef. Having
outlived his generation of politicians, Metternich died at the age of 86 in
1859. Born into the House of Metternich in 1773 as the son of a diplomat,
Metternich received a good education at the universities of Strasbourg and
Mainz. He also helped during the coronation of Francis II in 1792 and that of
his predecessor, Leopold II, in 1790. After a brief trip to England, Metternich
was named as the Austrian ambassador to the Netherlands; a short-lived post,
since the country was brought under French control the next year. He married
his first wife, Eleonore von Kaunitz, in 1795 and it did much to catapult him
into Viennese society. Despite having numerous affairs, he was devastated by
her death in 1825. He would later remarry, wedding Baroness Antoinette Leykam
in 1827 and, after her death in 1829, Countess Melanie Zichy-Ferraris in 1831.
She would also predecease him by five years. Before taking office as Foreign
Minister, Metternich held numerous smaller posts, including ambassadorial roles
in the Kingdom of Saxony, the Kingdom of Prussia and Napoleonic France. One of
Metternich's sons, Richard von Metternich, was also a successful diplomat; many
of Metternich's twelve other acknowledged children predeceased him. A
traditional conservative, Metternich was keen to maintain the balance of power,
in particular by resisting Russian territorial ambitions in Central Europe and
over the lands of the Ottoman Empire. He disliked liberalism and worked to
prevent the breakup of the Austrian empire; for example, by forcibly crushing
nationalist revolts in Austrian north Italy and the German states. At home, he
pursued a similar policy, using censorship and a wide ranging spy network to
dampen down unrest. Metternich has both been praised and heavily criticised for
the policies he pursued. His supporters point out that he presided over the
"Age of Metternich", when international diplomacy helped prevent major wars in
Europe. His qualities as a diplomat have also been commended; some add that his
achievements were all the better given the weakness of his negotiating
position. His decision to oppose Russian imperialism is also seen as a good
one. His detractors describe him as a bore who stuck to ill-thought out
conservative principles only out of vanity and a sense of infallibility. They
argue that he could have done much more in terms of securing Austria's future;
instead, his 1817 proposals for administrative reform were largely rejected
and, by opposing German nationalism, they find him responsible for ensuring it
would be Prussia and not Austria that united it. Other historians have argued
that in fact he had far less power than this view suggests, and that his
policies were only accepted when they agreed with the existing view of the
Habsburg monarchy that ruled Austria. Biography. Early life. Klemens Metternich
was born into the House of Metternich on 15 May 1773 to Franz George Karl Count
Metternich-Winneburg zu Beilstein, a diplomat who had passed from the service
of the Archbishopric of Trier to that of the Imperial court, and his wife
Countess Maria Beatrice Aloisia von Kagenegg (alternatively von Kageneck). He
was named in honour of Prince Clemens Wenceslaus of Saxony, the archbishop-
elector of Trier and the past employer of his father. He was the eldest son of
the couple and had one elder sister. At the time of Metternich's birth the
family possessed a ruined keep at Beilstein, a castle at Winneberg, an estate
just to the west of Koblenz, and an estate 300 miles away in KÃ¶nigswart,
Bohemia, won during the 17th century. At this time Metternich's father,
described as "a boring babbler and chronic liar" by a contemporary, was the
Austrian ambassador to the courts of the three Rhenish electors (Trier, Cologne
and Mainz). Metternich's education was handled by his mother, heavily
influenced by their proximity to the border with France; indeed, for many years
Metternich would consider himself able to communicate better in French than
German. As a child he would also go on official visits with his father and,
under the direction of Protestant tutor John Frederick Simon, he was tutored
not just in academic affairs but also in swimming and horseriding. In the
summer of 1788 Metternich began studying law at the University of Strasbourg
and was matriculated on 12 November. During his time at the University he was
for some time accommodated by Prince Maximilian of ZweibrÃ¼cken, the future
King of Bavaria. At this time he was described by Simon as "happy, handsome and
lovable", though contemporaries would later recount how he had been a liar and
a braggart. Metternich left Strasbourg in September 1790 to attend Leopold II's
October coronation in Frankfurt, an event for which he had been awarded the
largely honorific position of Ceremonial Marshall to the Catholic Bench of the
College of the Counts of Westphalia. There, under the wing of his father, he
met with the future Francis II and looked at ease among the nobility present.
Between the end of 1790 and the summer of 1792 Metternich studied law at the
University of Mainz, where he received a more conservative education than he
had at Strasbourg, a city now too unsafe to which to return. In the summers he
worked with his father who had been appointed plenipotentiary to the Austrian
Netherlands. In March 1792 Francis succeeded his father Leopold as Holy Roman
Emperor and was crowned in July, prompting Metternich to reprise his earlier
role of Ceremonial Marshall. To this he added the honour of officially opening
the accompanying ball alongside Louise of Mecklenburg. In the meantime France
had declared war on Austria, beginning the War of the First Coalition
(1792â€“7) and making Metternich's further study in Mainz impossible. Now
falling back on his employment with his father, he was sent on a special
mission to the front. Here he ended up leading the interrogation of the French
Minister of War the Marquis de Beurnonville and several National Convention
commissioners who were accompanying him. Metternich also observed the siege and
fall of Valenciennes, an experience he would later look back on as teaching him
a great deal about warfare. In early 1794 he was sent to England on, at least
ostensibly, official business helping Viscount Desandrouin, the Treasurer-
General of the Austrian Netherlands, to negotiate a loan. Marriage and the
Congress of Rastatt. During his stay in England he met the king on several
occasions and dined with a number of influential British politicians, including
William Pitt, Charles James Fox and Edmund Burke. Metternich was nominated as
the new Minister Plenipotentiary to the Dutch Republic and left England in
September 1794. Unfortunately, he found an exiled and powerless government in
headlong retreat from the latest French advance. Even worse news came in
October as a revitalised French army swept into Germany and annexed all of the
Metternich estates except KÃ¶nigswart. Disappointed, and affected by heavy
criticism of his father's key policies, he joined his parents in Vienna in
November. On 27 September 1795 he married Countess Eleonore von Kaunitz, a
granddaughter of former Austrian chancellor Wenzel Kaunitz. The marriage,
accompanied by a significant dowry, was arranged by Metternich's mother and
introduced him to Viennese society. This was undoubtedly part of the motivation
for Metternich, who demonstrated less affection for her than she for him. Two
conditions were imposed on the marriage by the father of the bride, Prince
Kaunitz: firstly, the still youthful Eleonore was to continue to live at home;
and secondly, Metternich was forbidden from serving as a diplomat as long as
the Prince was still alive. Their daughter Maria was born in January 1797.
After studying in Vienna, the Prince's death in September 1797 allowed
Metternich to participate in the Congress of Rastatt. Initially Metternich's
father offered to take him as a secretary while ensuring that, when proceedings
officially started in December 1797, he was named as the representative of the
Catholic Bench of the College of the Counts of Westphalia. A bored Metternich
remained at Rastatt in this role until 1799 when, much to his relief, the
congress was finally wound down. During this period Eleonore had chosen to live
with Metternich at Rastatt and gave birth to sons Francis (February 1798) and,
shortly after the end of the Congress, Klemens (June 1799). Much to
Metternich's anguish Klemens died after only a few days, and Francis soon
contracted a lung infection from which he would never recover. Ambassador.
Dresden and Berlin. The Holy Roman Empire's defeat in the War of the Second
Coalition shook up its diplomatic circles and the promising Metternich was now
offered the choice between three ministerial positions: to the Imperial Diet at
Regensburg; to the Kingdom of Norway at Copenhagen; or to the Elector of Saxony
at Dresden. He chose the third of these in late January 1801 and his
appointment was officially announced in February. Metternich summered in
Vienna, where he wrote his "Instructions", a memorandum which showed much
greater understanding of statesmanship than any of Metternich's earlier writing
and visited the KÃ¶nigswart estate in the autumn, before finally taken up his
new position on 4 November. The subtleties of the document were, however,
entirely lost on the Saxon court, which was headed by the retiring Frederick
Augustus, a man who lacked any desire for political initiative. Despite the
boredom of the court itself, Metternich enjoyed the light-hearted frivolity of
the city and took up a mistress, Katharina Bagration, who bore him a daughter,
Klementine. In January 1803 Metternich and his wife had another child
themselves whom they named Viktor. In Dresden Metternich also made a number of
important contacts including Friedrich Gentz, a publicist who would guide
Metternich in alternating roles as his confidant and critic for the next thirty
years. He also established links with important Polish and French political
figures. The Imperial Recess of 1803 brought Metternich's family new estates in
Ochsenhausen, the title of Prince and a seat in the Imperial Diet. In the
ensuing diplomatic reshuffle Metternich was appointed ambassador to the Kingdom
of Prussia, an appointment he was notified of in February 1803 and began in
November of that year. He arrived at a critical juncture in European diplomacy,
and Metternich soon grew worried about the territorial ambitions of Napoleon
Bonaparte, the new leader of France. This fear was shared by the Russian court,
under Alexander I, and the Tsar kept Metternich informed of Russian policy. By
the autumn of 1804 Vienna agreed and, in August 1805, the Austrian Empire (as
the Holy Roman Empire was in the process of becoming) took up the fight,
beginning their involvement in the War of the Third Coalition. Metternich's now
almost impossible task was to convince Prussia to join the coalition against
Bonaparte. Their eventual agreement was not motivated by Metternich's pleas,
and after the coalition's heavy defeat at the Battle of Austerlitz however,
Prussia disregarded the agreement and signed a treaty with the French instead.
Paris. In the ensuing reshuffle in Vienna Johann Philipp Stadion became the
Austrian foreign minister, freeing up for Metternich the post of Ambassador to
the Russian Empire. In the event, he never made it to Russia as a need had
arisen for a new Austrian at the French court. Metternich was duly approved for
the role in June 1806. Metternich enjoyed being in demand and was happy to be
sent to France on a generous salary of 90,000 gulden a year. After an arduous
trip he took up residence as ambassador there in August 1806, being briefed by
Baron von Vincent, and Engelbert von Floret whom he would retain as a close
adviser for two decades. He met French foreign minister Charles Talleyrand on 5
August and Napoleon himself five days later at Saint-Cloud; soon, the War of
the Fourth Coalition drew both Talleyrand and Napoleon eastwards. His wife and
children joined him in October and he took the opportunity to ingratiate
himself into society where, using his charm, he rapidly achieved a large degree
of social eminence. The presence of Eleonore did not prevent Metternich from
embarking on a series of affairs that certainly included Napoleon's sister
Caroline Murat and Laure Junot and perhaps many more besides. After the
Treaties of Tilsit of July 1807 Metternich saw that Austria's position in
Europe was now much more vulnerable but believed that the accord between Russia
and France would not last long. In the meantime he found the new French Foreign
Minister, Jean-Baptiste Champagny unaccommodating and struggled to negotiate a
satisfactory settlement over the future of several French forts on the River
Inn. Over the following months the reach of Austrian policy, and Metternich's
own reputation, increased. Metternich himself pushed for a Russo-Austrian
alliance, though Russian Tsar Alexander was too preoccupied with the three
other wars he was engaged in to commit. Over time, Metternich came to see war
an eventual war with France inevitable. In a memorable event to all sides,
Metternich argued with Napoleon at the French leader's 35th birthday
celebrations in August 1808 as a result of the increasingly obvious
preparations for war from both sides. Soon after, Napoleon refused Metternich's
attendance at the Congress of Erfurt; Metternich was later glad to hear from
Talleyrand that Napoleon's attempts to get Russia to invade Austria at the
Congress had proved unsuccessful. In late 1808 Metternich was recalled to
Vienna for five weeks of meetings about the possibility of Austria invading
France whilst Napoleon was on campaign in Spain. His memoranda reported that
France was not united behind Napoleon, that Russia was unlikely to want to
fight Austria, and that France had precious few reliable troops he could commit
to fighting in central Europe. Once back in Paris, Metternich himself was
overtly apprehensive about his own safety. When Austria declared war on France,
Metternich was indeed arrested in retaliation for the arrest of two French
diplomats in Vienna, but the practical implications of this were minimal and he
was allowed to leave France under escort for Austria in late May 1809. After
Napoleon's capture of Vienna Metternich was conducted to the Austrian capital
and handed over in exchange for the French diplomats. Foreign Minister.
DÃ©tente with France. Now back in Austria, Metternich witnessed her defeat at
the Battle of Wagram first hand. His reputation tarnished, Stadion tendered his
resignation as Foreign Minister and the emperor immediately offered the post to
Metternich. Metternich, worried that Napoleon would seize on this to demand
harsher peace terms, instead agreed to become a minister of state (which he did
on 8 July) and lead negotiations with the French on the understanding that he
would formally replace Stadion as Foreign Minister at a later date. During
peace talks at Altenburg, Metternich put forward pro-French proposals to save
the Austrian monarchy. Napoleon, however, disliked his memorandum on the future
of Poland and Metternich was gradually displaced from proceedings by Prince
Liechtenstein. He soon regained the influence he had lost, however, as a result
of his previously arranged appointment to the post of Foreign Minister (and
additionally that of Minister of the Imperial Household) on 8 October. In early
1810 Metternich's earlier affair with Junot became public but, because of
Eleonore's understanding, the new Austrian Foreign Minister was never greatly
scandalised by it. One of Metternich's first tasks was to push for the marriage
of Napoleon to Archduchess Marie Louise at a time when Napoleon was also
interested in a marriage to the Tsar's youngest sister Anna Pavlovna.
Metternich would later seek to distance himself from the marriage by claiming
it was Napoleon's own idea, but this is improbable, and, in any case, he was
happy to claim responsibility for the marriage at the time. By 7 February
Napoleon had agreed and the pair, still estranged, were married by proxy on 11
March. Marie Louise left for France soon after and Metternich followed, albeit
by a deliberately different route and unofficially. The visit was designed,
Metternich explained, to transport his family (stranded in France by the
outbreak of war) home and to report back to the Austrian Emperor about Marie
Louise's activities. Instead, Metternich stayed six months, entrusting his
office in Vienna to his father. He soon set about using the marriage, combined
with flattery, to renegotiate the terms set out at SchÃ¶nbrunn. The concessions
he won were ultimately trivial, however: a few trading rights, a delay in
paying the war indemnity, restitution of some estates belonging to Germans in
the Austrian service including the Metternich family's, and the lifting of a
150,000 man limit imposed by the treaty on the Austrian army. War of the Sixth
Coalition. As France's ally. When Metternich returned to Vienna in October 1810
he found he was no longer as popular as he had been before, with his influence
limited to foreign affairs and his attempts to get a full Council of State
reintroduced failed. With a strong belief that the now much weakened Austria
should avoid another invasion by France in any Franco-Russian war, he turned
away the diplomatic advances of Tsar Alexander and instead concluded an
alliance with Napoleon on 14 March 1812. He also supported a period of moderate
censorship, aimed at preventing provocation of the French. Requiring that only
30,000 Austrian troops fight alongside the French, the alliance treaty was more
generous than the one Prussia had signed a month earlier; this allowed
Metternich to give both Britain and Russia assurances that Austria remained
committed to curbing Napoleonic ambitions. The Austrian foreign minister
accompanied his sovereign for a final meeting with Napoleon at Dresden in May
1812 before the French Emperor moved east. The Dresden meeting revealed that
Austria's influence in Europe had reached its lowest point and Metternich was
now keen to take advantage of what he saw as his continuing strong ties with
all sides in the war to regain it, proposing general peace talks headed by
Austria. Over the next three months Metternich would slowly distance Austria
from the French cause, whilst avoiding alliance with either Prussia or Russia,
and remaining open to any peace proposal that would secure a place in Europe
for the combined Bonaparte-Habsburg dynasty. This grew out of a deep concern
that, if Napoleon were conclusively defeated in battle, Russia and Prussia
stood to gain too much. Napoleon was unavailing, however, and the fighting (now
officially the War of the Sixth Coalition) continued. Austria's alliance with
France ended in February 1813 and, much to Napoleon's anger, Austria took the
opportunity to move to a position of armed neutrality. As a neutral. Metternich
was much less keen on turning against France than many of his contemporaries
(though not the Emperor). He favoured his own plans for a general settlement;
nonetheless, these were not faring well and although a statement of general war
aims from the Russians that included many nods to Austria was secured, Britain
remained distrustful and generally unwilling to give up the military initiative
she had been fighting for twenty years to establish. Despite this, Francis
created the Austrian foreign minister Grand-Chancellor of the Order of Maria
Theresa, a post which had been vacant since the time of Kaunitz. Metternich
grew increasingly worried that Napoleon's retreat would be accompanied by the
kind of disorder that would do the Habsburgs no good at all. A peace had to be
concluded soon in his eyes and, since Britain could not be coerced, he sent
proposals to France and Russia only. These were rejected, though after the
battles of LÃ¼tzen (2 May) and Bautzen (20â€“21 May), a French-initiated truce
was duly called. Starting in April Metternich began to "slowly and reluctantly"
prepare Austria for war with France; the armistice provided Austria time for a
more complete mobilisation. In June Metternich was forced to leave Vienna and
personally handle negotiations at Gitschin in Bohemia. When he arrived he found
the hospitality of Princess Wilhelmine, Duchess of Sagan useful and the pair
began an affair that would last several months. None of his mistresses would
achieve such influence over Metternich as Wilhelmine and he would continue to
write letters to her after their separation. Meanwhile French Foreign Minister
Hugues-Bernard Maret remained elusive, though Metternich did manage to discuss
the state of affairs with the Tsar on 18â€“19 June at Opotschna. In talks which
would later be ratified as the Reichenbach Convention they agreed on general
peace demands and set out a process by which Austria could enter into the war
on the coalition side. Shortly afterwards Metternich was invited to join
Napoleon at Dresden, where he could put the terms directly. Though no reliable
record of their meeting on 26 June 1813 exists it seems it was a stormy
meeting, though not one that disappointed either side. Agreement was finally
reached as Metternich was about to leave: peace talks would start in Prague in
July and run until 20 August. In agreeing to this Metternich had ignored the
Reichenbach Convention and this fact angered Austria's coalition allies. The
Conference of Prague would never properly meet, since Napoleon gave his
representatives Armand Caulaincourt and the Count of Narbonne insufficient
powers to negotiate terms for a peace. At the informal discussions held in lieu
of the conference, Caulaincourt implied that Napoleon would not start
negotiating until an allied army threatened France itself. This proved
sufficient to convert Metternich, and, after an ultimatum that Metternich had
issued to France went unheeded, Austria duly declared war on 12 August. As a
coalition partner. Though Austria's coalition allies saw the declaration of war
as an acceptance of the failure of Austria's diplomatic ambitions, Metternich
considered it one manoeuvre in a much longer campaign. For the rest of the war
he strived to hold the coalition together and, as such, to prevent the Russians
from gaining momentum in Europe. To this end he won an early victory as, an
Austrian general, the Prince of Schwarzenberg, was confirmed as supreme
commander of the coalition forces in preference to Tsar Alexander I. He also
succeeded in getting the three allied monarchs (Alexander, Francis and
Prussia's Frederick William III) to follow him and their armies on campaign.
With the Treaties of Teplitz, Metternich allowed Austria to remain uncommitted
over the future of France, Italy and Poland. He was still confined, however, by
the British who considerably subsidised Prussia and Russia (in September
Metternich asked for Austria to be added to the list of recipient countries).
Meanwhile, the coalition forces took the offensive. On 18 October 1813
Metternich witnessed the successful Battle of Leipzig and, two days later, he
was rewarded for his "wise direction" of foreign affairs when he was given the
rank of prince (). Metternich was delighted when Frankfurt was retaken in early
November and, in particular, the deference the tsar showed to Francis at a
ceremony organised there by Metternich. Diplomatically, with the war drawing to
a close, he remained determined to prevent the creation of a strong unified
German state, even offering Napoleon generous terms in order to retain it as a
counterweight. On 2 December 1813 Napoleon agreed to talk, though these were
delayed by the need for a more senior British diplomat (Viscount Castlereagh)
to be present. Before talks could commence, coalition armies crossed the Rhine
on 22 December. Metternich retired from Frankfurt to Breisgau to celebrate
Christmas with his wife's family before travelling to the new coalition
headquarters at Basel in January 1814. Quarrels with the Tsar Alexander,
particularly over the fate of France intensified in January prompting Alexander
to storm out. He therefore missed the arrival of Castlereagh in mid-January.
The pair, who formed a good working relationship, then travelled into France to
discuss matters with Alexander at Langres. The tsar remained unaccommodating
however, demanding a push into the centre of France; fortunately, he was too
preoccupied to object to Metternich's other ideas, such as a final peace
conference in Vienna. Metternich did not attend talks with the French at
Chatillon as he wanted to stay with Alexander. The talks stalled, and, after a
brief advance, defeat at Montmirail and Montereau forced coalition forces to
retreat. This relieved Metternich's fears that an overconfident Tsar Alexander
might act unilaterally. Metternich continued negotiations with the French envoy
Caulaincourt throughout early to mid March 1814, when victory at Laon put the
coalition back on the offensive. By this time Metternich was tiring of trying
to hold the coalition together and even the British-engineered Treaty of
Chaumont did not seem to help. In the absence of the Prussians and Russians the
coalition agreed upon the restoration of the Bourbon dynasty to the French
throne. Francis rejected a final plea from Napoleon to abdicate in favour of
his wife, and Paris fell on 30 March. Military manoeuvres had forced Metternich
to retreat westward to Dijon on 24 March and now, after a deliberate delay,
Metternich left for the French capital on 7 April. He arrived on 10 April to a
city at peace and, much to his annoyance, largely in the control of Tsar
Alexander. The Austrians disliked the terms of the Treaty of Fontainebleau that
the Russians had imposed on Napoleon in their absence, but Metternich was
reluctant to take a stand on the issue and on 11 April signed the treaty.
Thereafter his job was focused on safeguarding Austrian interests in the
forthcoming peace; to assert Austria's influence in Germany over that of
Prussia; and to prevent the ascendency of Tsar Alexander from becoming
permanent. Within this he ensured that the Italian provinces of Lombardy and
Venetia, lost to French client states in 1805, were duly re-annexed. On the
questions of dividing formerly French occupied Poland and Germany Metternich
was far more confined by the interests of his coalition allies. After two
failed proposals, advanced by the Prussians, the various delegations agreed to
postpone the issue until after a peace treaty had been signed. Elsewhere,
Metternich, like many of his counterparts, was anxious to provide the renewed
French monarchy with the resources to suppress any new revolutionary spirit.
The generous Treaty of Paris was signed on 30 May. With it went Metternich's
need to stay in Paris and he accompanied Tsar Alexander to England; Wilhelmine,
who had followed Metternich to Paris, also made the crossing. A triumphant
Metternich filled his four weeks with revelry, regaining any reputation he and
Austria had lost; he was also awarded an honorary law degree from the
University of Oxford. By contrast and to Metternich's great pleasure, Alexander
displayed bad manners and a penchant for gratuitous insults. Despite the
opportunities presented, little actual diplomacy took place; instead, all that
was firmly agreed was that proper discussions would take place at Vienna, for
which a date was tentatively set of 15 August. When the tsar tried to postpone
it to October Metternich agreed but, worried that the tsar was trying to
capitalise on his de facto control of Poland, made sure suitable conditions
were imposed. Metternich was eventually reunited with his family in Austria in
the middle of July 1814, having stopped for a week in France to settle fears
surrounding Napoleon's wife Marie Louise, now the Duchess of Parma. His return
to Vienna was accompanied by a special cantata that included the line "History
holds thee up to posterity as a model among great men". Congress of Vienna. In
the autumn of 1814 the heads of the five reigning dynasties and representatives
from 216 noble families began to descend on Vienna. Before ministers from the
"Big Four" (the coalition allies of Britain, Austria, Prussia and Russia)
arrived, Metternich stayed quietly in Baden bei Wien, two hours to the south of
the Austrian capital. When he heard they had reached Vienna he made the journey
to meet them and to encourage them to come with him back to Baden. This proved
unsuccessful; so instead the ministers resolved key differences in a series of
four meetings held in the city itself. It was at these meetings that the
representatives agreed on how the Congress would operate and, to Metternich's
delight, named his own aide, Friedrich Gentz, as secretary to the negotiations
of the "Big Six" (the Big Four plus France and Spain). When Talleyrand and
Spanish representative Don Pedro Labrador learned of these decisions, they were
incensed that some agreements would be negotiated by the Big Four only. Sweden
and Portugal were similarly angered by their non-inclusion in anything but the
full Congress, especially since Metternich was determined to give the latter as
little power as possible. As a result the Big Six became the Preliminary
Committee of the Eight, whose first agreement was that the congress itself
should be postponed to 1 November. In fact, it would soon be postponed again,
with only a minor commission beginning work in November. In the meantime,
Metternich organised a controversially vast array of entertainments for all the
delegates including himself. Leaving Castlereagh to work out what Tsar
Alexander sought to gain from the proceedings on his behalf, Metternich briefly
turned his attention to quelling anti-Habsburg feeling in Italy, and not
without success. Around the same time, however, he learnt that the Duchess of
Sagan was now courting the tsar. Disappointed and exhausted by the full social
diary, Metternich let his guard drop, incensing Tsar Alexander during
negotiations over Poland (then ruled by Napoleon as the Grand Duchy of Warsaw)
by suggesting Austria could match Russia militarily. The pair would never meet
in person again. Despite the blunder, Francis refused to dismiss his foreign
minister and political crisis rocked Vienna throughout November, culminating in
a declaration by Tsar Alexander that Russia would not compromise on her demand
that Poland become a satellite kingdom of the Russian Empire. With this demand
completely unpalatable to his coalition allies, agreement seemed further away
than ever. During the tense stand-off, it seems that Alexander even went as far
as to challenge Metternich to a duel. Fortunately for the Austrian foreign
minister, Tsar Alexander soon decided upon a rapid "volte face" and agreed to
divide up Poland among the belligerents. He also opened up on the difficult
issue of dealing with the Germanic Kingdom of Saxony, and for the first time
allowed Talleyrand to participate in all Big Four (now Big Five) discussions.
As a result of the new consensus, the major issues concerning Poland and
Germany were settled in the second week of February 1815. Austria gained land
in the partition of Poland and prevented the Prussian annexation of Saxony, but
was forced to accept both Russian dominance in Poland and increasing Prussian
influence in Germany. Metternich's work was now focused on getting the various
German states to agree to surrender some of their historic rights to a new
Federal Diet that could stand up to the Prussians. He also assisted the work of
the Swiss Committee and worked on a myriad of smaller issues, such as
navigation rights on the Rhine. The beginning of Lent on 8 February meant that
he had much more time to devote to these congressional issues, as well as
private discussions about the fate of southern Italy where Joachim Murat was
said to be raising a Neapolitan army. On 7 March Metternich was awakened with
the news that Napoleon had absconded from his island prison of Elba and within
an hour had met with both the tsar and the King of Prussia. Metternich was in
no mood for rash changes of course and, at first, the development had little
impact on the congress. Finally, on 13 March the Big Five declared Napoleon an
outlaw and the coalition allies began preparations for a renewed fight. On 25
March they signed a new treaty, committing each to sending 150,000 men; there
was little sign of the divisions that had characterised the alliance only two
years before. With military commanders now drifting away, the Vienna congress
gained a new air of seriousness and quickly fixed the boundaries of an
independent Netherlands, formalised proposals for a loose confederation of
Swiss cantons, and ratified the earlier agreements over Poland. By late April
only two major issues remained, the organisation of a new German federation and
the problem of Italy. The latter soon began to come to a head. Austria had
solidified its control over Lombardy-Venice and extended its protection to
those provinces nominally under the control of Francis' daughter Marie Louise.
On 18 April Metternich announced that Austria was formally at war with Murat's
Naples. Austria was victorious at the Battle of Tolentino on 3 May and captured
Naples less than three weeks later. Metternich then felt able to delay a
decision on the future of the country until after Vienna; there was no longer
any rush. Discussions about Germany would drag on until early June, when a
joint Austrian-Prussian proposition was formally ratified. It left most
constitutional issues to the new diet; its President would be the Emperor
Francis himself. Despite criticism from within Austria, Metternich was pleased
with the outcome and the amount of control it granted the Habsburgs, and,
through them, himself. Certainly, Metternich would be able to use the diet to
suit his own ends on numerous occasions. The arrangement was similarly popular
with most German representatives. A summation treaty was signed on 19 June (the
Russians signed a week later), bringing the Vienna Congress officially to an
end. Metternich himself had already left on 13 June for the front line,
prepared for a lengthy war against Napoleon. In fact there was no need as
Napoleon was comprehensively beaten at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June. Paris
and Italy. On 15 June 1815 Metternich was with his coalition allies in Paris
once more to discuss peace terms when he read that his son and two daughters
had narrowly escaped death after a bridge collapsed. He disliked the enforced
separation. After 133 days of negotiations, longer than the turmoil itself, the
second Treaty of Paris was agreed to and signed on 20 November. Metternich, who
had come to the conclusion that France should not be dismembered, was happy
with the result: France lost only a little of its land along its eastern
borders, seven hundred million French francs, and the artworks it had captured.
It also accepted an army of occupation numbering 150,000 men. In the meantime a
separate treaty, proposed by Alexander and redrafted by the Austrian foreign
minister, had been signed on 26 September. This created a new Holy Alliance
centred on Russia, Prussia and Austria; nonetheless, with its vague liberal
sentiments it was a document that Metternich neither pushed for nor wanted.
Representatives from most of the European states would come to sign the
document, with the exception of the pope, the United Kingdom and the Ottoman
Empire. Shortly afterwards, a separate treaty reaffirmed the Quadruple Alliance
and established, through its sixth article, the Congress System of regular
diplomatic meetings. With Europe at peace, the Austrian flag now flew over 50%
more land than when Metternich had become foreign minister. Metternich now
turned once more to the question of Italy, arriving on his first visit to the
country in early December 1815. After visiting Venice, his family joined him in
Milan on 18 December. For once it was Metternich who played the liberal,
asking, unsuccessfully, Francis to give the region some autonomy. Metternich
spent four months in Italy, endlessly busy and suffering from chronic
inflammation of his eyelids. He tried to control Austrian foreign policy from
Milan and, when there was a serious disagreement between the empire and the
Kingdom of Bavaria, he was heavily criticised for his absence from Vienna. His
enemies could not capitalise however: Stadion was busy working in his role as
finance minister and the Empress Maria Ludovika, a fierce critic of
Metternich's policies, died in April. The uncharacteristic gap between the
views of Metternich and his emperor was only eased when the emperor accepted
some of Metternich's proposals and Metternich withdrew others. Metternich
finally returned to Vienna on 28 May 1816, after almost a year absent from the
capital. Professionally, the rest of 1816 passed quietly for the tired
Metternich, who was wrapped up in discussions over Austria's fiscal position
and in monitoring the spread of liberalism in Germany and nationalism in Italy.
Personally however, Metternich was rocked in November by the death of a focus
of his attentions, Julie Zichy-Festetics. Two years later Metternich was to
write that his "life ended there" and his old frivolity would take some time to
return. The only consolation was July's announcement that Metternich was to
receive new estates along the Rhine at Johannisberg, only from his birthplace
at Koblenz. In June 1817 Metternich was required to escort the emperor's newly
wed daughter Maria Leopoldina to a boat at Livorno. When they arrived they
found that the ship was delayed and Metternich spent the time travelling around
Italy once more; he visited Venice, Padua, Ferrara, Pisa, Florence and Lucca.
Though alarmed by the way Italy was developing (he noted that many of Francis'
concessions were yet to be put into practice), he still believed the situation
was salvageable and made another plea for decentralisation on 29 August. After
this failed, Metternich decided to broaden his efforts into general
administrative reform, to avoid the appearance of favouring the Italians over
the other peoples of the empire. Whilst working on these, Metternich returned
to Vienna on 12 September 1817 to be immediately wrapped up in the organisation
of his daughter Maria's marriage to Count Joseph EsterhÃ¡zy just three days
later. It proved all too much and Metternich was taken ill. After a delay
whilst he recovered, Metternich condensed his proposals into three documents he
submitted to Francis, all dated 27 October 1817. The administration would
remain undemocratic, but there would be a new ministry of justice and four new
chancellorsâ€”each with local remits, including one for "Italy". Importantly,
the divisions would be regional and not national. In the end, Francis accepted
the revised proposals, albeit with several alterations. Aachen, Teplice,
Karlsbad, Troppau and Laibach. Metternich's primary focus remained on keeping a
sense of unity among the Great Powers of Europe and hence preserving his own
power as mediator. He was also concerned by liberal-minded Ioannis
Kapodistrias' increasing influence over Tsar Alexander and the continual threat
of Russia annexing large areas of the declining Ottoman Empire (the so-called
"Eastern Question"). As he had earlier envisaged, by April 1818 Britain had
drawn up, and Metternich pushed through, proposals to have a Congress at
Aachen, then a Prussian frontier town, six months later. In the meantime,
Metternich was advised to travel to the spa town of Karlsbad to treat the
rheumatic tension in his back. It was a pleasant month-long trip, though it was
whilst at Karlsbad that he heard of the death of his father at the age of 72.
He visited the family estate at KÃ¶nigswart and then progressed to Frankfurt in
late August to encourage the member states of the German Confederation to agree
on procedural issues. He could also now revisit Koblenz for the first time in
25 years and travel on to his new estate at Johannisberg. Travelling with
Emperor Francis, he was warmly greeted by the Catholic towns along the Rhine as
he progressed towards Aachen. He had arranged in advance for newspapers to
cover the first peacetime congress of its kind. As discussions began,
Metternich pushed for the withdrawal of allied troops from France and means for
preserving the unity of the European powers. The former was agreed almost
immediately; but on the latter issue only agreement on a further extension to
the Quadruple Alliance. Metternich rejected the Tsar's idealistic plans for
(among other things) a single European army, but his own recommendations to the
Prussians for greater controls on freedom of speech proved equally hard for
other powers such as Britain to support openly. Drawn to the natural beauty of
Dorothea Lieven, Metternich travelled with her to Brussels soon after the
congress broke up. Though he could not stay more than a few days, the pair
would exchange letters for the next eight years. Metternich arrived back in
Vienna on 11 December 1818 and, unlike in preceding years, could spend
considerable time with his children. He entertained the Tsar during the
Christmas period and spent twelve weeks monitoring both Italy and Germany
before setting off with the Emperor on a third trip to Italy. In the event, the
trip had to be cut short following the assassination of the conservative German
dramatist August von Kotzebue. After a short delay, Metternich decided that if
the German governments would not take the lead against this perceived malaise,
Austria would have to compel them, and called an informal conference in
Karlsbad. Wanting to sound out Prussian support before the assembly, Metternich
met with Frederick William III of Prussia in Teplice in July. Metternich
carried the day, using a then recent attempt on the life of the Chief Minister
of Nassau, Carl Ibell, to get agreement for the conservative programme now
known as the "Convention of Teplitz". The Karlsbad conference opened on 6
August and ran for the rest of the month. Metternich quickly overcame any
opposition within the conference to his proposed "group of anti-revolutionary
measures, correct and preemptory", though they were condemned by outsiders.
Despite this censure Metternich was nonetheless very pleased with the result,
known as the "Karlsbad Decrees". At the conference in Vienna later in the year,
Metternich found himself constrained by the Princes of WÃ¼rttemberg and
Bavaria, forcing him to abandon his plans to reform the German federation. He
now regretted having so quickly forced through its original constitution five
years before. Nevertheless, he held ground on other issues and the conference's
Final Act was highly reactionary in nature, much as Metternich envisaged it. He
remained in Vienna until the close of the conference in May 1820 finding the
whole affair a bore. On 6 May Metternich heard of the death of his daughter
Klementine tuberculosis. Journeying on to Prague, he heard that his eldest
daughter Maria had also contracted the disease. He was at her bedside in Baden
bei Wien when she died on 20 July. The two deaths in quick succession prompted
Eleonore and the remaining children to leave for the cleaner air of France. The
rest of 1820 was filled with news of liberal revolts to which Metternich was
expected to respond. Ultimately, the Austrian Foreign Minister was torn between
following through on his conservative pledge (favoured by the Russians) and
keeping out of a country in which Austria had no interest (favoured by the
British). He chose "sympathetic inactivity" on Spain but, much to his dismay
and surprise, Guglielmo Pepe led a similar revolt in Naples in early July and
forced King Ferdinand I to accept a new constitution. Metternich reluctantly
agreed to attend the Russian-initiated Congress of Troppau in October to
discuss these very matters. He need not have worried: the Tsar gave way and
accepted a compromise proposal of moderate interventionism. Still worried at
Kapodistrias' influence over the Tsar, he lay down his conservative principles
in a long memorandum, using the opportunity to attack the free press and the
initiative of the middle classes. The congress disbanded in the third week of
December and the next step would be a congress at Laibach to discuss their
proposed intervention with Ferdinand. Metternich found himself able to dominate
Laibach more than any other congress, overseeing Ferdinand's rejection of the
liberal constitution he had agreed to only months before. Austrian armies duly
left for Naples in February and entered the city in March. The congress was
adjourned but, either forewarned or by luck, Metternich chose to keep
representatives of the European powers close at hand until the revolt had been
put down. As a result, when similar revolts broke out in Piedmont in the middle
of March, Metternich had the Tsar at hand and he agreed to send
ninetyâ€“thousand men to the frontier in a show of solidarity. Concerns grew in
Vienna that Metternich's policy was too expensive, prompting Metternich to
respond that Naples and Piedmont would pay for stability; nonetheless, it was
clear that even he was worried for the future of Italy. There was a consolation
when he was created Court Chancellor and Chancellor of State on 25 May, a post
left vacant since the death of Kaunitz in 1794. He was also pleased at the
renewed (if fragile) closeness between Austria, Prussia and Russia; however, it
had come at the expense of the Anglo-Austrian entente. Chancellor. Hanover,
Verona and Czernowitz. In 1821, whilst Metternich was still at Laibach with
Tsar Alexander, the revolt of Alexander Ypsilantis threatened to bring the
Ottoman Empire to the brink of collapse, a huge cause for concern. Wanting a
strong Ottoman Empire to counterbalance the Russians, Metternich opposed all
forms Greek nationalism. Before Alexander returned to Russia, Metternich
secured his agreement not take unilateral action, and would write to the Tsar
again and again asking him not to intervene. For extra support he met with
Viscount Castlereagh (now also Marquis of Londonderry) and King George IV of
the United Kingdom during a visit to Hanover in October. The king welcomed him
warmly and Castlereagh was similarly helpful. The earlier Anglo-Austrian
entente was thus restored and the pair agreed that they would support the
Austrian position over the Balkans. Metternich went away happy, not least
because he had bumped into Dorothea Lieven once more. Over the Christmas period
the Tsar wavered more than Metternich had bargained on. In February 1822, he
decided to send Dmitri Tatischev to Vienna for talks with Metternich.
Metternich soon convinced the "conceited and ambitious" Russian to let him
dictate events. In return Austria promised to support Russia in enforcing her
treaties with the Ottomans, if the other alliance members would do likewise; in
reality Metternich knew this was politically impossible for the British.
Further good news came on 25 June when Metternich's adversary in the Russian
court, Kapodistrias, retired from public life; however, by the end of April
there was a new threat: the Russians were now determined to intervene in Spain,
a proposal Metternich described as "utter nonsense". The Austrian chancellor
played for time, convincing his ally Castlereagh to come to Vienna for talks
before a scheduled congress in Verona, though Castlereagh's suicide on 12
August prevented this. With Castlereagh dead and relations with the British on
a downwards trend, Metternich had lost a useful ally. The Congress of Verona
was a fine social event but diplomatically it was less successful. Supposed to
be concerned with Italy, the congress now had to focus on Spain instead.
Austria took a stance of non-intervention, but it was the French who carried
the day with their proposal to prepare a joint invasion force. The Tsar pledged
150,000 men to help, while Prussia also committed men to the cause. Metternich
worried how they were supposed to get to Spain, and about French ambitions, but
nonetheless pledged (if only moral) support for the joint force. Metternich
lingered in Verona until 18 December, before spending some days in Venice with
the Tsar and then by himself in Munich. He returned to Vienna in early January
1823 and would remain there until September; indeed, after Verona he travelled
much less than before, partly as a result of his new post as Chancellor and
partly as a result of his declining health. He was nonetheless buoyed by the
arrival of his family from Paris in May. He shone once more in Viennese
society. Politically though, the year was one of disappointments. In March the
French crossed the Pyrenees unilaterally, undoing the "moral solidarity"
established at Verona. Likewise, Metternich thought the new Pope Leo XII too
pro-French, and there was trouble between several German states and Austria
over why they had not been included at Verona. Furthermore Metternich, in his
haste to discredit the Russian diplomat Pozzo di Borgo, instead succeeded in
renewing the Tsar's former suspicion of him. Worse was to come in late
September: whilst accompanying his emperor to a meeting with Alexander at
Czernowitz, an Austrian settlement now in the Ukraine, Metternich fell ill with
a fever. He could not continue and had to make do with brief talks with the
Russian foreign minister, Karl Nesselrode. At the Czernowitz talks, to which
the ill Metternich was not party, an impatient Tsar also asked for a congress
in the then Russian capital Saint Petersburg to discuss the Eastern Question.
Metternich, wary of letting the Russians dominate affairs, was forced into
playing for time. Fortunately for Metternich the Tsar's dual proposal for the
St Petersburg agenda (a settlement to the Eastern Question favourable to Russia
and limited autonomy for three Greek principalities) were a pairing that was
unpalatable to the other European powers, and potential attendees, such as
British Foreign Secretary George Canning, slowly dropped out, much to the
annoyance of Alexander. Metternich would believe for several months that he now
occupied a unique level of influence over the Tsar. In the meantime he renewed
the conservative programme he had outlined at Karlsbad five years before, and
sought to further increase Austrian influence over the German Federal Diet. He
also informed the press that they would no longer be able to publicise the
minutes of Diet meetings, only its rulings. In January 1825 he began to worry
about his wife Eleonore's health and he arrived at her sickbed in Paris shortly
before her death on 19 March. Having grieved sincerely for her, he also took
the opportunity to dine with the Paris elite. Unfortunately, an aside about the
Tsar was reported back and it did nothing to help his reputation. He left Paris
for the final time on 21 April and was joined by the Emperor in Milan after
Metternich's arrival on 7 May. He declined the Pope's invitation that he should
become a cardinal of the church. There was also a short trip to Genoa. Early in
July the court dispersed and Metternich travelled to be with his daughters
Leontine (fourteen) and Hermine (nine) in the quiet town of Bad Ischl. Despite
the seclusion he continued to receive reports, including of ominous
developments in the Ottoman Empire, where the Greek revolt was rapidly being
crushed by Ibrahim Ali of Egypt. He also had to deal with the fallout from St
Petersburg where the Tsar, though he had not succeeded in holding a full
congress, had talked with all the major ambassadors. By mid-May it was clear
that the allies could not decide on a common course of action and, as such, the
Holy Alliance was no longer active. Hungarian diets, Alexander I's death and
problems in Italy. In the early 1820s, Metternich had advised Francis that
reconvening the Hungarian Diet would be a good way to get approval for
financial reform. In fact, the diet of 1825 to 1827 would see three hundred
sessions filled with criticism of how the Empire had eroded the historic rights
of the Kingdom of Hungary's nobility. Metternich complained that it "interfered
with time, [his customs and daily life", as he was forced to travel to
Pressburg (modern day Bratislava) to perform his ceremonial duties and to
observe. He found the growth in Hungarian national sentiment alarming and was
wary of the growing influence of nationalist IstvÃ¡n SzÃ©chenyi, whom he had
met twice in 1825. Back in Vienna, in mid-December, he heard of the death of
Tsar Alexander with mixed feelings. He had known the Tsar well and his death
reminded him of his own fallibility, though it did potentially wipe the soured
diplomatic slate clean. Moreover, he could claim credit for prophesying the
Decembrist liberal revolt that the new Tsar Nicholas I had to crush. Now 53,
Metternich chose to send Archduke Ferdinand to establish first contact with
Nicholas. Metternich was also friendly with the British envoy (the Duke of
Wellington) and enlisted his help to win Nicholas over. Despite this, the first
eighteen months of Nicholas' reign did not go well for Metternich: firstly, it
was established that the British would oversee Russian-Ottoman talks and not
the Austrians; and, as a result, Metternich failed to exercise any influence
over the resulting Akkerman Convention. France too began to drift away from
Metternich's non-interventionist position on the issue. In August 1826 Russian
Foreign Minister Nesselrode rejected a congress proposed by Metternich to
discuss the events that would lead to the outbreak of civil war in Portugal.
The Austrian foreign minister accepted his eclipse with "surprising
resilience". On 5 November 1827 Antoinette von Leykam became Metternich's
second wife. She was only twenty; consequently, their marriage, a small affair
at Hetzendorf (a village just outside Vienna), drew considerable criticism,
though Antoinette's grace and charm soon won over Viennese society. The same
day British, Russian and French forces sank the Ottoman fleet at the Battle of
Navarino. Metternich worried that further intervention would topple the Ottoman
Empire and hence upset the balance so carefully created in 1815. To
Metternich's relief the new British Prime Minister Wellington and his cabinet
were equally apprehensive of giving Russia the upper hand in the Balkans. After
another round of his congress proposals were rejected, Metternich now stood
back from the Eastern Question, watching as the Treaty of Adrianople was signed
in September 1829. Though he publicly criticised it for being too harsh on
Turkey, privately he was satisfied with its leniency and its promise that the
new Greek state would be entirely autonomous, a buffer against Russian
expansion rather than a Russian satellite state. Metternich's private life was
filled with grief, however: in November 1828 his mother died; and in January
1829 Antoinette died, five days after giving birth to their son, Richard von
Metternich. After fighting tuberculosis for many months, Metternich's son
Viktor (already a junior diplomat) died on 30 November 1829. Consequently he
spent Christmas alone and depressed, worried about the draconian methods of
some of his fellow conservatives and the renewed march of liberalism. In May
Metternich embarked on a much needed holiday to his estate at Johannisberg. He
returned to Vienna a month later, still worried about the "chaos in London and
Paris" and his declining ability to prevent it. Hearing Nesselrode was due to
take the waters at Karlsbad, he set off to meet the Russian in late July. He
berated the quiet Nesselrode, but fortunately no offence was taken and the two
arranged a second meeting in August. In the interim Metternich heard of
France's July Revolution which deeply shocked him, and theoretically gave
automatic need of a congress of the Quadruple Alliance. Instead, Metternich met
with Nesselrode as planned and, whilst the Russian rejected the Austrian's plan
to restore the old Alliance, the pair agreed the chiffon of Karlsbad: that
panic could be postponed until the new government showed territorial ambitions
in Europe. Although pleased with this, Metternich's mood was soured by news of
unrest in Brussels (then part of the Netherlands), the resignation of
Wellington in London, and calls for constitutionality in Germany. He wrote with
sombre and "almost morbid relish" that it was the "beginning of the end" of Old
Europe. Nonetheless, he took heart from the fact that the July Revolution had
made a Franco-Russian alliance impossible, and that the Netherlands had called
an old-style congress of the sort Metternich enjoyed so much. The 1830
convocation of the Hungarian Diet also proved more successful, crowning
Archduke Ferdinand as King of Hungary with little dissent. Moreover, by
November his betrothal was completed to 25-year-old Melanie Zichy-Ferraris, who
came from a Magyar family the Metternichs had long known. The announcement
caused far less consternation in Vienna than Metternich's previous choice of
bride had, and they were married on 30 January 1831. In February 1831 rebels
took the cities of Parma, Modena and Bologna, and appealed to France for help.
Their former masters appealed for help from Austria, but Metternich was anxious
not to march Austrian men into the Papal States without authorisation from the
new Pope Gregory XVI. He occupied Parma and Modena, however, and would
eventually cross into the Papal lands. As a result, Italy had been pacified by
the end of March. He authorised Austrian troops to withdraw from the Papal
States in July, but by January 1832 they were back to put down a second
rebellion. By this time Metternich was noticeably ageing: his hair was grey,
his face drawn and sunken, although his wife nonetheless enjoyed his company.
In February 1832 a daughter, also Melanie, was born; in 1833 a son, Klemens,
though he died aged two months; in October 1834 a second son, Paul; and in 1837
his third with Melanie, Lothar. Politically, Metternich had a new adversary,
Lord Palmerston, who had taken over at the British Foreign Office in 1830. By
the end of 1832 they had clashed on virtually every issue. "In short,"
Metternich wrote, "Palmerston is wrong about everything". Mostly, Metternich
was annoyed by his insistence that under the 1815 agreements Britain had the
right to oppose Austria's tightening of university controls in Germany, as
Metternich had done again in 1832. Mtternich also worried that if future
congresses were held in Britain, as Palmerston wanted, his own power would be
significantly reduced. Eastern Question revisited and peace in Europe. In 1831
Egypt invaded the Ottoman Empire. There were fears of its total collapse and
Austria stood to gain little. Metternich therefore proposed multilateral
support for the Ottomans and a Viennese congress to sort out the details, but
the French were evasive and the British refused to support any congress held in
Vienna. Indeed, by the summer of 1833 Anglo-Austrian relations had hit a new
low. Over the Russians he was more confident of exerting influence. His faith
was misplaced, however, and he was left able only to observe the Russian
intervention in the region (culminating in the Treaty of HÃ¼nkÃ¢r Ä°skelesi)
from afar. Nonetheless, he prepared to meet with the King of Prussia at Teplitz
and accompany Francis to meet Tsar Nicholas at MÃ¼nchengrÃ¤tz in September
1833. The former meeting went well: Metternich still felt able to dominate the
Prussians, despite their rising economic prominence in Europe. The latter was
more strained but, as Nicholas warmed, three MÃ¼nchengrÃ¤tz agreements were
reached shaping a new conservative league that would uphold the existing order
in Turkey, Poland and elsewhere. Metternich left happy; his sole disappointment
was having to commit to being tougher on Polish nationalists. Almost
immediately, however, he heard of the creation of the Quadruple Alliance of
1834 between Britain, France, Spain and Portugal. The alliance of liberals was
such an affront to Austrian values that Palmerston wrote that he "should like
to see Metternich's face when he reads our treaty". It did indeed draw bitter
condemnation, mostly out of fear of an impending war. Metternich tried two
tacks: both to intrigue the British foreign secretary out of office and
simultaneously trying (and failing) to build up cross-power bloc agreements.
When Palmerston was indeed removed in November, however, it was nothing to do
with Metternich. Indeed, by the spring of 1835 Palmerston had been reinstated,
though Metternich could take heart from the fact that large scale war had been
avoided and the Quadruple Alliance was already beginning to disintegrate. On 2
March 1835 Emperor Francis died, succeeded by his epileptic son Ferdinand I.
Despite calls that Ferdinand was a "ghost of a monarch", Metternich placed a
great deal of importance upon legitimacy and did all he could to keep the
government running. He was soon required to accompany Ferdinand on his first
meeting with Tsar Nicholas and the King of Prussia, again at Teplitz. Ferdinand
was overwhelmed by it all, especially as the delegations paraded into Prague.
Overall, however, it was an untroubled meeting. The next few years would pass
relatively peacefully for Metternich: diplomatic incident was limited to the
occasional angry exchange with Palmerston and Metternich's failure become a
mediator between the British and Russian over their Black Sea dispute. He also
invested significant effort into bringing new technology such as the railways
into Austria. Metternich's most pressing issue was Hungary, where he remained
reluctant to support the centrist (but still nationalist) SzÃ©chenyi. His
hesitancy on the issue is "a sad commentary on his declining powers of
political presence". At court Metternich was defeated by the rising star of
Franz Anton von Kolowrat-Liebsteinsky increasingly regularly, particularly over
his proposals to increase military budgets. After his 1836 attempt to force
through constitutional reform (which would have seen him given greater
influence) was defeatedâ€”largely through the efforts of the more liberally
minded Archduke Johnâ€”Metternich was forced to share more power with Kolowrat
and Archduke Ludwig as part of Austria's Secret State Conference. Decision
making ground to a halt. Entertaining and maintaining his estates at
Johannisberg, KÃ¶nigswart and Plasy (together with MariÃ¡nskÃ¡ TÃ½nice) were
taking up a lot of his income at a time when he had four young children to
support, causing him more stress. Metternich had long predicted a new crisis in
the east, and when the Second Turko-Egyptian War broke out in 1839 he was
anxious to use it to re-establish Austria's diplomatic credentials. He quickly
brought representatives together in Vienna, from where they issued a
communiquÃ© to Constantinople pledging support on 27 July. However, Tsar
Nicholas sent Metternich a message from St Petersburg rejecting the idea that
Vienna should become the centre of diplomacy. Metternich worked so furiously
trying to keep his plans alive that he fell ill, spending the next five weeks
taking time out at Johannisberg. The Austrians lost the initiative and
Metternich had to accept that London would be the new centre of negotiations
over the Eastern Question. It was not the only climbdown: just three weeks
after its creation Metternich's European League of Great Powers (the result of
his diplomatic initiative following aggressive moves by French Prime Minister
Adolphe Thiers) it had become a mere curiosity; likewise, little was heard of
his proposals to hold a congress in Germany. A separate proposal to strengthen
the influence of the ambassadors stationed in Vienna was also rejected. These
rejections would set the tone for the rest of Metternich's chancellorship.
Metternich's illness had, it seemed to others, broken his love of being in
office. Over the next decade his wife Melanie prepared quietly for the moment
when he would either retire or die in office. Metternich's work during the
early 1840s would be dominated once more by Hungary and, more generally, by
questions of national identity within the diverse Austrian Empire. Here,
Metternich "showed of acute perception". His Hungarian proposals came far too
late, however, as the hard-liner Lajos Kossuth had already established a strong
brand of Hungarian nationalism. His support for other nationalities was patchy,
since he only had a problem with those that suggested the breakup of the
Empire. At the Conference of State Metternich lost his principal ally, Karel
Clam-Martinic, in 1840, which did nothing to help the growing state of
paralysis at the heart of Austrian government. Metternich now struggled to
enforce even the level of censorship he desired, a matter clearly within his
remit. Fortunately there were no major challenges to the regime from outside
its borders. Italy was quiet and neither Metternich's attempt to lecture the
new Prussian king, Frederick William IV, nor the boredom of the new British
Queen Victoria at their first meeting posed immediate problems. Far more
worrying was the behaviour of Tsar Nicholas, whose estimation of the Habsburg
dynasty and of Austria was low. After an impromptu tour of Italy in 1845 the
Tsar unexpectedly stopped in Vienna on his way back to Russia. Already in a bad
mood he was an awkward guest, though in-between criticism of Austria he did
reassure Metternich that Russia was not about to invade the Ottoman Empire once
again. Two months later their countries were required to work together over the
Galician slaughter and a declaration of independence from Krakow. Metternich
authorised the occupation of the city and the use of troops to restore order in
surrounding areas, keen to rescind the pseudo-independence that had been
granted to Krakow in 1815. After months of negotiations with the Prussians and
Russians, Austria annexed the city in November 1846. Metternich regarded it as
a personal victory but, in hindsight, it was a move of dubious utility: not
only were the Polish dissidents now officially part of Austria, the Europe-wide
Polish dissident movement were now hell-bent on destroying the "Metternich
system" that had overridden the rights enshrined in 1815. Britain and France
appeared similarly outraged, though Metternich did not heed their calls for his
resignation. For the next two years Ferdinand would not be able to abdicate in
favour of his son without a regency; in the interim Metternich believed Austria
would need him to hold government together. Revolution. Though Metternich was
tiring in his old age, the memoranda kept pouring forth from his chancellery.
Despite this he largely missed the building crisis. The new Pope Pius IX was
attracting a reputation as a liberal nationalist to oppose Metternich and
Austria; at the same time, the Empire was experiencing unemployment and rising
prices as a result of poor harvests. Metternich was suitably bemused at the
outcry from Italians, the Pope and Palmerston when he ordered the occupation of
Papal-controlled Ferrara in the summer of 1847. It would prove to be just the
beginning. Despite securing French agreement for the first time in many years
from FranÃ§ois Guizot over the Swiss Civil War, they were forced into backing
breakaway cantons. The pair proposed a conference, but soon there was no need:
the government had crushed the revolt. It was a major blow to Metternich's
prestige, and his opponents in Vienna would seize upon the whole affair as
evidence of his incompetence. In January 1848 Metternich predicted trouble in
Italy during the year ahead. He responded to this growing threat by dispatching
an envoy, Karl Ludwig von Ficquelmont to Italy; by resurrecting his 1817 plans
for an Italian chancellery and by pre-arranging various contingency plans with
the French. In late February Austrian Field Marshal Joseph Radetsky placed the
Austrian holding in Italy (Lombardy-Venetia) in a state of martial law as
disturbances spread. Despite this and hearing of renewed revolution in France,
Metternich was not about to be drawn into overhasty action; he still considered
domestic revolution unlikely. Nonetheless, he was described by a Saxon diplomat
as, in the words of biographer Musulin, "having shrunk to a shadow of his
former self". On 3 March Kossuth, speaking in the Hungarian Diet, gave a fiery
speech calling for a constitution. Nonetheless, it was not until 10 March that
Metternich appeared concerned about events in Vienna itself, where there were
now threats and counter-threats flying. Two petitions were organised calling
for greater freedom, transparency, and representation. Students were involved
in several demonstrations, culminating on 13 March, when they cheered the royal
family but voiced anger towards Metternich. Having continued as usual through
the morning, soon after midday Metternich was called to meet with Archduke
Ludwig. The chancellor had troops sent onto the streets, whilst also announcing
a prearranged but minimal concession. In the afternoon the crowd turned
hostile, however, and a division of troops opened fire on it, killing five. The
mob was now truly incited as the liberals were joined by underprivileged
Viennese set on wreaking havoc. The students offered to form a pro-government
Academic Legion if their demands were met. Ludwig was eager to accept and told
Metternich he must resign, to which he reluctantly agreed. After sleeping in
the chancellery he was advised to either take back his resignation or leave the
city. After Ludwig sent him a message to the effect that the government could
not guarantee his safety, Metternich left first for the house of Count Taaffe
and then, with aid from friends Charles von HÃ¼gel and Johann Rechberg,
travelled on to the family seat of Prince Liechtensteinâ€”forty miles from
Vienna at Feldsberg. Metternich's daughter Leontine joined them on 21 March and
suggested England as a place of haven; agreeing, Metternich, Melanie and 19-
year-old Richard set out across Europe, leaving the younger children with
Leontine. Metternich's resignation had been met with cheering in Vienna, and
even the Viennese commoners welcomed the end of Metternich's era of social
conservatism. Exile, return and death. After an anxious journey lasting nine
days, during which they were variously honoured and refused entry to various
towns, Metternich, his wife and son Richard arrived in the Dutch city of
Arnhem. There they stayed whilst Metternich regained his strength, before
travelling on to Amsterdam and the Hague, where they waited to hear of the
results of a demonstration by English chartists, planned for 10 April. On 20
April they landed at Blackwall in London, where they would stay in the comfort
of the Brunswick Hotel in Hanover Square for a fortnight until they found a
permanent residence. Metternich largely enjoyed his time in London: the Duke of
Wellington, now nearly eighty, tried to keep him entertained and there were
also visits from Palmerston, Guizot (now also in exile) and Benjamin Disraeli,
who enjoyed his talks on European politics. The sole disappointment was that
Victoria herself had not acknowledged his presence in the capital. The trio
leased a house, 44 Eaton Square, for four months. The younger children joined
them in the summer. He followed events in Austria from afar, famously denying
ever having erred; in fact, he declared the turmoil in Europe to be vindication
of his policies. In Vienna, however, a hostile post-censorship press continued
to attack him; in particular, they accused him of embezzlement and accepting
bribes, prompting the authorities there to investigate. Gradually investigators
cleared Metternich of the more extreme charges and would evidently abandon the
search for evidence for the more minor ones empty handed, though nothing was
ever proven. (In all likelihood Metternich's large expense claims were merely a
product of the necessities of early 19th century diplomacy.) In the meantime,
as he was denied his pension, Metternich was ironically reliant on loans. In
mid-September the family moved to 42 Brunswick Terrace, Brighton, on the south
coast of England where they found a tranquillity that contrasted greatly with
the revolutionary Europe they had left behind. Parliamentary figures,
particularly Disraeli, travelled down to visit them, as did Metternich's former
friend Dorothea Lieven (Melanie led a reconciliation between the two).
Expecting a visit from Metternich's daughter Leontine, and her own daughter
Pauline, the family moved to a suite of rooms at Richmond Palace on 23 April
1849. Visitors included: Wellington, who still watched out for Metternich;
Johann Strauss, the Austrian composer; Dorothea de Dino, the sister of former
lover Wilhemine of Sagan; and former lover Katharina Bagration. Metternich was
however showing his age and his frequent fainting attracted a great deal of
worry. The ex-chancellor was also depressed by the lack of communication from
new Emperor Franz Joseph I or his government. Leontine wrote to Vienna to try
to secure this contact and in August Metternich received a warm letter from
Franz Joseph; whether sincere or not, it buoyed Metternich considerably. From
mid-August Melanie began to push for a move to Brussels, a city cheaper to live
in and closer to continental affairs. They arrived in October, overnighting in
the Hotel Bellevue. With revolution subsiding, Metternich was hopeful they
would soon be back in Vienna once more. Their stay would in fact last over 18
months, whilst Metternich waited for the perfect opportunity to launch himself
back into Austrian politics. It was a pleasant enough (and cheap) stay, first
in the Boulevard de l'Observatoire and later in the Sablons/Zavel areaâ€”filled
with visits from politicians, writers, musicians and scientists. For
Metternich, however, the tedium and homesickness only increased. In March 1851
Melanie induced him to write to the new political force in Vienna, Prince
Schwarzenberg, to ask if he might return if he promised not to interfere in
public affairs. In April he received an affirmative reply, authorised by Franz
Joseph. In May 1851 Metternich duly left for his Johannisberg estate, which he
had last visited in 1845. Whilst staying there for the summer Metternich
enjoyed the company of Prussian representative Otto von Bismarck. He also
enjoyed a visit from Frederick William, though the king irritated Metternich by
appearing to nurture him as a tool against Schwarzenberg. In September he
returned to Vienna and on the journey the various German princes were keen to
entertain the focus of Prussian intrigue. Metternich was reinvigorated,
dropping his nostalgia and living in the present for the first time in a
decade. Franz Josef asked for his advice on numerous issues (though he was too
headstrong to be much influenced by it) and both of the two factions now
emerging in Vienna were keen to get Metternich on side; even Tsar Nicholas
called on him during a state visit. Metternich was not keen on the new Foreign
Minister, Karl Ferdinand von Buol, but at least Buol was sufficiently
incompetent that he would be impressionable. Metternich's advice was of varying
quality; nonetheless, some of it did give useful insights, even over modern
matters. Now deaf, Metternich wrote endlessly; particularly for an appreciative
Franz Josef. He wanted Austrian neutrality in the Crimean War, though Buol did
not. In the meantime Metternich's health was slowly failing and he became a
more peripheral figure after the death of his wife Melanie in January 1854.
After a brief resurgence in energy in early 1856, he busied himself in the
arrangements for a marriage between his son Richard and his granddaughter
Pauline (Richard's step-sister's daughter) and undertook more travel. The King
of the Belgians came to visit him, as did Bismarck, and on 16 August 1857 he
entertained the future Edward VII of the United Kingdom. Buol, however, was
becoming more resentful Metternich's advice, particularly over Italy. In April
1859 Franz Josef came to ask him about what should be done in Italy. According
to Pauline, Metternich begged him not to send an ultimatum to Italy and Franz
Josef explained that such an ultimatum had already been sent. In this way, much
to Metternich's disappointment and to Franz Josef's embarrassment, Austria
began the Second Italian War of Independence against the combined forces of
Piedmont-Sardinia and her ally France. Though Metternich could secure the
replacement of Buol with his friend Rechberg, who had helped him so much in
1848, the war itself was now beyond his capacity. Even a special task given by
Franz Josef in June 1859â€”to draw up secret papers handling the event of Franz
Josef's deathâ€”was now too taxing for Metternich. Shortly afterwards he died
in Vienna on 11 June 1859, aged 86, and the last of his generation. Almost
everyone of note in Vienna came to pay their tributes to him; however, in the
foreign press his death went virtually unnoticed. Legacy. Over a century-and-a-
half later a sparkling wine was named after Metternich, "FÃ¼rst von Metternich"
Riesling Sekt, and his image was selected as the main motif on the Austrian 20-
euro Biedermeier Period commemorative coin minted on 11 June 2003. The reverse
of the coin shows his portrait with the map of Europe that was redrawn at the
Congress of Vienna after the defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte. Historical
assessment. Particularly in the 19th century, Metternich was heavily
criticised, decried as the man who prevented Austria and the rest of central
Europe from "developing along 'normal' liberal and constitutional lines". If
Metternich had not stood in the way of (in their view) progress, Austria might
have reformed, dealt with the problems of nationality better, and the First
World War may never have happened. Instead, Metternich chose to fight an
overwhelmingly fruitless (and potentially counter-productive) war against the
forces of liberalism and nationalism. Heavy censorship was just one of a range
of repressive instruments of state available to him that also included a large
spy network. He also opposed electoral reform, heavily criticising the British
Reform Bill introduced in 1830. In short, he locked himself in an embittered
battle against "the prevailing mood of his age". On the other hand,
Metternich's credentials as a diplomat and statesman were the focus of praise
in the twentieth century from more favourable historians, particularly
biographer Heinrich von Srbik. For example, particularly after the Second World
War, historians were more likely to defend Metternich's policies as reasonable
attempts to achieve his own goals i.e. the defence of the balance of power in
Europe. More sympathetic historians highlight that Metternich correctly foresaw
and worked to prevent Russian dominance in Europe, succeeding where his
forebears would fail 130 years later. As argued by Srbik, Metternich himself
pursued legality, cooperation and dialogue, and therefore helped ensure 30
years of peace, the "Age of Metternich". In the works of authors such as Peter
Viereck and Ernst B. Haas Metternich also gains credit for many of his more
liberal ideals, even if they did not come to much. These views presuppose that
Metternich had the ability to favourably shape Europe, but chose not to. More
modern critiques, such as that included in the work of A. J. P. Taylor, have
questioned just how much influence Metternich really had. Robin Okey, a critic
of Metternich, noted that even in the realm of foreign affairs Metternich "had
only his own persuasiveness to rely on", and this degraded over time. On this
reading, his job was to create a "smokescreen" that hid Austria's true
weakness. When it came to choosing a set of sound principles, wrote Taylor,
"most men could do better while shaving". The result was that Metternich was no
captivating diplomatic force: Taylor described him as "the most boring man in
European history". Not only were his failures limited to foreign affairs,
critics argue: at home he was equally powerless, failing to push through even
his own proposals for administrative reform. By comparison, those who have
attempted to rehabilitate Metternich describe him as "unquestionably master of
diplomacy", someone who "perfected" and indeed shaped the nature of diplomacy
in his era. In a similar vein, Alan Sked argues that Metternich's "smokescreen"
may well have served a purpose in furthering a relatively coherent set of
principles. Children. With Melanie: Two daughters, three sons
