Kremlinology Kremlinology is the study and analysis of Soviet (and today,
Russian) politics and policies based on efforts to understand the inner
workings of an opaque central government. The term is named after the Kremlin,
the seat of the Russian/Soviet government. Kremlinologist refers to academic,
media, and commentary experts who specialize in the study of Kremlinology.
Sovietology/Sovietologist describes specialists of the country as a whole. The
term is sometimes sweepingly used to describe Western scholars who researched
issues of, or specialized in, Russian/Soviet law, although the correct term is
simply "Russian law" scholar. Sovietologists or Kremlinologists should also be
distinguished from transitologists, scholars who study legal, economic and
social transitions from communism to capitalism. During the Cold War, lack of
reliable information about the country forced Western analysts to "read between
the lines" and to use the tiniest tidbits, such as the removal of portraits,
the rearranging of chairs, positions at the reviewing stand for parades in Red
Square, the choice of capital or small initial letters in phrases such as
"First Secretary", the arrangement of articles on the pages of the party
newspaper "Pravda" and other indirect signs to try to understand what was
happening in internal Soviet politics. In the German language, such attempts
acquired the somewhat derisive name "Kreml-Astrologie" (Kremlin Astrology),
hinting at the fact that its results were often vague and inconclusive, if not
outright wrong. The term "Kremlinology" is still in use in application to the
study of decision-making processes in the politics of the Russian Federation.
In popular culture, the term is sometimes used to mean any attempt to
understand a secretive organization or process, such as plans for upcoming
products or events, by interpreting indirect clues.
