Labour movement The labour movement or labor movement is a broad term for the
development of a collective organization of working people, to campaign for
better working conditions and treatment from their employers and governments,
in particular through the implementation of specific laws governing labour
relations. Trade unions are collective organizations within societies,
organized for the purpose of representing the interests of workers and the
working class. Many ruling class individuals and political groups may also be
active in and part of the labour movement. In some countries, especially the
United Kingdom and Australia the labour movement is understood to encompass a
formal "political wing", frequently known by the name labour party or workers'
party, which complements the aforementioned "industrial wing". History. In
Europe, the labour movement began during the industrial revolution, when
agricultural jobs declined and employment moved to more industrial areas. The
idea met with great resistance. In the 18th century and early 19th century,
groups such as the Tolpuddle Martyrs of Dorset were punished and transported
for forming unions, which was against the laws of the time. The labour movement
was active in the early to mid 19th century and various labour parties and
trade unions were formed throughout the industrialised world. The International
Workingmen's Association, the first attempt at international coordination, was
founded in London in 1864. The key points were the right of the workers to
organize themselves, the right to an 8 hour working day etc. In 1871 the
workers in France rebelled and the Paris Commune was formed. The movement
gained major impetus in the late nineteenth and early 20th centuries from the
Catholic Social Teaching tradition which began in 1891 with the publication of
Pope Leo XIII's foundational document, "Rerum Novarum", also known as "On the
Condition of the Working Classes," in which he advocated a series of reforms
including limits on the length of the work day, a living wage, the elimination
of child labour, the rights of labour to organize, and the duty of the state to
regulate labour conditions. Throughout the world, action by the labour movement
has led to reforms and workers' rights, such as the two-day weekend, minimum
wage, paid holidays, and the achievement of the eight-hour day for many
workers. There have been many important labour activists in modern history who
have caused changes that were revolutionary at the time and are now regarded as
basic. For example, Mary Harris Jones, better known as "Mother Jones", and the
National Catholic Welfare Council were central in the campaign to end child
labour in the United States during the early 20th century. An active and free
labour movement is considered by many to be an important element in maintaining
democracy and for economic development. Labour parties. Modern labour parties
originated from an upsurge in organizing activities in Europe and European
colonies during the 19th century, such as the Chartist movement in Britain
during 1838â€“50. In 1891, localised labour parties were formed, by trade union
members in the British colonies of Australia. They later amalgamated to form
the Australian Labor Party (ALP). In 1893, Members of Parliament in the Colony
of Queensland briefly formed the world's first labour government. The British
Labour Party was created as the Labour Representation Committee, as a result of
an 1899 resolution by the Trade Union Congress. While archetypal labour parties
are made of direct union representatives, in addition to members of
geographical branches, some union federations or individual unions have chosen
not to be represented within a labour party and/or have severed ties with them.
Labour and racial equality. A degree of strategic bi-racial cooperation existed
among black and white dockworkers on the waterfronts of New Orleans, Louisiana
during the turn of the 20th century. Although the groups maintained racially
separate labor unions, they coordinated efforts to present a united front when
making demands of their employers. These pledges included a commitment to the
"50-50" or "half-and-half" system wherein a dock crew would consist of 50%
black and 50% white workers and agreement on a single wage demand to reduce the
risk of ship owners pitting one race against the other. Black and white
dockworkers also stood together during protracted labor strikes, including
general levee strikes in 1892 and 1907 as well as smaller strikes involving
skilled workers such as screwmen in the early 1900s. Development of labour
movements within nation states. Historically labour markets have often been
constrained by national borders that have restricted movement of workers.
Labour laws are also primarily determined by individual nations or states
within those nations. While there have been some efforts to adopt a set of
international labour standards through the International Labour Organization
(ILO), international sanctions for failing to meet such standards are very
limited. In many countries labour movements have developed independently and
reflect those national boundaries. Development of an international labour
movement. With ever increasing levels of international trade and rising
influence of multinational corporations, there has been debate and action
within the labour movement broadly to attempt international co-operation. This
has led to renewed efforts to organize and collectively bargain
internationally. A number of international union organizations have been
established in an attempt to facilitate international collective bargaining, to
share information and resources and to advance the interests of workers
generally.
