Labor Zionism Labor Zionism (Labour Zionism, , "tsionut sotsialistit") can be
described as the major stream of the left wing of the Zionist movement. It was,
for many years, the most significant tendency among Zionists and Zionist
organizational structure. It saw itself as the Zionist sector of the historic
Jewish labor movements of Eastern and Central Europe, eventually developing
local units in most countries with sizeable Jewish populations. Unlike the
"political Zionist" tendency founded by Theodor Herzl and advocated by Chaim
Weizmann, Labor Zionists did not believe that a Jewish state would be created
simply by appealing to the international community or to a powerful nation such
as Britain, Germany or the Ottoman Empire. Rather, Labor Zionists believed that
a Jewish state could only be created through the efforts of the Jewish working
class settling in Palestine and constructing a state through the creation of a
progressive Jewish society with rural kibbutzim and moshavim and an urban
Jewish proletariat. Labor Zionism grew in size and influence and eclipsed
"political Zionism" by the 1930s both internationally and within the British
Mandate of Palestine where Labor Zionists predominated among many of the
institutions of the pre-independence Jewish community Yishuv, particularly the
trade union federation known as the Histadrut. The Haganahthe largest Zionist
paramilitary defense forcewas a Labor Zionist institution and was used on
occasion (such as during the Hunting Season) against right-wing political
opponents or to assist the British Administration in capturing Jewish
terrorists. Labor Zionists played a leading role in the 1948 Arab-Israeli War
and Labor Zionists were predominant among the leadership of the Israeli
military for decades after the formation of the state of Israel in 1948. Major
theoreticians of the Labor Zionist movement included Moses Hess, Nachman
Syrkin, Ber Borochov and Aaron David Gordon and leading figures in the movement
included David Ben-Gurion, Golda Meir and Berl Katznelson. Ideology. Moses
Hess's 1862 work "Rome and Jerusalem. The Last National Question" argued for
the Jews to settle in Palestine as a means of settling the national question.
Hess proposed a socialist state in which the Jews would become agrarianized
through a process of "redemption of the soil" that would transform the Jewish
community into a true nation in that Jews would occupy the productive layers of
society rather than being an intermediary non-productive merchant class, which
is how he perceived European Jews. Ber Borochov, continuing from the work of
Moses Hess, proposed the creation of a socialist society that would correct the
"inverted pyramid" of Jewish society. Borochov believed that Jews were forced
out of normal occupations by Gentile hostility and competition, using this
dynamic to explain the relative predominance of Jewish professionals, rather
than workers. Jewish society, he argued, would not be healthy until the
inverted pyramid was righted, and the majority of Jews became workers and
peasants again. This, he held, could only be accomplished by Jews in their own
country. Another Zionist thinker, A. D. Gordon, was influenced by the
"v√∂lkisch" ideas of European romantic nationalism, and proposed establishing a
society of Jewish peasants. Gordon made a religion of work. These two figures
(Gordon and Borochov), and others like them, motivated the establishment of the
first Jewish collective settlement, or kibbutz, Degania, on the southern shore
of the Sea of Galilee, in 1909 (the same year that the city of Tel Aviv was
established). Deganiah, and many other kibbutzim that were soon to follow,
attempted to realise these thinkers' vision by creating communal villages,
where newly arrived European Jews would be taught agriculture and other manual
skills. Joseph Trumpeldor is also considered to be one of the early icons of
the Labor Zionist movement in Palestine. When discussing what it is to be a
Jewish pioneer, Trumpeldor stated "What is a pioneer? Is he a worker only? No!
The definition includes much more. The pioneers should be workers but that is
not all. We shall need people who will be ‚Äúeverything‚Äù ‚Äì everything that
the land of Israel needs. A worker has his labor interests, a soldier his
esprit de corps, a doctor and an engineer, their special inclinations. A
generation of iron-men; iron from which you can forge everything the national
machinery needs. You need a wheel? Here I am. A nail, a screw, a block? ‚Äì
here take me. You need a man to till the soil? ‚Äì I‚Äôm ready. A soldier? I am
here. Policeman, doctor, lawyer, artist, teacher, water carrier? Here I am. I
have no form. I have no psychology. I have no personal feeling, no name. I am a
servant of Zion. Ready to do everything, not bound to do anything. I have only
one aim ‚Äì creation." Trumpeldor, an Anarcho-Communist Zionist, gave his life
in 1920 defending the community of Tel Hai in the Upper Galilee. He became a
symbol of Jewish self-defense and his reputed last words, "Never mind, it is
good to die for our country" (En davar, tov lamut be'ad artzenu ◊ê◊ô◊ü ◊ì◊ë◊®,
◊ò◊ï◊ë ◊ú◊û◊ï◊™ ◊ë◊¢◊ì ◊ê◊®◊¶◊ ◊ï), became famous in the pre-state Zionist
movement and in Israel during the 1950s and 1960s. Trumpeldor's heroic death
made him not only a martyr for Zionists Left but also for the Revisionist
Zionist movement who named its youth movement Betar (an acronym for "Covenant
of Joseph Trumpeldor") after the fallen hero. Albert Einstein was a prominent
supporter of both Labor Zionism and efforts to encourage Jewish-Arab
cooperation. Fred Jerome in his "Einstein on Israel and Zionism: His
Provocative Ideas About the Middle East" argues that Einstein was a Cultural
Zionist who supported the idea of a Jewish homeland but opposed the
establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine ‚Äúwith borders, an army, and a
measure of temporal power.‚Äù Instead, he preferred a bi-national state with
‚Äúcontinuously functioning, mixed, administrative, economic, and social
organizations.‚Äù However Ami Isseroff in his article "Was Einstein a Zionist"
argues that Einstein was not opposed to the state of Israel given that Einstein
declared it ‚Äúthe fulfillment of our dreams.‚Äù Perceiving its vulnerability
after independence, he again set aside his pacifism in the name of human
preservation, when president Harry Truman recognized Israel in May 1948.In the
November 1948 presidential election Einstein supported former vice-president
Henry A. Wallace‚Äôs Progressive Party, which advocated a pro-Soviet foreign
policy ‚Äì but which also at the time (like the USSR) strongly supported the
new state of Israel. Wallace went down to defeat, winning no states. Parties.
Initially two labor parties were founded by immigrants to Palestine of the
Second Aliyah (1904-1914): the pacifist and anti-militarist Hapo'el Hatza'ir
(Young Worker) party and the Marxist Poale Zion party, with Poale Zion roots.
The Poale Zion Party had a left wing and a right wing. In 1919 the right wing,
including Ben-Gurion and anti-Marxist non-party people, founded Ahdut HaAvoda.
In 1930 Ahdut HaAvoda and Hapoel Hatzair fused into the Mapai party, which
included all of mainstream Labor Zionism. Until the 1960s these parties were
dominated by members of the Second Aliyah. The Left Poale Zion party ultimately
merged with the kibbutz-based Hashomer Hatzair, the urban Socialist League and
several smaller left-wing groups to become the Mapam party, which in turn later
joined with other parties to create Meretz. The Mapai party later became the
Israeli Labor Party, which for a number of years was linked with Mapam in the
Alignment. These two parties were initially the two largest parties in the
Yishuv and in the first Knesset, whilst Mapai and its predecessors dominated
Israeli politics both in the pre-independence Yishuv and for the first three
decades of Israel's independence, until the late 1970s. Decline and
transformation. Already in the 1920s the Labor movement disregarded its
socialist roots and concentrated on building the nation by constructive action.
According to Tzahor its leaders did not "abandon fundamental ideological
principles". However according to Ze'ev Sternhell in his book "The Founding
Myths of Israel", the labor leaders had already abandoned socialist principles
by 1920 and only used them as "mobilizing myths". Following the 1967 Six-Day
War several prominent Labor Zionists created the Movement for Greater Israel
which subscribed to an ideology of Greater Israel and called upon the Israeli
government to keep and populate all areas captured in the war. Among the public
figures in this movement associated with Left-wing nationalism were Rachel
Yanait Ben-Zvi, Yitzhak Tabenkin, Icchak Cukierman, Zivia Lubetkin, Eliezer
Livneh, Moshe Shamir, Zev Vilnay, Shmuel Yosef Agnon, Isser Harel, Dan
Tolkovsky, and Avraham Yoffe. In the 1969 Knesset elections it ran as the "List
for the Land of Israel", but failed to cross the electoral threshold. Prior to
the 1973 elections, it joined the Likud and won 39 seats. In 1976 it merged
with the National List and the Independent Centre (a breakaway from the Free
Centre) to form La'am, which remained a faction within Likud until its merger
into the Herut faction in 1984. Other prominent Labor Zionists, especially
those who came to dominate the Israeli Labor Party, became strong advocates for
relinquishing the territory won during the Six-Day War. By the signing of the
Oslo Accords in 1993, this became the central policy of the Labor Party under
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres. What
distinguishes Labor Zionism from other Zionist streams today is not economic
policy, an analysis of capitalism or any class analysis or orientation but its
attitude towards the peace process in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict with
modern Labor Zionists tending to support the Israeli peace camp to varying
degrees. This orientation towards Israel's borders and foreign policy has
dominated Labor Zionist institutions in recent decades to the extent that
socialist Zionists who support a Greater Israel ideology are forced to seek
political expression elsewhere. In Israel the Labor Party has followed the
general path of other governing social democratic parties such as the British
Labour Party and is now fully oriented towards capitalism and even neo-
liberalism, though recently it has rediscovered the welfare state under the
leadership of Amir Peretz. The Israeli Labor Party and its predecessors have
ironically been associated within Israeli society as representing the country's
ruling class and political elite whereas working-class Israelis have
traditionally voted for the Likud since the Begin Revolution of 1977. Labor
Zionism today. Labor Zionism manifests itself today in both adult and youth
organizations. Among adults, the World Labor Zionist Movement, based in
Jerusalem, has affiliates in countries around the world, such as Ameinu in the
United States and Australia, Associa√ß√£o Mosh√© Sharett in Brazil and the
Jewish Labour Movement in the United Kingdom. Youth and students are served
through Zionist youth movements such as Habonim Dror, Hashomer Hatzair and
college-age campus activist groups such as the Union of Progressive Zionists of
the U.S. and Canada. In Israel, Labor Zionism has become nearly synonymous with
the Israeli peace camp. Usually Labor Zionist political and educational
institutions activists are also advocates of a two-state solution, who do not
necessarily adhere to socialist economic views.
