Labour Party (UK) The Labour Party is a centre-left political party in the
United Kingdom, and one of the two main British political parties along with
the Conservative Party. The Labour Party was founded in 1900 and overtook the
Liberal Party in general elections during the early 1920s, forming minority
governments under Ramsay MacDonald in 1924 and 1929â€“1931. The party was in a
wartime coalition from 1940 to 1945, after which it formed a majority
government under Clement Attlee. Labour was also in government from 1964 to
1970 under Harold Wilson and from 1974 to 1979, first under Wilson and then
James Callaghan. The Labour Party was last in national government between 1997
and 2010 under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, beginning with a majority of 179,
reduced to 167 in 2001 and 66 in 2005. Having won 258 seats in the 2010 general
election, the party currently forms the Official Opposition in the Parliament
of the United Kingdom. Labour has a minority government in the Welsh Assembly,
is the main opposition party in the Scottish Parliament and has 13 MEPs in the
European Parliament, sitting in the Socialists and Democrats group. The Labour
Party is a member of the Socialist International and Party of European
Socialists. The current leader of the party is Ed Miliband MP. Party ideology.
Throughout its history, the Labour Party has been characterised as being left-
wing or, more recently, centre-left in its political position. Officially, it
has maintained the stance of being a socialist party ever since its inception,
part of the social democratic ideological trend that rose among sections of the
working classes across Europe at the end of the 19th Century. The party
currently describes itself as a "democratic socialist party". The most
influential branch of socialism within the Labour Party, other than democratic
socialism, has been ethical socialism, promoted most recently by Tony Blair.
The party has been described as a broad church, containing a diversity of
ideological trends from strongly socialist, to more moderately social
democratic. Historically the party was broadly in favour of democratic
socialism, as set out in Clause Four of the original party constitution, and
advocated socialist policies such as public ownership of key industries,
government intervention in the economy, redistribution of wealth, increased
rights for workers, the welfare state, publicly funded healthcare and
education. Throughout its early history, from the participation of the Social
Democratic Federation in its founding to the expulsion of Militant Tendency in
the 1980s, there were radical Marxist trends in the Party. In 1947, the Labour
Party published a reprint of the Communist Manifesto with an introduction by
Harold Laski. Beginning in the late-1980s continuing to the current day, the
party has adopted free market policies, leading many observers to describe the
Labour Party as social democratic or Third Way, rather than democratic
socialist. Other commentators go further and argue that traditional social
democratic parties across Europe, including the British Labour Party, have been
so deeply transformed in recent years by prevailing economic and social
neoliberalism that it is no longer possible to describe them ideologically as
'social democratic', and claim that this ideological shift has put new strains
on the party's traditional relationship with the trade unions. Party
constitution and structure. The Labour Party is a membership organisation
consisting of Constituency Labour Parties, affiliated trade unions, socialist
societies and the Co-operative Party, with which it has an electoral agreement.
Members who are elected to parliamentary positions take part in the
Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP) and European Parliamentary Labour Party
(EPLP). The party's decision-making bodies on a national level formally include
the National Executive Committee (NEC), Labour Party Conference and National
Policy Forum (NPF)â€”although in practice the Parliamentary leadership has the
final say on policy. The 2008 Labour Party Conference was the first at which
affiliated trade unions and Constituency Labour Parties did not have the right
to submit motions on contemporary issues that would previously have been
debated. Labour Party conferences now include more "keynote" addresses, guest
speakers and question-and-answer sessions, while specific discussion of policy
now takes place in the National Policy Forum. Executive Board. On 9 March 2012
the Labour Party announced its new senior management team As part of the
reorganisation, Tom Baldwin, previously Director of Strategy and
Communications, becomes "Senior Advisor (Communications and Strategy)". The two
outgoing Deputy General Secretaries: Membership. The party had 193,961 members
on 31 December 2010 according to accounts filed with the Electoral Commission,
which was up from 156,205 the previous year. In that year it had an income of
about Â£36Â million (Â£4.9Â million from membership fees) and expenditure of
about Â£34Â million, high due to that year's general election. For many years
Labour held to a policy of not allowing residents of Northern Ireland to apply
for membership, instead supporting the Social Democratic and Labour Party
(SDLP) which informally takes the Labour whip in the House of Commons. The 2003
Labour Party Conference accepted legal advice that the party could not continue
to prohibit residents of the province joining, and whilst the National
Executive has established a regional constituency party it has not yet agreed
to contest elections there. Trade unions. As it was founded by the unions to
represent the interests of working-class people, Labour's link with the unions
has always been a defining characteristic of the party. In recent years this
link has come under increasing strain, with the RMT being expelled from the
party in 2004 for allowing its branches in Scotland to affiliate to the left-
wing Scottish Socialist Party. Other unions have also faced calls from members
to reduce financial support for the Party and seek more effective political
representation for their views on privatisation, public spending cuts and the
anti-trade union laws. Unison and GMB have both threatened to withdraw funding
from constituency MPs and Dave Prentis of UNISON has warned that the union will
write "no more blank cheques" and is dissatisfied with "feeding the hand that
bites us". International organisations. The party was a member of the Labour
and Socialist International between 1923 and 1940. Since 1951 the party has
been a member of the Socialist International, which was founded thanks to the
efforts of the Clement Attlee leadership. Labour is also a member of the Party
of European Socialists, while the party's MEPs sit in the Socialists &
Democrats group. History. Founding of the party. The Labour Party's origins lie
in the late 19th century, around which time it became apparent that there was a
need for a new political party to represent the interests and needs of the
urban proletariat, a demographic which had increased in number and had recently
been given franchise. Some members of the trades union movement became
interested in moving into the political field, and after further extensions of
the voting franchise in 1867 and 1885, the Liberal Party endorsed some trade-
union sponsored candidates. In addition, several small socialist groups had
formed around this time, with the intention of linking the movement to
political policies. Among these were the Independent Labour Party, the
intellectual and largely middle-class Fabian Society, the marxist Social
Democratic Federation and the Scottish Labour Party. In the 1895 general
election, the Independent Labour Party put up 28 candidates but won only 44,325
votes. Keir Hardie, the leader of the party, believed that to obtain success in
parliamentary elections, it would be necessary to join with other left-wing
groups. Hardie's roots as a Methodist lay preacher contributed to an ethos in
the party which led to the comment by 1950s General Secretary Morgan Phillips
that "Socialism in Britain owed more to Methodism than Marx". Labour
Representation Committee. In 1899, a Doncaster member of the Amalgamated
Society of Railway Servants, Thomas R. Steels, proposed in his union branch
that the Trade Union Congress call a special conference to bring together all
left-wing organisations and form them into a single body that would sponsor
Parliamentary candidates. The motion was passed at all stages by the TUC, and
the proposed conference was held at the Memorial Hall on Farringdon Street on
26 and 27 February 1900. The meeting was attended by a broad spectrum of
working-class and left-wing organisationsÂ â€” trades unions represented about
one third of the membership of the TUC delegates. After a debate, the 129
delegates passed Hardie's motion to establish "a distinct Labour group in
Parliament, who shall have their own whips, and agree upon their policy, which
must embrace a readiness to cooperate with any party which for the time being
may be engaged in promoting legislation in the direct interests of labour."
This created an association called the Labour Representation Committee (LRC),
meant to coordinate attempts to support MPs sponsored by trade unions and
represent the working-class population. It had no single leader, and in the
absence of one, the Independent Labour Party nominee Ramsay MacDonald was
elected as Secretary. He had the difficult task of keeping the various strands
of opinions in the LRC united. The October 1900 "Khaki election" came too soon
for the new party to campaign effectively; total expenses for the election only
came to Â£33. Only 15 candidatures were sponsored, but two were successful;
Keir Hardie in Merthyr Tydfil and Richard Bell in Derby. Support for the LRC
was boosted by the 1901 Taff Vale Case, a dispute between strikers and a
railway company that ended with the union being ordered to pay Â£23,000 damages
for a strike. The judgement effectively made strikes illegal since employers
could recoup the cost of lost business from the unions. The apparent
acquiescence of the Conservative Government of Arthur Balfour to industrial and
business interests (traditionally the allies of the Liberal Party in opposition
to the Conservative's landed interests) intensified support for the LRC against
a government that appeared to have little concern for the industrial
proletariat and its problems. In the 1906 election, the LRC won 29
seatsâ€”helped by a secret 1903 pact between Ramsay MacDonald and Liberal Chief
Whip Herbert Gladstone that aimed to avoid splitting the opposition vote
between Labour and Liberal candidates in the interest of removing the
Conservatives from office. In their first meeting after the election the
group's Members of Parliament decided to adopt the name "The Labour Party"
formally (15 February 1906). Keir Hardie, who had taken a leading role in
getting the party established, was elected as Chairman of the Parliamentary
Labour Party (in effect, the Leader), although only by one vote over David
Shackleton after several ballots. In the party's early years the Independent
Labour Party (ILP) provided much of its activist base as the party did not have
individual membership until 1918 but operated as a conglomerate of affiliated
bodies. The Fabian Society provided much of the intellectual stimulus for the
party. One of the first acts of the new Liberal Government was to reverse the
Taff Vale judgement. Early years and the rise of the Labour Party. The 1910
election saw 42 Labour MPs elected to the House of Commons, a significant
victory since, a year before the election, the House of Lords had passed the
Osborne judgment ruling that Trades Unions in the United Kingdom could no
longer donate money to fund the election campaigns and wages of Labour MPs. The
governing Liberals were unwilling to repeal this judicial decision with primary
legislation. The height of Liberal compromise was to introduce a wage for
Members of Parliament to remove the need to involve the Trade Unions. By 1913,
faced with the opposition of the largest Trades Unions, the Liberal government
passed the Trade Disputes Act to allow Trade Unions to fund Labour MPs once
more. During the First World War the Labour Party split between supporters and
opponents of the conflict but opposition to the war grew within the party as
time went on. Ramsay MacDonald, a notable anti-war campaigner, resigned as
leader of the Parliamentary Labour Party and Arthur Henderson became the main
figure of authority within the party. He was soon accepted into Prime Minister
Asquith's war cabinet, becoming the first Labour Party member to serve in
government. Despite mainstream Labour Party's support for the coalition the
Independent Labour Party was instrumental in opposing conscription through
organisations such as the Non-Conscription Fellowship while a Labour Party
affiliate, the British Socialist Party, organised a number of unofficial
strikes. Arthur Henderson resigned from the Cabinet in 1917 amid calls for
party unity to be replaced by George Barnes. The growth in Labour's local
activist base and organisation was reflected in the elections following the
war, the co-operative movement now providing its own resources to the Co-
operative Party after the armistice. The Co-operative Party later reached an
electoral agreement with the Labour Party. The Communist Party of Great Britain
was refused affiliation between 1921 and 1923. Meanwhile the Liberal Party
declined rapidly and the party suffered a catastrophic split that allowed the
Labour Party to co-opt much of the Liberals' support. With the Liberals in
disarray Labour won 142 seats in 1922, making it the second largest political
group in the House of Commons and the official opposition to the Conservative
government. After the election the now-rehabilitated Ramsay MacDonald was voted
the first official leader of the Labour Party. First Labour government (1924).
The 1923 general election was fought on the Conservatives' protectionist
proposals but, although they got the most votes and remained the largest party,
they lost their majority in parliament, necessitating the formation of a
government supporting free trade. Thus, with the acquiescence of Asquith's
Liberals, Ramsay MacDonald became the first ever Labour Prime Minister in
January 1924, forming the first Labour government, despite Labour only having
191 MPs (less than a third of the House of Commons). Because the government had
to rely on the support of the Liberals it was unable to get any socialist
legislation passed by the House of Commons. The only significant measure was
the Wheatley Housing Act, which began a building programme of 500,000 homes for
rental to working-class families. Legislation on education, unemployment and
social insurance were also passed. While there were no major labour strikes
during his term, MacDonald acted swiftly to end those that did erupt. When the
Labour Party executive criticized the government, he replied that, "public
doles, Poplarism defiance of the national government, strikes for increased
wages, limitation of output, not only are not Socialism, but may mislead the
spirit and policy of the Socialist movement." The government collapsed after
only nine months when the Liberals voted for a Select Committee inquiry into
the Campbell Case, a vote which MacDonald had declared to be a vote of
confidence. The ensuing general election saw the publication, four days before
polling day, of the Zinoviev letter, in which Moscow talked about a Communist
revolution in Britain. The letter had little impact on the Labour vote--which
held up. It was the collapse of the Liberal party that led to the Conservative
landslide. The Conservatives were returned to power although Labour increased
its vote from 30.7% to a third of the popular vote, most Conservative gains
being at the expense of the Liberals. However many Labourites for years blamed
their defeat on foul play (the Zinoviev Letter), thereby according to A.J.P.
Taylor misunderstanding the political forces at work and delaying needed
reforms in the party. In opposition Ramsay MacDonald continued his policy of
presenting the Labour Party as a moderate force. During the General Strike of
1926 the party opposed the general strike, arguing that the best way to achieve
social reforms was through the ballot box. The leaders were also fearful of
Communist influence orchestrated from Moscow. Second Labour government
(1929â€“1931). In the 1929 general election, the Labour Party became the
largest in the House of Commons for the first time, with 287 seats and 37.1% of
the popular vote. However MacDonald was still reliant on Liberal support to
form a minority government. MacDonald went on to appoint Britain's first female
cabinet minister, Margaret Bondfield, who was appointed Minister of Labour. The
government, however, soon found itself engulfed in crisis: the Wall Street
Crash of 1929 and eventual Great Depression occurred soon after the government
came to power, and the crisis hit Britain hard. By the end of 1930 unemployment
had doubled to over two and a half million. The government had no effective
answers to the crisis. By the summer of 1931 a dispute over whether or not to
reduce public spending had split the government. As the economic situation
worsened MacDonald agreed to form a "National Government" with the
Conservatives and the Liberals. On 24 August 1931 MacDonald submitted the
resignation of his ministers and led a small number of his senior colleagues in
forming the National Government together with the other parties. This caused
great anger among those within the Labour Party who felt betrayed by
MacDonald's actions: he and his supporters were promptly expelled from the
Labour Party but went on to form a separate National Labour Organisation, the
remaining Labour Party (again led by Arthur Henderson) and a few Liberals going
into opposition. The ensuing general election resulted in overwhelming victory
for the National Government and disaster for the Labour Party which won only 52
seats, 225 fewer than in 1929. In opposition during the 1930s. Arthur
Henderson, elected in 1931 to succeed MacDonald, lost his seat in the 1931
general election. The only former Labour cabinet member who had retained his
seat, the pacifist George Lansbury, accordingly became party leader. The party
experienced another split in 1932 when the Independent Labour Party, which for
some years had been increasingly at odds with the Labour leadership, opted to
disaffiliate from the Labour Party and embarked on a long, drawn-out decline.
Lansbury resigned as leader in 1935 after public disagreements over foreign
policy. He was promptly replaced as leader by his deputy, Clement Attlee, who
would lead the party for two decades. The party experienced a revival in the
1935 general election, winning 154 seats and 38% of the popular vote, the
highest that Labour had achieved. As the threat from Nazi Germany increased in
the 1930s the Labour Party gradually abandoned its earlier pacifist stance and
supported re-armament, largely due to the efforts of Ernest Bevin and Hugh
Dalton who by 1937 had also persuaded the party to oppose Neville Chamberlain's
policy of appeasement. Wartime coalition (1940-1945). The party returned to
government in 1940 as part of the wartime coalition. When Neville Chamberlain
resigned in the spring of 1940, incoming-Prime Minister Winston Churchill
decided to bring the other main parties into a coalition similar to that of the
First World War. Clement Attlee was appointed Lord Privy Seal and a member of
the war cabinet, eventually becoming the United Kingdom's first Deputy Prime
Minister. A number of other senior Labour figures also took up senior
positions; the trade union leader Ernest Bevin, as Minister of Labour, directed
Britain's wartime economy and allocation of manpower, the veteran Labour
statesman Herbert Morrison became Home Secretary, Hugh Dalton was Minister of
Economic Warfare and later President of the Board of Trade, while A. V.
Alexander resumed the role he had held in the previous Labour Government as
First Lord of the Admiralty. Post-war victory under Attlee. At the end of the
war in Europe, in May 1945, Labour resolved not to repeat the Liberals' error
of 1918, and so promptly withdrew from government, on trade's union isistence,
to contest the 1945 general election in opposition to Churchill's
Conservatives. Surprising many observers, Labour won a formidable victory,
winning just under 50% of the vote with a majority of 159 seats. Clement
Attlee's proved one of the most radical British governments of the 20th
century, enacting Keynesian economic policies, presiding over a policy of
nationalising major industries and utilities including the Bank of England,
coal mining, the steel industry, electricity, gas, inland transport (including
railways, road haulage and canals). It developed and implemented the "cradle to
grave" welfare state conceived by the economist William Beveridge. To this day,
the party considers the 1948 creation of Britain's publicly funded National
Health Service (NHS) under health minister Aneurin Bevan its proudest
achievement. Attlee's government also began the process of dismantling the
British Empire when it granted independence to India and Pakistan in 1947,
followed by Burma (Myanmar) and Ceylon (Sri Lanka) the following year. At a
secret meeting in January 1947, Attlee and six cabinet ministers, including
Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin, decided to proceed with the development of
Britain's nuclear weapons programme, in opposition to the pacifist and anti-
nuclear stances of a large element inside the Labour Party. Labour went on to
win the 1950 general election, but with a much reduced majority of five seats.
Soon afterwards, defence became a divisive issue within the party, especially
defence spending (which reached a peak of 14% of GDP in 1951 during the Korean
War), straining public finances and forcing savings elsewhere. The Chancellor
of the Exchequer, Hugh Gaitskell, introduced charges for NHS dentures and
spectacles, causing Bevan, along with Harold Wilson (then President of the
Board of Trade), to resign over the dilution of the principle of free treatment
on which the NHS had been established. In the 1951 general election, Labour
narrowly lost to the Conservatives despite receiving the larger share of the
popular vote, its highest ever vote numerically. Most of the changes introduced
by the 1945â€“51 Labour government were accepted by the Conservatives and
became part of the "post-war consensus" that lasted until the late 1970s. Food/
Clothing rationing, however, still in place from the war, were swiftly relaxed,
then abandoned from about 1953. Opposition during the 1950s. Following the
defeat of 1951, the party underwent a long period of thirteen years in
opposition. The party suffered an ideological split during the 1950s, while the
postwar economic recovery, given the social effects of Attlee's reforms, made
the public broadly content with the Conservative governments of the time.
Attlee remained as leader until his retirement, in 1955. His replacement, Hugh
Gaitskell, a man associated with the right-wing of the party, struggled in
dealing with internal party divisions in the late 1950s and early 1960s and
Labour lost the 1959 general election. In 1963, Gaitskell's sudden death from a
heart-attack made way for Harold Wilson to lead the party. Labour in government
under Wilson (1964â€“1970). A down-turn in the economy along with a series of
scandals in the early 1960s (the most notorious being the Profumo affair)
engulfed the Conservative government by 1963. The Labour Party returned to
government with a 4-seat majority under Wilson in the 1964 election but
increased its majority to 96 in the 1966 election. Wilson's government was
responsible for a number of sweeping social and educational reforms such as the
legalisation of abortion and homosexuality (initially only for men aged 21 or
over). The 1960s Labour government also expanded comprehensive education and
created the Open University. But Wilson's government had inherited a large
trade deficit that led to a currency crisis and an ultimately doomed attempt to
stave off devaluation of the pound. Labour went on to lose the 1970 election to
the Conservatives under Edward Heath. In opposition (1970-1974). After losing
the 1970 general election, Labour returned to opposition, but retained Harold
Wilson as Leader. Heath's government soon ran into trouble over Northern
Ireland and a dispute with miners in 1973 which led to the "three-day week".
The 1970s proved a difficult time to be in government for both the
Conservatives and Labour due to the 1973 oil crisis which caused high inflation
and a global recession. The Labour Party was returned to power again under
Wilson a few weeks after the February 1974 general election, forming a minority
government with the support of the Ulster Unionists. The Conservatives were
unable to form a government as they had fewer seats despite receiving more
votes numerically. It was the first general election since 1924 in which both
main parties had received less than 40% of the popular vote and the first of
six successive general elections in which Labour failed to reach 40% of the
popular vote. In a bid to gain a proper majority, a second election was soon
called for October 1974 in which Labour, still with Harold Wilson as leader,
managed a majority of three, gaining just 18 seats and taking its total to 319.
Return to government (1974-1979). For much of its time in office the Labour
government struggled with serious economic problems and a precarious majority
in the Commons, while the party's internal dissent over Britain's membership of
the European Economic Community (EEC), which Britain had entered under Edward
Heath in 1972, led in 1975 to a national referendum on the issue in which two
thirds of the public supported continued membership. Harold Wilson's personal
popularity remained reasonably high but he unexpectedly resigned as Prime
Minister in 1976, citing health reasons and was replaced by James Callaghan.
The Wilson and Callaghan governments of the 1970s tried to control inflation
(which reached 23.7% in 1975) by a policy of wage restraint. This was fairly
successful, reducing inflation to 7.4% by 1978. However it led to increasingly
strained relations between the government and the trade unions. Fear of
advances by the nationalist parties, particularly in Scotland, led to the
suppression of a report from Scottish Office economist Gavin McCrone that
suggested that an independent Scotland would be 'chronically in surplus'. By
1977 by-election losses and defections to the breakaway Scottish Labour Party
left Callaghan heading a minority government, forced to trade with smaller
parties in order to govern. An arrangement negotiated in 1977 with Liberal
leader David Steel, known as the Lib-Lab Pact, ended after one year. After this
deals were forged with various small parties including the Scottish National
Party and the Welsh nationalist Plaid Cymru, prolonging the life of the
government slightly. The nationalist parties, in turn, demanded devolution to
their respective constituent countries in return for their supporting the
government. When referenda for Scottish and Welsh devolution were held in March
1979 Welsh devolution was rejected outright while the Scottish referendum
returned a narrow majority in favour without reaching the required threshold of
40% support. When the Labour government duly refused to push ahead with setting
up the proposed Scottish Assembly, the SNP withdrew its support for the
government: this finally brought the government down as it triggered a vote of
confidence in Callaghan's government that was lost by a single vote on 28 March
1979, necessitating a general election. Callaghan had been widely expected to
call a general election in the autumn of 1978 when most opinion polls showed
Labour to have a narrow lead. However he decided to extend his wage restraint
policy for another year hoping that the economy would be in a better shape for
a 1979 election. But during the winter of 1978-79 there were widespread strikes
among lorry drivers, railway workers, car workers and local government and
hospital workers in favour of higher pay-rises that caused significant
disruption to everyday life. These events came to be dubbed the "Winter of
Discontent". In the 1979 election Labour suffered electoral defeat by the
Conservatives, now led by Margaret Thatcher. The number of people voting Labour
hardly changed between February 1974 and 1979 but in 1979 the Conservative
Party achieved big increases in support in the Midlands and South of England,
benefiting from both a surge in turnout and votes lost by the ailing Liberals.
The "Wilderness Years" (1979â€“1997). After its defeat in the 1979 election the
Labour Party underwent a period of internal rivalry between the left-wing,
represented by Michael Foot and Tony Benn, and the right-wing represented by
Denis Healey. The election of Michael Foot as leader in 1980 led in 1981 to
four former cabinet ministers from the right of the Labour Party (Shirley
Williams, William Rodgers, Roy Jenkins and David Owen) forming the Social
Democratic Party. The Labour Party was defeated heavily in the 1983 general
election, winning only 27.6% of the vote, its lowest share since 1918, and
receiving only half a million votes more than the SDP-Liberal Alliance who
leader Michael Foot condemned for "siphoning" Labour support and enabling the
Conservatives to win more seats. Michael Foot resigned and was replaced as
leader by Neil Kinnock who was elected on 2 October 1983 and progressively
moved the party towards the centre. Labour improved its performance in 1987,
gaining 20 seats and so reducing the Conservative majority from 143 to 102.
They were now firmly established as the second political party in Britain as
the Alliance had once again failed to make a breakthrough with seats and it
subsequently collapsed, prompting a merger of the SDP and Liberals to form the
Liberal Democrats. Following the 1987 election, Kinnock began expelling
Militant Tendency members from the party. They would later form the Socialist
Party and the Scottish Socialist Party although a remnant of Militant continues
to operate within the Labour Party through the newspaper "Socialist Appeal". In
November 1990, Margaret Thatcher resigned as prime minister and was succeeded
by John Major. Most opinion polls had shown Labour comfortably ahead of the
Tories for more than a year before Mrs Thatcher's resignation, with the fall in
Tory support blamed largely on the introduction of the unpopular poll tax,
combined with the fact that the economy was sliding into recession at the time.
One of the reasons Mrs Thatcher gave for her resignation was that she felt the
Tories would stand a better chance of re-election with a new leader at the
helm. The change of leader in the Tory government saw a turnaround in support
for the Tories, who regularly topped the opinion polls throughout 1991 although
Labour regained the lead more than once. The "yo yo" in the opinion polls
continued into 1992, though after November 1990 any Labour lead in the polls
was rarely sufficient for a majority. Major resisted Kinnock's calls for a
general election throughout 1991. Kinnock campaigned on the theme "It's Time
for a Change", urging voters to elect a new government after more than a decade
of unbroken Conservative rule. However, the Conservatives themselves had
undergone a dramatic change in the change of leader from Margaret Thatcher to
John Major, at least in terms of style if not substance. From the outset, it
was clearly a well-received change, as Labour's 14-point lead in the November
1990 "Poll of Polls" was replaced by an 8% Tory lead a month later. The
election on 9 April 1992 was widely tipped to result in a hung parliament or a
narrow Labour majority, but in the event the Conservatives were returned to
power, though with a much reduced majority of 21 in 1992. Despite the increased
number of seats and votes, it was still an incredibly disappointing result for
members and supporters of the Labour party, and for the first time in over 30
years there was serious doubt among the public and the media as to whether
Labour could ever return to government. Even before the country went to the
polls, it seemed doubtful as to whether Labour could form a majority as an 8%
electoral swing was needed across the country for this to be achieved. Kinnock
then resigned as leader and was replaced by John Smith. Smith's leadership once
again saw the re-emergence of tension between those on the party's left and
those identified as "modernisers", both of whom advocated radical revisions of
the party's stance albeit in different ways. At the 1993 conference, Smith
successfully changed the party rules and lessened the influence of the trade
unions on the selection of candidates to stand for Parliament by introducing a
one member, one vote system called OMOV â€” but only barely, after a
barnstorming speech by John Prescott which required Smith to compromise on
other individual negotiations. The Black Wednesday economic disaster in
September 1992 left the Conservative government's reputation for monetary
excellence in tatters, and by the end of that year Labour had a comfortable
lead over the Tories in the opinion polls. Although the recession was declared
over in April 1993 and a period of strong and sustained economic growth
followed, coupled with a relatively swift fall in unemployment, the Labour lead
in the opinion polls remained strong. However, Smith died from a heart attack
in May 1994. "New Labour" â€“ in government (1997â€“2010). Tony Blair continued
to move the party further to the centre, abandoning the largely symbolic Clause
Four at the 1995 mini-conference in a strategy to increase the party's appeal
to "middle England". More than a simple re-branding, however, the project would
draw upon the Third Way strategy, informed by the thoughts of the British
sociologist Anthony Giddens. "New Labour" was first termed as an alternative
branding for the Labour Party, dating from a conference slogan first used by
the Labour Party in 1994, which was later seen in a draft manifesto published
by the party in 1996, called "New Labour, New Life For Britain". It was a
continuation of the trend that had begun under the leadership of Neil Kinnock.
"New Labour" as a name has no official status, but remains in common use to
distinguish modernisers from those holding to more traditional positions,
normally referred to as "Old Labour". The Labour Party won the 1997 general
election with a landslide majority of 179; it was the largest Labour majority
ever, and the largest swing to a political party achieved since 1945. Over the
next decade, a wide range of progressive social reforms were enacted, with
millions lifted out of poverty during Labour's time in office largely as a
result of various tax and benefit reforms. Among the early acts of Tony Blair's
government were the establishment of the national minimum wage, the devolution
of power to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, and the re-creation of a
city-wide government body for London, the Greater London Authority, with its
own elected-Mayor. Combined with a Conservative opposition that had yet to
organise effectively under William Hague, and the continuing popularity of
Blair, Labour went on to win the 2001 election with a similar majority, dubbed
the "quiet landslide" by the media. A perceived turning point was when Tony
Blair controversially allied himself with US President George W. Bush in
supporting the Iraq War, which caused him to lose much of his political
support. The UN Secretary-General, among many, considered the war illegal. The
Iraq War was deeply unpopular in most western countries, with Western
governments divided in their support and under pressure from worldwide popular
protests. At the 2005 election, Labour was re-elected for a third term, but
with a reduced majority of 66. The decisions that led up to the Iraq war and
its subsequent conduct are currently the subject of Sir John Chilcot's Iraq
Inquiry. Tony Blair announced in September 2006 that he would quit as leader
within the year, though he had been under pressure to quit earlier than May
2007 in order to get a new leader in place before the May elections which were
expected to be disastrous for Labour. In the event, the party did lose power in
Scotland to a minority Scottish National Party government at the 2007 elections
and, shortly after this, Tony Blair resigned as Prime Minister and was replaced
by his Chancellor, Gordon Brown. Although the party experienced a brief rise in
the polls after this, its popularity soon slumped to its lowest level since the
days of Michael Foot. During May 2008, Labour suffered heavy defeats in the
London mayoral election, local elections and the loss in the Crewe and Nantwich
by-election, culminating in the party registering its worst ever opinion poll
result since records began in 1943, of 23%, with many citing Brown's leadership
as a key factor. Membership of the party also reached a low ebb, falling to
156,205 by the end of 2009: over 40 per cent of the 405,000 peak reached in
1997 and thought to be the lowest total since the party was founded. Finance
proved a major problem for the Labour Party during this period; a "cash for
peerages" scandal under Tony Blair resulted in the drying up of many major
sources of donations. Declining party membership, partially due to the
reduction of activists' influence upon policy-making under the reforms of Neil
Kinnock and Tony Blair, also contributed to financial problems. Between January
and March 2008, the Labour Party received just over Â£3Â million in donations
and were Â£17Â million in debt; compared to the Conservatives' Â£6Â million in
donations and Â£12Â million in debt. In the 2010 general election on 6 May that
year, Labour with 29.0% of the vote won the second largest number of seats
(258). The Conservatives with 36.5% of the vote won the largest number of seats
(307), but no party had an overall majority, meaning that Labour could still
remain in power if they managed to form a coalition with at least one smaller
party. However, the Labour Party would have had to form a coalition with more
than one other smaller party to gain an overall majority; anything less would
result in a minority government. On 10 May 2010, after talks to form a
coalition with the Liberal Democrats broke down, Gordon Brown announced his
intention to stand down as Leader before the Labour Party Conference but a day
later resigned as both Prime Minister and party leader. In opposition
(2010â€“present). Harriet Harman became the Leader of the Opposition and acting
Leader of the Labour Party following the resignation of Gordon Brown on 11 May
2010, pending a leadership election subsequently won by Ed Miliband. This
period has to date witnessed some revival in fortunes for the party with Labour
gaining a large number of council seats in both the 2011 and 2012 local
elections. The party also improved its position in Wales, forming a single
party minority Government in the Welsh Assembly. However at the same time,
Labour lost a number of MSPs moving backwards in the 2011 Scottish Parliament
election and the party's candidate for London Mayor Ken Livingstone failed to
re-gain the London Mayoralty in 2012. In September 2010 the party reported a
surge of 32,000 new members since the general election; at the end of 2011 this
figure had reached 65,000 new members. The new leadership of the party has been
seeking a coherent ideological position to answer Cameron's 'Big Society'
rhetoric, and also mark a seachange from the neoliberal ideology of Blair and
'New Labour'. Blue Labour is a recent, and somewhat influential ideological
tendency in the party that advocates the belief that working class voters will
be won back to Labour through more conservative policies on certain social and
international issues, such as immigration and crime, a rejection of neoliberal
economics in favour of ideas from guild socialism and continental corporatism,
and a switch to local and democratic community management and provision of
services, rather than relying on a traditional welfare state that is seen as
excessively 'bureaucratic'. These ideas have been given an endorsement by Ed
Miliband who in 2011 wrote the preface to a book expounding Blue Labour's
positions. However, it lost some influence after comments by Maurice Glasman in
the Telegraph newspaper. Ed Miliband has himself emphasised responsible
capitalism and greater state intervention to change the balance of the UK
economy away from financial services. Tackling vested interests and opening up
closed circles in British society have also been themes that he has returned to
a number of times. Electoral performance. â€ The first election held under the
Representation of the People Act 1918 in which all men over 21, and most women
over the age of 30 could vote, and therefore a much larger electorate â€¡The
first election under universal suffrage in which all women aged over 21 could
vote Current elected MPs. Changes. 1. Phil Woolas was removed as MP for Oldham
East and Saddleworth following a decision that he had breached electoral law.
Debbie Abrahams won the subsequent by-election on 13 January 2011 for Labour.
2. Eric Illsley resigned as MP for Barnsley Central after he was convicted for
expenses fraud. Dan Jarvis won the by-election for Labour. 3. Peter Soulsby
resigned as MP for Leicester South in order to contest the election for the
newly created position of directly elected Mayor of Leicester. Jon Ashworth won
the following by-election for Labour. 4. The MP for Inverclyde David Cairns
died on 9 May 2011. He was replaced as MP for Inverclyde in the by-election
held on 30 June 2011. 5. Following the death of the MP for Feltham and Heston,
Alan Keen, on 10 November 2011, the seat was won by Seema Malhotra at the by-
election on 15 November 2011. 6. Eric Joyce was suspended from the
Parliamentary Labour Party after he assaulted two Conservative and one Labour
MP in Strangers Bar. On 12 March he resigned from the Labour Party. 7. Marsha
Singh resigned as MP for Bradford West on 28 February 2012 due to ill-health.
On 29 March 2012, the seat was won by George Galloway of the Respect Party.
