Land (economics) In economics, land comprises all naturally occurring resources
whose supply is inherently fixed. Examples are any and all particular
geographical locations, mineral deposits, and even geostationary orbit
locations and portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Natural resources are
fundamental to the production of all goods, including capital goods. Location
values must not be confused with values imparted by fixed capital improvements.
In classical economics, land is considered one of the three factors of
production (along with capital, and labor). In some cases, land may be merged
with capital due to the relatively small importance that land has in industrial
and service sectors. Income derived from ownership or control of natural
resources is referred to as rent. Land was sometimes defined in classical and
neoclassical economics as the "original and indestructible powers of the soil."
Georgists hold that this implies a perfectly inelastic supply curve (i.e., zero
elasticity), suggesting that a land value tax that recovers the rent of land
for public purposes would not affect the opportunity cost of using land, but
would instead only decrease the value of owning it. This view is supported by
evidence that although land can come on and off the market, market inventories
of land show if anything an inverse relationship to price (i.e., negative
elasticity). As a tangible asset land is represented in accounting as a fixed
asset or a capital asset. Land, particularly geographic locations and mineral
deposits, has historically been the cause of much conflict and dispute; land
reform programs, which are designed to redistribute possession and/or use of
geographic land, are often the cause of much controversy, and conflicts over
the economic rent of mineral deposits have contributed to many civil wars,
particularly in Africa.
