List of landslide victories In politics, a landslide victory (or landslide) is
the victory of a candidate or political party by an overwhelming margin in an
election. Just what margin is needed for a victory to be "in by a landslide"
has not been precisely defined, and has varied from time to time. Australia.
Australian elections are characterised by few changes in governmentÂ â€” since
1949 there have been only five elections where a new party has won government.
When a new party is elected, however, it is often by a landslide. Brazil.
Considering that Brazil has a two-round system there was never a landslide
victory in presidential elections since the redemocratization in the late
1980s. The closest to a landslide victory in presidential elections happened
when Fernando Henrique Cardoso was both elected and re-elected in the first
round with 53% of the valid votes against about 30% of Luiz InÃ¡cio Lula da
Silva. Considering the second round, Lula had a landslide victory both in 2002
and 2006, achieving more than 60% of the valid votes against 39% of his
contestants. Two of the three national referendums were marked with landslide
victories. In 1963, Presidentialism was restored with 80% of the votes, while
in 2005, almost 64% voted against the prohibition of firearms and ammunition
commercialization. Ireland. These were the only times a party has won a
majority of the vote in an Irish General Election. Japan. The once-dominant
Liberal Democratic Party has held large parliamentary majorities in the 1960s
until the 1970s when it had to govern with coalitions to command workable
majorities. New Zealand. New Zealand formerly used solely first-past-the-post
voting until 1993, when it switched to the Mixed Member Proportional (MMP)
system in 1996 to elect members of the Parliament of New Zealand. Therefore,
landslides have not happened since then as no single party has won a majority
of seats under proportional representation. Philippines. In the Philippines,
the positions of president and vice president are directly elected separately,
without runoff election. From 1935 to 1946, the Philippines was under "de
facto" one-party rule by the Nacionalista Party; as such all presidential
elections were landslides; Manuel L. Quezon won with 68% of the vote in 1935
and an even bigger margin of 82% on 1941. Sergio OsmeÃ±a won even larger
margins in the vice presidential elections: 80% in 1935 and 85% in 1942. In
1972, martial law was declared and political opposition was suppressed. It was
lifted in 1981, but other major parties boycotted that year's election.
Singapore. The People's Action Party has continuously enjoyed winning large
parliamentary majorities since its first victory in 1959, when Singapore was
under British colonial rule. From the 1968 to 1980 general elections, the PAP
won a monopoly of seats in the Singapore parliament and a vote share above 70%,
as a result of an opposition boycott in 1968 and weak opposition forces seeing
little success. This trend ended in 1984, when the PAP won less than 65% of the
vote and the opposition parties returned with a presence in the legislature,
but with the PAP continuing to hold a large parliamentary majority (above 90%
of seats in the parliament). This was wildly exaggerated as a result of the
Group Representation Constituency bloc voting scheme implemented in 1988 with
the PAP winning 60% and above vote shares. Thailand. Both were under parallel
voting system. United Kingdom. House of Commons of the United Kingdom. Labour's
general election victory in 2001 with an overall majority of 167 was dubbed
"the quiet landslide" by the media. Though the Government did score a very high
majority, public interest in the election was not excited and, unlike most of
the landslide results listed above, there was little change from the previous
election and no change of governing party. Landslides are relatively common in
British electoral history, and this is partly as a result of the first-past-
the-post electoral system. Relatively small differences in numbers of popular
votes cast can amplify the eventual result. For instance, Labour achieved a 66-
seat majority in the 2005 election despite securing only 35% of the vote.
Conversely, parties can poll very highly and achieve disproportionately low
numbers of MPs. United States. Presidential. Presidential elections in the
United States are indirect; they are not determined by the "popular vote", but
by the Electoral College. Each state is allocated as many "electors" as it has
Senators and Representatives in the United States Congress, and, at present,
all states but Nebraska and Maine hold a "winner take all" vote, in which the
winner of the popular vote in a state wins "all" electoral votes the state is
eligible to cast (Nebraska and Maine give two electoral votes to the winner of
the state and one electoral vote to the winner of each congressional district
within the state.). This allows for candidates to win 1 vote more than the
runner-up but still get 100% of the electoral votes. For this reason, many
presidential victories appear to be huge landslide victories when examining the
electoral vote, but much less so when examining the popular vote; for example,
in the 1980 election, Ronald Reagan won 90.9% of the electoral vote but 50.7%
of the popular vote to Jimmy Carter's 41.0%.
