Lawrence O'Brien Award The Democratic National Committee (DNC) Lawrence O'Brien
Award was created in 1992 by the family of Lawrence Francis "Larry" O'Brien Jr.
(1917-1990) and Democratic Party leaders to recognize the many years of service
he gave to the party and his belief in the contribution of party volunteers.
Since then, party leaders presented this award on five occasions to 94 winners
from across the United States. The award honors the importance of this
contribution to the continuing success and vitality of the party. It's given to
individuals and groups who exhibit a high degree of commitment and self-
sacrifice on behalf of the party and its candidates. The award was expanded in
1998 to help mark the 150th anniversary of the DNC. Party leaders honored an
individual or group from every commonwealth, district, state and territory and
six individuals nationally. Through the generosity of the O'Brien family, award
winners also received financial grants. A news report which was published in
2000 by "Insight" magazine described a 1998 controversy about e-mail messages
which were written between Clinton-Gore Administration staff members and 1996
presidential reelection campaign staffers about political fundraising by
Administration staffers. Some of the messages were written in 1996 and
solicited the award for a campaign contributor. Selection. Award winners are
selected from among many nominations received from party leaders, appointed and
elected public officials, and other Democrats in the United States. Each winner
worked at the local-, state- or national-party levels, including assisting
candidates for elected public office. Furthermore, the winners made personal,
family or financial sacrifices, or otherwise showed unusual or extraordinary
dedication to the furtherance of the goals of the party, without financial
remuneration or professional gain.
