League of Coloured Peoples The League of Coloured Peoples was a British civil-
rights organization that was founded in 1931 in London with the goal of racial
equality around the world. Altthe League's primary focus was black rights in
Britain, it also was involved in other civil-rights issues, such as the
persecution of the Jews in Germany. In 1933, the League of Coloured Peoples
began publication of the civil-rights journal "The Keys", and was a powerful
civil-rights force until its dissolution in 1951. The beginning. Harold Moody,
a physician and devout Christian, was frustrated with the prejudice he
experienced in Britain, from finding employment to simply obtaining a
residence. Through his involvement with London Christian Endeavour Federation,
Moody began to confront employers who were refusing jobs to black Britons. On
13 March 1931, in a London YMCA in Tottenham Court Road, Moody called a meeting
with the contacts he had made over the years. On this night, they formed The
League of Coloured Peoples. Also present at the inaugural meeting was Stella
Thomas, who would go on to become the first woman magistrate in West Africa.
Other prominent members included C. L. R. James, Jomo Kenyatta and Una Marson.
Accomplishments. The Colour Bar in the Workplace. From its inception in 1931
until the outbreak of World War II, the League's primary focus was eliminating
the colour bar (the restrictions placed on a group of people due to their race
or colour) in the British workplace, in social life, and in housing. Throughout
Britain in the 1930s, black people were refused service in many restaurants,
hotels, and lodging houses. They also found it extremely difficult to find
employment in many industries; the medical profession in particular drew the
attention of the league, most likely due to founder and president Harold
Moody's personal struggles in that area. By 1935, a branch of the league
focusing on equality in the shipping industry had grown to over 80 members.
During the 1930s, The League of Coloured Peoples struck many blows for blacks
in the workplace. During the second world war. During the Second world war the
LCP continued to highlight discrimination. Authorities organizing the
evacuation of children from the big towns found it very difficult to find
families who would accept to take in coloured children, and the LCP lobbied
against this sort of discrimination.
