Left–right politics The left–right political spectrum is a common way of
classifying political positions, ideologies, or parties along a political
spectrum. Left-wing politics and right-wing politics are often presented as
opposed, and although a particular individual or party may take a left-wing
stance on one matter and a right-wing stance on another, the terms "left" and
"right" are used to refer to two globally opposed political families. In
France, where the terms originated, "the Left" is called "the party of
movement" and "the Right" "the party of order." There is general consensus that
"the Left" includes progressives, social-liberals, greens, social-democrats,
socialists, democratic-socialists, civil-libertarians (as in "social-
libertarians"; not to be confused with the right's "economic-libertarians"),
secularists, communists, and anarchists, and that "the Right" includes
conservatives, reactionaries, neoconservatives, capitalists, neoliberals,
economic-libertarians (not to be confused with the left's "civil-
libertarians"), social-authoritarians, monarchists, theocrats, nationalists,
Nazis (including neo-Nazis) and fascists. History of the terms. The terms
"left" and "right" appeared during the French Revolution of 1789 when members
of the National Assembly divided into supporters of the king to the president's
right and supporters of the revolution to his left. One deputy, the Baron de
Gauville explained, "We began to recognize each other: those who were loyal to
religion and the king took up positions to the right of the chair so as to
avoid the shouts, oaths, and indecencies that enjoyed free rein in the opposing
camp." However the Right opposed the seating arrangement because they believed
that deputies should support private or general interests but should not form
factions or political parties. The contemporary press occasionally used the
terms "left" and "right" to refer to the opposing sides. When the National
Assembly was replaced in 1791 by a Legislative Assembly composed of entirely
new members the divisions continued. "Innovators" sat on the left, "moderates"
gathered in the centre, while the "conscientious defenders of the constitution"
found themselves sitting on the right, where the defenders of the Ancien
Régime had previously gathered. When the succeeding National Convention met in
1792, the seating arrangement continued, but following the coup d'état of June
2, 1793, and the arrest of the Girondins, the right side of the assembly was
deserted, and any remaining members who had sat there moved to the centre.
However following the Thermidorian Reaction of 1794 the members of the far left
were excluded and the method of seating was abolished. The new constitution
included rules for the assembly that would "break up the party groups." However
following the Restoration in 1814-1815 political clubs were again formed. The
majority ultraroyalists chose to sit on the right. The "constitutionals" sat in
the centre while independents sat on the left. The terms "extreme right" and
"extreme left", as well as "centre-right" and "centre-left", came to be used to
describe the nuances of ideology of different sections of the assembly. The
terms "left" and "right" were not used to refer to political ideology but only
to seating in the legislature. After 1848, the main opposing camps were the
"democratic socialists" and the "reactionaries" who used red and white flags to
identify their party affiliation. With the establishment of the Third Republic
in 1871, the terms were adopted by political parties: the Republican Left, the
Centre Right, and the Centre Left (1871) and the Extreme Left (1876) and
Radical Left (1881). Beginning in the early twentieth century the terms left
and right came to be associated with specific political ideologies and were
used to describe citizens' political beliefs, gradually replacing the terms
"reds" and "the reaction" or "republicans" and "conservatives". By 1914 the
left half of the legislature was composed of Unified Socialists, Republican
Socialists and Socialist Radicals, while the parties that were called "left"
now sat on the right side. There was asymmetry in the use of the terms left and
right by the opposing sides. The right mostly denied that the left–right
spectrum was meaningful because they saw it as artificial and damaging to
unity. The left, however, seeking to change society, promoted the distinction.
As Alain observed in 1931, "When people ask me if the division between parties
of the right and parties of the left, men of the right and men of the left,
still makes sense, the first thing that comes to mind is that the person asking
the question is certainly not a man of the left" The terms left and right came
to be applied to British politics during the 1906 general election, which saw
the Labour Party emerge as a third force. The sociologist Robert M. MacIver
noted in "The Web of Government" (1947): Lipset, p. 222 Political parties in
the political spectrum. [[File:2009 European Parliament
Composition.svg|thumb|Seating in the 2009 European Parliament Political
scientists have observed that the ideologies of political parties can be mapped
along a single left–right axis. Klaus von Beyme categorized European parties
into nine families, which described most parties. He was able to arrange seven
of them from left to right: communist, socialist, green, liberal, Christian
democratic, conservative and right-wing extremist. The position of agrarian and
regional/ethnic parties varied. A study conducted in the late 1980s on two
bases, positions on ownership of the means of production and positions on
social issues, confirmed this arrangement. There has been a tendency for party
ideologies to persist, and values and views that were present at a party's
founding have survived. However they have also adapted for pragmatic reasons,
making them appear more similar. Lipset and Rokkan observed that modern party
systems are the product of social conflicts played out in the last few
centuries. They argued that lines of cleavage had become 'frozen'. The first
modern political parties were liberals, organized by the middle class in the
19th century to protect them against the aristocracy. They were major political
parties in that century but declined in the twentieth century as first the
working class came to support socialist parties and economic and social change
eroded their middle class base. Conservative parties arose in opposition to
liberals in order to defend aristocratic privilege. But in order to attract
voters they became less doctrinaire than liberals. However they were
unsuccessful in most countries and generally have only been able to achieve
power through cooperation with other parties. Socialist parties were organized
in order to achieve political rights for workers and were originally allied
with liberals. However they broke with the liberals when they sought worker
control of the means of production. Christian democratic parties were organized
by Catholics who saw liberalism as a threat to traditional values. Although
established in the 19th century, they became a major political force following
the Second World War. Communist parties emerged following a division within
socialism first on support of the First World War and then support of the
Bolshevik Revolution. Right-wing extremist parties are harder to define, other
than being more right-wing than other parties, but include fascists and some
extreme conservative and nationalist parties. Green parties were the most
recent of the major party groups to develop. They have rejected socialism and
they are very liberal on social issues. These categories can be applied to many
parties outside Europe. Ware (1996) asserted that in the United States both
major parties were liberal, even though there are left–right policy
differences between them. Usage in Western Europe. The 2001 book "The
government and politics of France" argues that the main factor dividing the
left and right wings in Western Europe is class. It is argued that the Left
seeks social justice through redistributive social and economic policies, while
the Right defends private property and capitalism. The book argues that the
nature of the conflict depends on existing social and political cleavages and
on the level of economic development. It is furthermore argued that left-wing
values include the belief in the power of human reason to achieve progress for
the benefit of the human race, secularism, sovereignty exercised through the
legislature, social justice, and mistrust of strong personal political
leadership. To the Right, it is argued, this is regularly seen as anti-
clericalism, unrealistic social reform, doctrinaire socialism and class hatred.
The Right are skeptical about the capacity of radical reforms to achieve human
well-being while maintaining workplace competition. They believe in the
established church both in itself and as an instrument of social cohesion, and
believe in the need for strong political leadership to minimize social and
political divisions. To the Left, this is seen as a selfish and reactionary
opposition to social justice, a wish to impose doctrinaire religion on the
population, and a tendency to authoritarianism and repression. The differences
between left and right have altered over time. The initial cleavage at the time
of the French Revolution was between supporters of absolute monarchy (the
Right) and those who wished to limit the king's authority (the Left). During
the 19th century the cleavage was between monarchists and republicans.
Following the establishment of the Third Republic in 1871, the cleavage was
between supporters of a strong executive on the Right and supporters of the
primacy of the legislature on the Left. Contemporary usage in the United
States. The terms "left-wing" and "right-wing" are widely used in the United
States but, as on the global level, there is no firm consensus about their
meaning. The only aspect which is generally agreed upon is that they are the
defining opposites of the United States political spectrum. "Left" and "right"
in the U.S. are generally associated with "liberal" and "conservative"
respectively, although the meanings of the two sets of terms do not entirely
coincide. Depending on the political affiliation of the individual using them,
these terms can be spoken with varying implications. A 2005 poll of 2,209
American adults showed that "respondents generally viewed the paired concepts
liberals and left-wingers and conservatives and right-wingers as possessing,
respectively, generally similar political beliefs", but also showed that around
ten percent fewer respondents understood the terms "left" and "right" than
understood the terms "liberal" and "conservative". The contemporary Left in the
United States is usually understood as a category including New Deal liberals,
Rawlsian liberals, social democrats and civil libertarians, and is generally
identified with the Democratic Party. In general, "left-wing" implies a
commitment to egalitarianism, support for social policies that favor the
working class, and multiculturalism. The contemporary Left usually defines
itself as promoting government regulation of business, commerce and industry;
protection of fundamental rights such as freedom of speech and freedom of
religion; and government intervention on behalf of racial, ethnic, and sexual
minorities and the working class. The contemporary Right in the United States
is usually understood as a category including social conservatives, Christian
conservatives and free market liberals, and is generally identified with the
Republican Party. In general, "right-wing" implies a commitment to conservative
Christian values, support for a free-market system, and "traditional family
values". The contemporary Right usually defines itself as promoting
deregulation of banking, commerce, and industry. Whether something is to your
left or to your right depends on where you stand. According to liberal
commentator David Sirota, writing in Salon.com, "On economic issues, we are
often told that right is center, center is left, and left is fringe." Relevance
of the terms today. Some political scientists have suggested that the
classifications of "left" and "right" are no longer meaningful in the modern
complex world. Although these terms continue to be used, they advocate a more
complex spectrum that attempts to combine political, economic and social
dimensions. However, a survey conducted between 1983 and 1994 by Bob Altemeyer
of Canadian legislative caucuses showed an 82% correlation between party
affiliation and score on a scale for right-wing authoritarianism when comparing
right-wing and social democratic caucuses. There was a wide gap between the
scores of the two groups which was filled by liberal caucuses. His survey of
American legislative caucuses showed scores by American Republicans and
Democrats were similar to the Canadian Right and liberals, with a 44%
correlation between party affilitation and score. Norberto Bobbio saw the
polarization of the Italian Chamber of Deputies in the 1990s as evidence that
the linear left/right axis remained valid. He thought that the argument that
the spectrum had disappeared occurred when either the Left or Right were weak.
The dominant side would claim that its ideology was the only possible one,
while the weaker side would minimize its differences. He saw the Left and Right
not in absolute terms, but as relative concepts that would vary over time. The
key distinction was one of equality. The Right was committed to inequality
while the further left one went the more committed to equality one was. In his
view, the left/right axis could be applied to any time period. The political
philosopher Charles Blattberg has proposed "response to conflict" as the basis
of a reinterpreted political spectrum. According to Blattberg, those who would
respond to conflict with conversation should be considered as on the left, with
negotiation as in the centre, and with force as on the right. See his essay
"Political Philosophies and Political Ideologies." Libertarian writer David
Boaz argued that terms "left" and "right" are used to spin a particular point
of view rather than as simple descriptors, with those on the "left" typically
emphasizing their support for working people and accusing the right of
supporting the interests of the upper class, and those on the "right" usually
emphasizing their support for individualism and accusing the Left of supporting
collectivism. Boaz asserts that arguments about the way the words should be
used often displaces arguments about policy by raising emotional prejudice
against a preconceived notion of what the terms mean.
