Left-wing fascism Left-wing fascism and left fascism are terms used to describe
tendencies in left-wing politics that contradict or violate the progressive
ideals with which the Left is usually associated. The most prominent early user
of the term "left-fascism" was Jürgen Habermas, a sociologist and philosopher
influenced by the neo-Marxist Frankfurt School. He used the term in the 1960s
to distance the Frankfurt School from the violence and authoritarianism of
left-wing terrorists. Habermas, whose work emphasizes the importance of
rational discourse, democratic institutions and opposition to violence, has
made important contributions to conflict theory and is often associated with
the radical left. Sociologist Irving Louis Horowitz argues that "left-wing
fascism" in the United States consists of a rejection of American democracy and
a devotion to socialism that is merely an idealized abstraction, combined with
an unwillingness to confront the actual history of communism. He argues that it
operates through mystified language; attributes faults "everywhere and always
in an imperial conspiracy of wealth, power or status"; and uses anti-Semitism
as a pseudo-populist tool. The term has also been used to describe unusual
hybrid political alliances in the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Historian
Richard Wolin has used the term "left fascism" in arguing that some European
intellectuals' have been infatuated with post-modernist or anti-enlightenment
theories, opening up the opportunity for cult-like, irrational, anti-democratic
positions that combine characteristics of the Left with those of fascism.
Bernard-Henri Lévy, a philosopher and journalist, calls this political hybrid
"neo-progressivism", "new barbarism" or "red fascism". Lévy argues that it is
anti-liberal, anti-American, anti-empire, anti-Semitic and pro-"Islamofascist".
