Legal research Legal research is "the process of identifying and retrieving
information necessary to support legal decision-making. In its broadest sense,
legal research includes each step of a course of action that begins with an
analysis of the facts of a problem and concludes with the application and
communication of the results of the investigation." The processes of legal
research vary according to the country and the legal system involved. However,
legal research generally involves tasks such as: 1) finding primary sources of
law, or primary authority, in a given jurisdiction (cases, statutes,
regulations, etc.); 2) searching secondary authority (for example, law reviews,
legal dictionaries, legal treatises, and legal encyclopedias such as American
Jurisprudence and Corpus Juris Secundum), for background information about a
legal topic; and 3) searching non-legal sources for investigative or supporting
information. Legal research is performed by anyone with a need for legal
information, including lawyers, law librarians, and paralegals. Sources of
legal information range from printed books, to free legal research websites
(like Cornell Law Schoolâ€™s Legal Information Institute, Findlaw.com,
Martindale Hubbell, Lawyers.com, HG.org and CanLII) and information portals to
fee database vendors such as Wolters Kluwer, Chancery Law Chronicles,
LexisNexis, Westlaw, and Bloomberg Law. Law libraries around the world provide
research services to help their patrons find the legal information they need in
law schools, law firms and other research environments. Many law libraries and
institutions provide free access to legal information on the web, either
individually or via collective action, such as with the Free Access to Law
Movement. Databases and software. An Australian team created AustLII, a
database collecting all primary sources from each Australian jurisdiction and
some secondary sources, all freely available. It has now been replicated in
many countries as BAILII, CanLII, WorldLII, etc. Third-Party Legal Research
Providers. Legal research is known to take much time and effort, and access to
online legal research databases such as LexisNexis and Westlaw can be costly.
Consequently, law firms and other practitioners may turn to third-party legal
research providers to outsource their legal research needs. The Standing
Committee on Ethics and Professional Responsibility thus concluded that "is
nothing unethical about a lawyer outsourcing legal and nonlegal services,
provided the outsourcing lawyer renders legal services to the client with the
'legal knowledge, skill, thoroughness and preparation reasonably necessary for
the representation,' as required by Rule 1.1."
