Limit price A limit price is the price set by a monopolist to discourage entry
into a market, and is illegal in many countries. The limit price is the price
that a potential entrant would face upon entering as long as the incumbent firm
did not decrease output. The limit price is often lower than the average cost
of production or just low enough to make entering not profitable. Such a
pricing strategy is called limit pricing. The quantity produced by the
incumbent firm to act as a deterrent to entry is usually larger than would be
optimal for a monopolist, but might still produce higher economic profits than
would be earned under perfect competition.Dennis W. Carlton and Jeffery M.
Perloff, 2004. "Modern Industrial Organization", 4th edition, Description.
Another example is to build excess production capacity as a commitment device.
Simple Example. Suppose there are two potential producers of good X, Firm A,
and Firm B. Firm A has no fixed costs and constant marginal cost equal to
formula_1. Firm B also has no fixed costs, and has constant marginal cost equal
to formula_2, where formula_3 (so that Firm B's marginal cost is greater than
Firm A's). In this case, if Firm A charges formula_5, Firm B has an incentive
to enter the market, since it can sell a positive quantity of good X at a price
above its marginal cost, and therefore make positive profits. In order to
prevent Firm B from having an incentive to enter the market, Firm A must set
its price no greater than formula_2. To maximize its profits subject to this
constraint, Firm A sets price formula_8 (the limit price).
