Line-item veto The line-item veto, or partial veto, is a special form of veto
that authorizes a chief executive to reject particular provisions of a bill
enacted by a legislature without vetoing the entire bill. Many countries have
different standards for invoking the line-item veto, if it exists at all. Each
country and/or state has its own particular requirement for overriding a line-
item veto. Line-item veto by country. Brazil. The President of Brazil has the
power of the line-item veto over all legislation. Any provisions vetoed in such
a manner are returned to the Brazilian congress, and can be overridden by a
vote. Recently, the President of Brazil vetoed portions of a new forestry law
which had been criticized as potentially causing another wave of deforestation
in the Amazon rainforest. Panama. The President of Panama has the ability to
partially veto portions of a bill. United States. Federal government. Starting
with Ulysses S. Grant, every US president has asked congress to enact
legislation granting the president line-item veto power but it was not until
the Clinton presidency that Congress passed such legislation. Although it was
intended to control "pork barrel spending", the Line Item Veto Act of 1996 was
held to be unconstitutional by the US Supreme Court in a 1998 ruling in
"Clinton v. City of New York". The court affirmed a lower court decision that
the line-item veto was equivalent to the unilateral amendment or repeal of only
parts of statutes and therefore violated the Presentment Clause of the United
States Constitution. Before the ruling, President Clinton applied the line-item
veto to the federal budget 82 times. Since then, the prospect of granting the
President a line-item veto has occasionally resurfaced in Congress; either
through a constitutional amendment or a differently-worded bill. Most recently,
the House of Representatives passed a bill on February 8, 2012, that would have
granted the President a limited line-item veto; however, the bill was not heard
in the Senate. The most-commonly proposed form of the line-item veto, including
the version passed in 1996, is limited to partial vetoes of spending bills, for
the purpose of reducing the deficit by eliminating unnecessary provisions from
spending bills. Confederate States of America. While the Constitution of the
Confederate States of America was largely based on the U.S. Constitution, one
of the most notable departures was the granting of a line-item veto to the
President. Jefferson Davis, however, never exercised the provision. State
governments. Forty-three states - all except Indiana, Maryland, Nevada, New
Hampshire, North Carolina, Rhode Island, and Vermont â€” give their governors
some form of line-item veto power. The Mayor of Washington, D.C. also has this
power. Use of the line-item veto remains far less controversial at the state
level than at the federal level.
