Lishenets A lishenets (Russian: лишенец), from Russian word
лишение, "deprivation", properly translated in this context as a
disenfranchised, was a person stripped of the right of voting in the Soviet
Union of 1918 — 1936. Disfranchisement was a means of repression of the
categories of population that were classified as "enemies of the working
people". The 1924 Soviet Constitution and subsequent decrees detailed this list
further and added new categories. Being disenfranchised meant much more than
simply being disallowed to vote or be elected. A "lishenets" could not occupy
any governmental position, or receive higher and technical education. He was
deprived of various privileges and subsidies: employment, housing, retirement,
etc. He could not be a member of kolkhozes and other kinds of cooperatives.
During the rationing system of 1929-1930, disenfranchised were also deprived of
rations. Members of the family whose head was "lishenets" were automatically
disenfranchised. The voting rights could be restored by local election
commissions upon the proof of engagement in productive labor and of the loyalty
to the Soviet power. The ultimate authorities were the Central Election
Commission and Presidium of the Central Executive Committee. The 1936 Soviet
Constitution instituted universal suffrage, and the category of "lishenets" was
officially eliminated. Nevertheless, for a long time after 1936, Soviet
citizens applying for any job had to make a statement if they or their family
members were ever deprived of voting rights so they still fall into
disenfranchised category.
