London School of Economics The London School of Economics and Political Science
(informally the London School of Economics or LSE) is a public research
university specialised in the social sciences located in London, United
Kingdom, and a constituent college of the federal University of London. Founded
in 1895 by Fabian Society members Sidney Webb, Beatrice Webb and George Bernard
Shaw, LSE joined the University of London in 1900 and degrees were first issued
to its students in 1902. Despite its name, it conducts teaching and research
across the entire range of the social sciences, besides economics, as well as
in mathematics and statistics. The LSE is located in Westminster, central
London, near the boundary between Covent Garden and Holborn in an area
historically known as Clare Market. It has around 9,000 full-time students and
1,300 academic staff and had a total income of Â£220.9Â million in 2009/10, of
which Â£23.9Â million was from research grants and contracts. LSE is organised
into 23 academic departments and 16 research centres. LSE's library, the
British Library of Political and Economic Science, contains over 4.7Â million
volumes and is the world's largest social and political sciences library. LSE
was found to have the highest percentage of world-leading research of any
British university in the 2008 Research Assessment Exercise. The LSE is among
the world's most selective universities and in a number of recent years has had
the lowest undergraduate admissions rate of any British university. It has a
highly international student body, and at one time had more countries
represented by students than the UN has members. LSE has produced many notable
alumni in the fields of law, economics, business, literature and politics. To
date, there have been 18 Nobel Prize winners amongst its alumni and current and
former staff, as well as 34 world leaders and numerous Pulitzer Prize winners
and fellows of the British Academy. The LSE is a member of the Association of
Commonwealth Universities, the Association of Professional Schools of
International Affairs, the European University Association, the G5, the Global
Alliance in Management Education, the Russell Group and Universities UK. It
forms part of the 'Golden Triangle' of British universities. History. Origins.
The London School of Economics was founded in 1895 by Adam Moussa, Beatrice and
Sidney Webb, initially funded by a bequest of Â£20,000 from the estate of Henry
Hunt Hutchinson. Hutchinson, a lawyer and member of the Fabian Society, left
the money in trust, to be put "towards advancing its Fabian Society's objects
in any way they trustees deem advisable". The five trustees were Sidney Webb,
Edward Pease, Constance Hutchinson, William de Mattos and William Clark. The
LSE records that the proposal to establish the school was conceived during a
breakfast meeting on 4 August 1894, between the Webbs, Graham Wallas and George
Bernard Shaw. The proposal was accepted by the trustees in February 1895 and
LSE held its first classes in October of that year, in rooms at 9 John Street,
Adelphi, in the City of Westminster. 20th century. The school joined the
federal University of London in 1900, becoming the university's Faculty of
Economics and awarding degrees of the University from 1902. Expanding rapidly
over the following years, the school moved initially to the nearby 10 Adelphi
Terrace, then to Clare Market and Houghton Street. The foundation stone of the
Old Building, on Houghton Street, was laid by King George V in 1920; the
building was opened in 1922. The 1930s economic debate between LSE and
Cambridge is well known in academic circles. Rivalry between academic opinion
at LSE and Cambridge goes back to the School's roots when LSE's Edwin Cannan
(1861â€“1935), Professor of Economics, and Cambridge's Professor of Political
Economy, Alfred Marshall (1842â€“1924), the leading economist of the day,
argued about the bedrock matter of economics and whether the subject should be
considered as an organic whole. (Marshall disapproved of LSE's separate listing
of pure theory and its insistence on economic history.) The dispute also
concerned the question of the economist's role, and whether this should be as a
detached expert or a practical adviser. LSE and Cambridge economists worked
jointly in the 1920sâ€”for example, the London and Cambridge Economic
Serviceâ€”but the 1930s brought a return to the dispute as LSE and Cambridge
argued over the solution to the economic depression. The LSE's Robbins and
Hayek, and Cambridge's Keynes were chief figures in the intellectual
disagreement between the institutions. The controversy widened from deflation
versus demand management as a solution to the economic problems of the day, to
broader conceptions of economics and macroeconomics. Robbins and Hayek's views
were based on the Austrian School of Economics with its emphasis on free trade
and anti-interventionism, while Keynes advanced a brand of economic theory now
known as Keynesianism which advocates active policy responses by the public
sector. During World War II, the School decamped from London to University of
Cambridge, occupying buildings belonging to Peterhouse. The school's arms,
including its motto and beaver mascot, were adopted in February 1922, on the
recommendation of a committee of twelve, including eight students, which was
established to research the matter. The latin motto, ""Rerum cognoscere
causas"", is taken from Virgil's Georgics. Its English translation is "to Know
the Causes of Things" and it was suggested by Professor Edwin Cannan. The
beaver mascot was selected for its associations with "foresight,
constructiveness and industrious behaviour". 21st century. Recently, the school
has been active in British government proposals to introduce compulsory ID
cards, researching into the associated costs of the scheme, and shifting public
and government opinion on the issue. The institution is also popular with
politicians and MPs to launch new policy, legislation and manifesto pledges,
prominently with the launch of the Liberal Democrats Manifesto Conference under
Nick Clegg on 12 January 2008. LSE is heavily targeted by employers and
graduates are in great demand despite the current economic climate. The vast
majority of LSE students are engaged in employment or further study within 6
months of graduating and the School is listed first for employability in the
2012 Sunday Times Good University Guide. The most common sectors for LSE
graduates to work in within 6 months of graduating are banking, finance and
accountancy; development, NGOs and international organisations; Consultancy;
Education; and central and local government. In addition, the average starting
salary of graduates who have completed undergraduate degrees with LSE is
significantly higher than the overall national average salary of Â£26,200, at
over Â£30,000. Over the years the School has continued to expand around
Houghton Street. A recent fund-raising scheme, called the "Campaign for LSE"
raised over Â£100Â million in one of the largest university fund-raising
exercises ever seen in Britain. In 2003, LSE purchased the former Public
Trustee building at 24 Kingsway. This has been redeveloped by Sir Nicholas
Grimshaw into an ultra-modern educational building, known as the "New Academic
Building" at a total cost of over Â£45Â million, and has increased the campus
space by . The building opened for teaching in October 2008, with an official
opening by Her Majesty the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh on 5 November 2008.
The School has an ongoing capital investment project and has recently purchased
a number of sites to add to its portfolio. In November 2009, LSE purchased the
freehold of both Sardinia House, overlooking Lincoln's Inn Fields, and the Ye
Old White Horse public house. In October 2010 it was announced the university
had been successful in acquiring the freehold of the grade-II listed Land
Registry Building adjacent to Lincoln's Inn. It is currently also embarking on
a Â£30Â million project to build a new students' centre, housing the Students'
Union, careers service, accommodation office, events spaces, cafes, bars and a
club. The building will be located on the St Philips site, which was demolished
in Summer 2010. In November 2011, the New Students' Centre was recognised a low
environmental impact building, receiving 'Outstanding' status under BREEAM, and
in 2012 was one of three winners of the New London Award (NLA) in the Education
category. A new Â£25Â million student residence is also expected to be built in
Southwark by 2012. Professor Craig Calhoun took up the post of Director in
September 2012. Its previous Director, Professor Judith Rees, is also chair of
the school's Grantham Institute on Climate Change, an adviser to the World Bank
as well as sitting on the UN Secretary General's Advisory Board on Water and
Sanitation and the International Scientific Advisory Council (ISAC). She is
also a former Convenor of the Department of Geography and Environment, and
served as Deputy Director from 1998â€“2004. Her predecessor, Sir Howard Davies
stepped down after controversy regarding the School's links to the Libyan
regime. In February 2011, LSE had to deal with controversy regarding the
authorship of the PhD thesis of one of Muammar Gaddafi's sons, Saif al-Islam
Gaddafi, and also a Â£1.5m donation to university. In March 2011, Howard Davies
resigned over allegations about the institution's links to the Libyan regime.
The LSE announced in a statement that it had accepted his resignation with
"great regret" and that it had set up an external inquiry into the school's
relationship with the Libyan regime and Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, to be conducted
by the former lord chief justice Harry Woolf. Campus. LSE moved to its present
day central London campus at Clare Market and Houghton Street in Westminster,
off the Aldwych and next to the Royal Courts of Justice and Temple Bar in 1902.
In 1920, King George V laid the foundation stone of the Old Building, the
principal building of LSE. The School has gradually increased its ownership of
adjacent buildings, creating an almost continuous campus between Kingsway and
the Royal Courts of Justice. Today, the campus consists of approximately thirty
buildings, connections between which have been established on an ad-hoc basis,
with often confusing results. The floor levels of buildings do not always
equate, leading to an individual being on a different "floor" after passing
through a hallway. The campus also has a series of extension bridges between
buildings created high on the upper floors to connect several buildings. The
school is also noted by its numerous statues, either animals or surrealist,
often donated by alumni. The LSE's campus went through a renewal under former
Director Anthony Giddens (1996â€“2003), with the redevelopment of Connaught and
Clement Houses on the Aldwych, and the purchase of buildings including the
George IV public house, which had been nestled amongst the campus for decades,
but is now owned by LSE. Recent projects have included the Â£35Â million
renovation of the Lionel Robbins Building, which houses the British Library of
Political and Economic Science, LSE's Library and a brand new Student Services
Centre in the Old Building as well as LSE Garrick on the junction of Houghton
Street and Aldwych. In 2009, the School purchased Sardinia House on Lincoln's
Inn Fields and the "Ye Olde White Horse" public house, adjacent to Parish Hall,
as new additions to the estate. Since 2010, LSE has also leased premises behind
the Library in New Court. There is both a medical centre and a dentist on
campus. The New Academic Building (the former Public Trust Building on
Kingsway), is one of the most environmentally friendly university buildings in
the UK. With an entrance overlooking Lincoln's Fields, the new building has
dramatically increased the size of the campus, incorporating four new lecture
theatres, the Departments of Management and Law, computer and study facilities.
The British Library of Political and Economic Science (BLPES) is the current
operating Library of LSE. It is the home of the world's largest social and
political sciences Library, containing over 4.7Â million volumes on its
shelves. This also makes it the second largest single entity library in
Britain, after the British Library at King's Cross. There is also the smaller
Shaw Library, on the top floor of the Old Building, which hosts the Fabian
Window and as well as concerts and events. Other buildings of note include the
Peacock Theatre, the School's main lecture theatre, seating 999 persons, which
by night serves as the West End base of Sadler's Wells. The venue is a member
of the Society of London Theatre, and has hosted many dance, musical and
dramatic productions, as well as serving as the base for many of LSE' public
lectures and discussions. Location and transport. The LSE is situated in the
City of Westminster between Covent Garden, Aldwych and Temple Bar, bordering
the City of London. It resides adjacent to the Royal Courts of Justice,
Lincoln's Inn and Kingsway, in what used to be Clare Market. The School lies
within the London Congestion Charging zone. The nearest London Underground
stations are Holborn, Temple and Covent Garden. Charing Cross, at the Trafalgar
Square end of Strand, and the City Thameslink entrance at Ludgate Hill are the
nearest mainline stations, whilst London Waterloo is a walk or bus across the
River Thames. Buses to Aldwych, Kingsway and the Royal Courts of Justice will
all stop a short distance from the School. Organisation and administration.
Governance. The LSE is incorporated under the Companies Act as a company
limited by guarantee and is an exempt charity within the meaning of Schedule
Two of the Charities Act 1993. The principal governance bodies of the LSE are:
the LSE Council; the Court of Governors; the Academic Board; and the Director
and Directorâ€™s Management Team. The LSE Council is responsible for strategy
and its members are company directors of the School. It has specific
responsibilities in relation to areas including: the monitoring of
institutional performance; finance and financial sustainability; audit
arrangements; estate strategy; human resource and employment policy; health and
safety; "educational character and mission", and student experience. The
Council is supported in carrying out its role by a number of committees which
report directly to it. The Court of Governors deals with certain constitutional
matters and has pre-decision discussions on key policy issues and the
involvement of individual governors in the School's activities. The Court has
the following formal powers: the appointment of members of Court, its
subcommittees and of the Council; election of the Chair and Vice Chairs of the
Court and Council and honorary fellows of the School; the amendment of the
Memorandum and Articles of Association; and the appointment of external
auditors. The Academic Board is the LSE's principal academic body, and
considers all major issues of general policy affecting the academic life of the
School and its development. It is chaired by the Director, with staff and
student membership, and is supported by its own structure of committees. The
Vice Chair of the Academic Board serves as a non-director member of the Council
and makes a termly report to the Council. The Director is the head of the LSE
and its chief executive officer, responsible for executive management and
leadership on academic issues. The Director reports to and is accountable to
the Council. The Director is also the accountable officer for the purposes of
the Higher Education Funding Council for England Financial Memorandum. The
Schoolâ€™s current Director is Professor Craig Calhoun. Finances. In the
financial year ended 31 July 2011, LSE had a total income (including share of
joint ventures) of Â£233.7 million (2009/10 â€“ Â£220.92 million) and total
expenditure of Â£214.84 million (2009/10 â€“ Â£201.69 million). Key sources of
income included Â£114.71 million from tuition fees and education contracts
(2009/10 â€“ Â£106.61 million), Â£29.65 million from Funding Council grants
(2009/10 â€“ Â£30.62 million), Â£24.07 million from research grants and
contracts (2009/10 â€“ Â£23.87 million) and Â£6.04 million from endowment and
investment income (2009/10 â€“ Â£4.81 million). During the 2010/11 financial
year LSE had a capital expenditure of Â£47.0 million (2009/10 â€“ Â£10.6
million). At year end LSE had endowments of Â£81.72 million (2009/10 â€“
Â£72.63 million) and total net assets of Â£365.59 million (2009/10 â€“ Â£337.23
million). Academics. Admissions. Admission to the LSE is highly competitive. In
2011, the school received 17,654 applications for 1,271 undergraduate places.
This means that there were 13.8 applicants per place. Most programmes give out
typical offers of A*AA-AAB at A-Level, with new undergraduates in 2011 arriving
with an average of 512 UCAS points (equivalent to over AAAA at A-level).
Entrance standards are also high for postgraduate students, who are required to
have (for taught Master's courses) a First Class or Upper Second Class UK
honours degree, or its foreign equivalent. The applications success rate for
postgraduate programmes varies, although most of the major courses, including
Economics and Law, consistently have an acceptance rate below 10%. Some of the
very top premium programmes such as the MSc Finance and the MSc Financial
Mathematics have admission rates below 5%. Programmes and degrees. The LSE is
dedicated solely to the study and research of social sciences, and is the only
university in the United Kingdom to be so. LSE awards a range of academic
degrees spanning bachelors, masters and PhDs. The postnominals awarded are the
degree abbreviations used commonly among British universities. The School
offers over 140 MSc programmes, 5 MPA programmes, an LLM, 30 BSc programmes, an
LLB and 4 BA programmes (including International History and Geography). LSE is
the only British university to teach a BSc in Economic History. Other subjects
pioneered by LSE include anthropology, criminology, social psychology,
sociology and social policy; with international relations being first taught as
a discipline at LSE. Courses are split across more than thirty research centres
and nineteen departments, plus a Language Centre. Since programmes are all
within the social sciences, they closely resemble each other, and undergraduate
students usually take at least one course module in a subject outside of their
degree for their first and second years of study, promoting a broader education
in the social sciences. At undergraduate level, certain departments are very
small (90 students across three years of study), ensuring small lecture sizes
and a more hands-on approach than other institutions. Since September 2010, it
has been compulsory for first year undergraduates to participate in LSE 100:
Understanding the Causes of Things alongside normal studies. In conjunction
with New York University's Stern School and HEC Paris the LSE also offers an
executive global MBA called TRIUM. This is currently globally ranked 2nd by the
Financial Times and strives to meld the strong social sciences, management
strategy and financial accumen providing senior executives a well rounded view.
From 1902, following its absorption into the University of London, and up until
2007, all degrees were awarded by the federal university, in common with all
other colleges of the university. This system was changed in 2007 in order to
enable some colleges to award their own degrees. LSE was granted the power to
begin awarding its own degrees from June 2008. Students graduating between June
2008 and June 2010 have the option of receiving a degree either from the
University of London or the School. All undergraduate students entering from
2007 and postgraduate students from 2009 received an LSE degree. The LSE does
not award annual honorary degrees in common with other universities. In its
113-year history, the School has awarded fifteen honorary doctorates to
established figures such as Nelson Mandela (Doctor of Science, Economics).
Research. In the 2008 Research Assessment Exercise, LSE had the highest
percentage of world-leading research of any British higher education
institution. The Independent Newspaper placed LSE first in the country for its
research, on the basis that 35% of its faculty were judged to be doing world
leading work, compared to just 32% for both Oxford and Cambridge respectively.
Furthermore, according to the Times Newspaper, LSE ranks as joint-second (with
Oxford) by grade point average across the fourteen units of assessment
submitted, behind only Cambridge. According to these RAE results, LSE is the
UK's top research university in Anthropology, Economics, Law, Social Policy and
European Studies. LSE IDEAS. LSE IDEAS is a research centre for the study of
international affairs, diplomacy and grand strategy at the LSE. It was founded
by Prof Michael Cox and Prof Arne Westad in 2008. Its pre-cursor was the Cold
War Studies Centre (CWSC), also co-founded by Prof Cox and Prof Westad. In a
global survey, the center has been ranked as world's fourth-best university
think tank, after Harvard University's Belfer Center for Science and
International Affairs, Stanford University's Hoover Institution, and the Center
for International Development, again at Harvard. Partnerships. The LSE has
university-wide partnerships in teaching and research with Columbia University
in New York, Tsinghua, Peking University and Sciences Po Paris, with whom it
offers various joint degrees. For example, the highly rated International
History department offers a joint MA in International and World History with
Columbia University and an MSc in International Affairs with Peking University,
with graduates earning degrees from both institutions. LSE also offers various
joint degrees with other universities. It offers the TRIUM Global Executive MBA
programme jointly with Stern School of Business of New York University and HEC
School of Management, Paris. It is divided into six modules held in five
international business locations over a 16-month period. LSE also offers a Dual
Master of Public Administration (MPA) with Global Public Policy Network schools
such as Sciences Po Paris, the Hertie School of Governance and National
University of Singapore. The school also runs exchange programmes with the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Fuqua School of Business,
Kellogg School of Management, Stern School of Business and Yale School of
Management as part of its MSc in International Management and an undergraduate
student exchange programme with the University of California, Berkeley in
Political Science. It is however distincly not part of the E.U. wide Erasmus
Programme. The School has formed formal academic agreements with five
international universities â€“ Columbia University (New York City), Sciences Po
(Paris), the University of Cape Town, Peking University (Beijing) and the
National University of Singapore, in addition to numerous research agreements
with Oxford, Harvard, Yale, Chicago, NYU, Imperial College and UC Berkeley.
Libraries and archives. The main library of LSE is the British Library of
Political and Economic Science (BLPES). It is the home of the world's largest
social and political sciences Library. Founded in 1896, it has been the
national social science library of the United Kingdom and Commonwealth and all
its collections have been recognised for their outstanding national and
international importance and awarded 'Designation' status by the Museums
Libraries and Archives Council (MLA). BLPES responds to around 6,500 visits
from students and staff each day. In addition, it provides a specialist
international research collection, serving over 12,000 registered external
users each year. The Shaw Library, housed in an impressive room in the Old
Building contains the university's collection of fiction and general readings
for leisure and entertainment. The Fabian Window is also located within the
library, having been unveiled by Tony Blair in 2003. Additionally, students are
permitted to use the libraries of any other University of London college, and
the extensive facilities at Senate House Library, situated in Russell Square.
LSE Summer School. The LSE Summer School was established in 1989 and has
expanded extensively with more than 4,400 participants in 2011. The Summer
School offers over 60 courses, from the Accounting & Finance, Economics,
English Language, Law, International Relations, Government & Society and
Management departments, and takes place over two sessions of three weeks, in
July and August each year. LSE also offers LSE-PKU Summer School in
collaboration with Peking University. Courses from both Summer Schools can be
used as credit against other qualifications. In 2011 the Summer School accepted
students from over 115 countries, from some of the top colleges and
universities in the world, as well as professionals from several national banks
and major financial institutions. As well as the courses, accommodation in LSE
halls of residence is available, and the Summer School provides a full social
programme including guest lectures and receptions. Public lectures. LSE is
famous for its programme of public lectures. These lectures, organised by the
LSE Events office, are open to students, alumni and the general public. As well
as leading academics and commentators, speakers frequently include prominent
national and international figures such as ambassadors, CEOs, Members of
Parliament, and heads of state. Recent speakers at the LSE have included Kofi
Annan, Hilary Benn, Ben Bernanke, Tony Blair, Hazel Blears, Cherie Booth,
Gordon Brown, David Cameron, Noam Chomsky, Bill Clinton, Tom Halford, Alistair
Darling, Niall Ferguson, Joschka Fischer, Vicente Fox, Milton Friedman, Muammar
al-Gaddafi, John Lewis Gaddis, Alan Greenspan, Tenzin Gyatso, Will Hutton, Paul
Krugman, Richard Lambert, Jens Lehmann, Lee Hsien Loong, John Major, Nelson
Mandela, Mary McAleese, Dmitri Medvedev, John Atta Mills, Mario Monti, George
Osborne, Robert Peston, SebastiÃ¡n PiÃ±era, Kevin Rudd, Jeffrey Sachs, Gerhard
Schroeder, Carlos D. Mesa, Luiz InÃ¡cio Lula da Silva, Costas Simitis, George
Soros, Lord Stern, Jack Straw, Aung San Suu Kyi, Baroness Thatcher, Archbishop
Desmond Tutu and Rowan Williams. The LSE has also introduced LSE Live, which is
a series of public lectures that are broadcast live over the internet, as well
as being open to LSE community, and occasionally to the general public.
Introduced in 2008, the series has seen many prominent speakers such as George
Soros, Thomas L. Friedman, Fareed Zakaria and Ben Bernanke, chairman of the
Federal Reserve System of the United States. In addition LSE, hosts several
business and political conferences, with prestigious speakers such as the LSE
Alternative Investment Conference. iXXi Briefings. The iXXi Briefings are
private discussions which are attended by 40 experts from within LSE and
elsewhere and are chaired by Lord Desai. At the briefings speakers talk for 15
minutes before discussion is opened to all attendees. iXXi briefings provide an
opportunity to for the LSE to exhibit its resources and engage with experts and
prominent figures. The iXXi Briefings are run by LSE Enterprise. Rankings and
reputation. The Fulbright Commission has stated that the LSE is "the leading
social science institution in the world". Domestic. Domestically, the LSE is
the only British University, alongside the University of Oxford the University
of Cambridge and the University of Warwick, to have never ranked outside the
top 10 in any newspaper compiled league table. LSE ranked 3rd overall in the
"Sunday Times University Guide" cumulative ranking over a ten year period
(1997â€“2007), and ranked 2nd in the "Complete University Guide 2012". A number
of departments also ranked among the top three in subject rankings, including
but not limited to Law (1st), Social Policy (1st), Philosophy (2nd), Economics
(3rd), Sociology (2nd), Accounting and Finance (3rd), History (3rd), Geography
(3rd). LSE graduates often score highly in the 'employment prospects' section
of guides, with students considered to have the best 'graduate prospects' of
any British university in all 2009 "Sunday Times University Guide" rankings.
International. In the THE-QS World University Rankings, the school was ranked
11th in the world in 2004 and 2005, but dropped to 66th and 67th in the 2008
and 2009 edition. The school administration asserts that the fall was due to a
controversial change in methodology which hindered social science institutions.
In January 2010, THE concluded that their existing methodology system with
Quacquarelli Symonds was flawed in such a way that it was unfairly biased
against certain schools, including LSE. A representative of Thomson Reuters,
THE's new partner, commented on the controversy: ""LSE stood at only 67th in
the last Times Higher Education-QS World University Rankings â€“ some mistake
surely? Yes, and quite a big one"." Nevertheless, the school was the only one
of its type to finish in the top 200 universities, and was thus stated to be
the best "medium sized specialised research university" in the world.
Incidentally LSE was ranked 29th globally for Reputation and often scores well
in the social science specific section of the ranking. Indeed, it has never
finished out of the top 5 in the world; ranking 5th, 4th, 3rd and 2nd in the
last five years. LSE also appears high up in the employer review surveys and
since the rankings inception, has never finished outside of the world's top 5
universities in the eyes of employers. Student life. Student body. In the 2011-
12 academic year there were 9,300 full-time students and around 700 part-time
students at the School. Of these, approximately two-thirds came from outside
the United Kingdom. LSE has a highly international student body,with over 145
countries represented. Over half of LSE's students are postgraduates, an
unusually high proportion in comparison with other British institutions. There
is approximately an equal split between genders with 51% male and 49% female
students. Students' Union. LSE has its own students' union (LSESU), which is
affiliated to the National Union of Students and the National Postgraduate
Committee, as well as to the University of London Union. The students' union is
often regarded as the most politically active in Britain â€“ a reputation it
has held since the well documented LSE student riots in 1966â€“67 and
1968â€“69, which made international headlines. The Union is responsible for the
organisation and undertaking of entertainment events and student societies, as
well as student welfare and issues regarding accommodation and other matters.
As of 2010, there are over 200 societies, 40 sports clubs, a Raising and Giving
(RAG) branch and a thriving media group. The Media Group is a collective of
four distinct outlets, each with their own history and identity. A weekly
student newspaper "The Beaver", is published each Tuesday during term time and
is amongst the oldest student newspapers in the country. The Union's radio
station" Pulse!" has existed since 1999, and the television station "LooSE
Television" has existed since 2005. The "Clare Market Review" one of Britain's
oldest student publications was revived in 2008 and has gone on to win many
national awards. Students also get access to "London Student", which is
published by the University of London Union. In various forms, RAG Week has
been operating since 1980, when it was started by then Student Union
Entertainments Officer and now New Zealand MP Tim Barnett. Affiliated with
LSESU, LSE Athletics Union is the body responsible for all sporting activity
within the university. It is a member of British Universities & Colleges Sport
(BUCS). In distinction to the "blues" awarded for sporting excellence at Oxford
and Cambridge, LSE's outstanding athletes are awarded "purples". Student
housing. There are 11 LSE halls of residence in and around central London, of
which 10 are owned and operated by LSE and one is operated by Shaftesbury
Student Housing. Together, these residences accommodate over 3,500 students. In
addition, there are also eight intercollegiate halls shared with other
constituent colleges of the University of London, which accommodate
approximately 25% of LSE's first-year undergraduate students. The School
guarantees accommodation for all first-year undergraduate students, regardless
of their present address. Many of the School's larger postgraduate population
are also catered for, with some specific residences available for postgraduate
living. Whilst none of the residences are located at the Houghton Street
campus, the closest, Grosvenor House is within a five-minute walk from the
School in Covent Garden, whilst the farthest residences (Nutford and Butler's
Wharf) are approximately forty-five minutes by Tube or Bus. Each residence
accommodates a mixture of students both domestic and foreign, male and female,
and, usually, undergraduate and postgraduate. New undergraduate students
(including General Course students) occupy approximately 36% of all spaces,
with postgraduates taking approximately 56% and continuing students about 8% of
places. The largest LSE student residence, Bankside, opened in 1996 and
accommodates 617 students across eight floors overlooking the River Thames and
located behind the popular Tate Modern art gallery on the south bank of the
River. The second-largest residence is based in High Holborn, was opened in
1995 and is approximately 10Â minutes walk from the main campus. Other
accommodation is located well for London's attractions and facilities â€“
Butler's Wharf is situated next to Tower Bridge, Rosebery Hall is located in
the London Borough of Islington close to Sadler's Wells, and Carr-Saunders
Hall, named after LSE professor is approximately 5Â minutes from Telecom Tower
in the heart of Fitzrovia. Since 2005, the School has opened three new
residences to provide accommodation for all first year students. Lilian
Knowles, independently operated in Spitalfields, is home for approximately 360
students and opened in 2006. It is located in a converted Victorian night
refuge; the remnants of which can still be seen on the outside facade. It is a
common stop on Jack the Ripper tours as one of his victims is commonly believed
to have been a one-time resident. Planning permission was sought to convert
Northumberland House, on Northumberland Avenue into a new residence on 2 June
2005, and the accommodation opened to students in October 2006. The newest
accommodation development is Northumberland House, a Grade II listed building,
located between the Strand and Thames Embankment. It was formerly a Victorian
grand hotel and lately government offices. The closest residence to the
Houghton Street campus is reserved for postgraduate students and is located on
the eastern side of Drury Lane at the crossroads of Great Queen Street and Long
Acre. Grosvenor House, converted from a Victorian office building, opened in
September 2005. The residence is unique in that all of its 169 rooms are small,
self-contained studios, with private toilet and shower facilities and a mini-
kitchen. There are also eight intercollegiate halls and some students are
selected to live in International Students House, London. Notable people. LSE
has a long list of notable alumni and staff, spanning the fields of scholarship
covered by the school. Among them are seventeen Nobel Prize winners in
Economics, Peace and Literature. The school currently has over 50 fellows of
the British Academy on its staff, while other notable former staff members
include Anthony Giddens, Harold Laski, Ralph Miliband, Michael Oakeshott, A. W.
Philips, Karl Popper, Lionel Robbins, Susan Strange and Charles Webster. Former
British Prime Minister, Clement Attlee taught at the school from 1912 to 1923,
while Ramsay MacDonald frequently gave lectures on behalf of the Fabian
Society. Mervyn King, the current Governor of the Bank of England, is also a
former professor of economics. Many alumni of the school are notable figures,
especially in the areas of politics, economics and finance. Indeed, with
regards to the political arena, as of February 2009, around 45 past or present
heads of state have studied or taught at LSE, and 28 members of the current
British House of Commons and 46 members of the current House of Lords have
either studied or taught at the school. In recent British politics, former LSE
students include Virginia Bottomley, Yvette Cooper, Edwina Currie, Frank
Dobson, Margaret Hodge and current UK Labour Party leader Ed Miliband.
Internationally, John F Kennedy (former US President), Ã“scar Arias (Costa
Rican President), Taro Aso (Prime Minister of Japan), Queen Margrethe II of
Denmark, B. R. Ambedkar (Father of Indian Constitution) K. R. Narayanan (Ex-
President of India) and Romano Prodi (Italian Prime Minister and President of
the European Commission) all studied at LSE. As of August 2010, the present
heads of government and/or state of seven countries studied at the School â€“
Colombia, Denmark, Ghana, Greece, Kenya, Kiribati and Mauritius. Moreover, in
President Barack Obama's administration, LSE has more former students than any
other university outside the US, with the White House Chief of Staff, Deputy
Chief of Staff, Budget Director, and Secretary for Homeland Security, all
having studied at the school. In fact, LSE is more represented than Yale,
Princeton, Stanford and MIT. Successful businesspeople who studied at LSE
include Tony Fernandes, Delphine Arnault, Stelios Haji-Ioannou, Spiros Latsis,
David Rockefeller, Maurice Saatchi, George Soros and Michael S. Jeffries. LSE
in fiction and popular culture. Notable fictitious alumni include President
Josiah Bartlet from the television series "The West Wing" and Andrew Bond, the
father of Ian Fleming's James Bond and Jim Hacker, the fictitious Minister and
Prime Minister of Yes, Minister and Yes, Prime Minister (in which the Prime
Minister is regularly derided by his Permanent Secretary for not having
attended Oxford or Cambridge). The LSE features in the book, Liar's Poker by
Michael Lewis. The autobiographical book, charts how Lewis's career in
investment banking was begun while enrolled at the university. First published
in 1989, it is considered one of the books that defined Wall Street during the
1980s, along with Bryan Burrough and John Helyar's "", and the fictional "The
Bonfire of the Vanities" by Tom Wolfe. In John LeCarrÃ©'s spy novel Tinker,
Tailor, Soldier, Spy, the detention of two Czech academics at the LSE is
ordered by the character Bill Haydon. The LSE is mentioned in the film "The
Social Network", as being one of the first three UK universities to have a
Facebook network, along with Oxford and Cambridge.
