Louis XVIII of France Louis XVIII (Louis Stanislas Xavier; 17 November
1755¬ ‚Äì 16 September 1824), known as "the Desired" ("le Desir√©"), was a
Bourbon King of France and of Navarre from 1814 to 1824, omitting the Hundred
Days in 1815. Louis XVIII spent twenty-three years in exile, from 1791 to 1814,
during the French Revolution and the First French Empire, and again in 1815,
for 111 days, upon the return of Napoleon I from Elba. Until his accession to
the throne of France, Louis held the title of Count of Provence, being the
brother of King Louis XVI. On the 21 September 1792, the National Convention
abolished the monarchy and deposed King Louis XVI, who was later executed by
guillotine. When the young Louis XVII, Louis XVI's son, died in prison in June
1795, Louis XVIII succeeded his nephew as titular King, although the monarchy
had been disestablished. During the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era,
Louis XVIII lived in exile in Prussia, the United Kingdom and Russia. When the
Sixth Coalition finally defeated Napoleon, Louis XVIII was restored to what he,
and Royalists, considered his rightful place. This period was marked by an
Ultra-royalist reaction. However Napoleon escaped from his exile in Elba,
marched on Paris and restored the French Empire. Louis XVIII fled and a Seventh
Coalition declared war on the French Empire, defeated Napoleon and for a second
time restored Louis XVIII on the French throne. In 1823, Louis XVIII sent an
expeditionary corps, known as the "Hundred Thousand Sons of Saint Louis", in
Spain to restore the absolute King of Spain. Louis XVIII ruled as king for
slightly less than a decade. The Bourbon Restoration regime was a
constitutional monarchy (unlike the "Ancien R√©gime", which was absolute). As a
constitutional monarch, Louis XVIII's royal prerogative was reduced
substantially by the Charter of 1814, France's new constitution. Louis had no
children; therefore, upon his death, the crown passed to his brother, Charles,
Count of Artois. Louis XVIII was the last French monarch to die while reigning.
Youth. Louis Stanislas Xavier, titled "comte de Provence" at birth, was born on
17 November 1755 in the Palace of Versailles, the son of Louis, Dauphin of
France, and of his wife, Princess Maria Josepha of Saxony. He was the grandson
of the reigning King Louis XV. As a son of the Dauphin he was a Fils de France.
Louis Stanislas was christened Louis Stanislas Xavier six months after his
birth, in accordance with Bourbon family tradition, being nameless before his
baptism. By this act, he became also a Knight of the Order of the Holy Spirit.
The name of "Louis" was bestowed because it was typical of a Prince of France;
Stanislas after his great-grandfather King Stanis≈Çaw Leszczy≈Ñski of Poland;
and Xavier for Saint Francis Xavier, whom his mother's family held as one of
their patron saints. At the time of his birth, Louis Stanislas was fourth in
line to the throne of France, behind his father, the Dauphin; and his two elder
brothers, Louis Joseph Xavier, Duke of Burgundy and Louis Auguste, Duke of
Berry. The former died in 1761, leaving Louis Auguste as heir apparent until
the Dauphin's own premature death in 1765. The two deaths elevated Louis
Stanislas to second in the line of succession, while Louis Auguste acquired the
title of "Dauphin". Louis Stanislas found comfort in his governess, Madame de
Marsan, Governess of the Children of France, ("Gouvernante des Enfants de
France"), as he was her favourite among his siblings. Louis Stanislas was taken
away from his governess when he turned seven, age at which the education of
boys of royal blood and of the nobility was turned over to men. Antoine de
Qu√©len de Stuer de Caussade, Duke of La Vauguyon, a friend of his father, was
named his governor. Louis Stanislas was an intelligent boy, excelling in
classics. His education was of the same quality and consistency as that of his
older brother, Louis Auguste, despite the fact that Louis Auguste was heir and
Louis Stanislas was not. Louis Stanislas' education was quite religious in
nature, several of his teachers being ecclesiastics. La Vauguyon drilled into
young Louis Stanislas and his brothers the way he thought princes should "know
how to withdraw themselves, to like to work," and "to know how to reason
correctly". In April 1771, Louis Stanislas's education was formally concluded,
and his own independent household was established, which astounded
contemporaries with its extravagance: in 1773, the number of servants reached
390. In the same month his household was founded, Louis was granted several
titles by his grandfather, Louis XV: Duke of Anjou, Count of Maine, Count of
Perche and Count of Senoches. On 17 December 1773 he was ordained as Grand
Master of the Order of St. Lazarus. Marriage. On 14 May 1771, Louis Stanislas
married Princess Maria Giuseppina of Savoy. Marie Jos√©phine (as she was known
in France) was a daughter of the then Duke and Duchess of Savoy, future king
Victor Amadeus III of Sardinia. A luxurious ball followed the wedding on 20
May. Louis Stanislas was repulsed by his wife, the new Countess of Provence,
who was considered to be ugly, tedious and ignorant of the court at Versailles.
The marriage remained unconsummated; biographers disagree about the reason,
maintaining that it was due to Louis Stanislas' alleged impotence (according to
biographer Antonia Fraser) or his unwillingness to sleep with his wife, due to
her poor personal hygiene. She never brushed her teeth, plucked her eyebrows,
or used any perfumes. At the time of his marriage, Louis Stanislas was obese
and waddled instead of walked. He never exercised and continued to eat enormous
amounts of food. Despite the fact that Louis Stanislas was not infatuated with
his wife, he boasted that the two enjoyed vigorous conjugal relations¬ ‚Äî such
declarations were held in low esteem by courtiers at Versailles. He also
proclaimed his wife to be pregnant, merely to spite Louis Auguste and his wife
Archduchess Marie Antoinette of Austria, who had not yet consummated their
marriage. The Dauphin and Louis Stanislas did not enjoy a harmonious
relationship, and often quarrelled, as did their wives. Louis Stanislas
impregnated his wife in 1774, having conquered his aversion to Marie
Jos√©phine. However, the pregnancy ended in a miscarriage. A second pregnancy
in 1781 was also miscarried. The marriage was, ultimately, childless. At his
brother's court. On 27 April 1774, Louis XV fell ill after having contracted
smallpox, and died the following 10 May. The Dauphin, Louis Auguste, succeeded
his grandfather as King Louis XVI. Louis Stanislas longed for political
influence. He attempted to gain admittance to the King‚Äôs council in 1774,
ultimately failing. Louis Stanislas was left in a political limbo that he
called "a gap of 12 years in my political life". Louis XVI granted Louis
Stanislas revenues from the Duchy of Alen√ßon in December 1774. The duchy was
given to enhance Louis Stanislas' prestige; however, his appanage turned over
only 300,000 livres "per annum", an amount much lower than it had been at its
peak in the fourteenth century. King Louis XVI, his brothers, and Marie
Antoinette became fellows of the masonic lodge Trois Fr√®res √  l'Orient de
Versailles. Louis Stanislas travelled more through France than other members of
the royal family, who rarely left the √éle-de-France. In 1774, he accompanied
his sister Madame Clotilde to Chamb√©ry, on the journey to meet her bridegroom
Charles Emmanuel, Prince of Piedmont, heir to the throne of Sardinia. In 1775,
he visited Lyon and also his spinster aunts, Madame Ad√©la√Øde and Madame
Victoire, while they were taking the waters at Vichy. The four provincial tours
that Louis Stanislas took before the year 1791 amounted to a total of three
months. On 5 May 1778, Dr. Lassonne, Marie Antoinette's private physician,
confirmed her pregnancy. On 19 December 1778, the Queen gave birth to a
daughter, who was named Marie-Th√©r√®se Charlotte de France, and given the
honorific title Madame Royale. The birth of a girl came as a relief to the
"comte de Provence", who kept his position as heir to Louis XVI, since Salic
Law excluded women from acceding to the throne of France. However, Louis
Stanislas did not remain heir to the throne much longer, as on 22 October 1781,
Marie Antoinette gave birth to the Dauphin, Louis Joseph. Louis Stanislas and
the Comte d‚ÄôArtois served as godfathers by proxy for the Holy Roman Emperor,
the Queen‚Äôs brother. When Marie Antoinette gave birth to her second son,
Louis Charles, in March 1785, Louis Stanislas slid further down the line of
succession. In 1780, Anne Nompar de Caumont de La Force, comtesse de Balbi
entered the service of Marie Jos√©phine. Louis Stanislas soon fell in love with
his wife's new lady-in-waiting, and installed her as his mistress, which
resulted in the couple's already small affection for each other cooling
entirely. Louis Stanislas commissioned a pavilion for his mistress on a parcel
that became known as the "Parc Balbi", near the "Pi√®ce d‚Äôeau des Suisses"
and the "Potager du Roi" at Versailles. Louis Stanislas lived a quiet and
sedentary lifestyle at this point, not having a great deal to do since his
self-proclaimed political exclusion in 1774. He kept himself occupied with his
vast library of over 11,000 books at Balbi's pavilion, reading for several
hours each morning. In the early 1780, he also incurred huge debts totaling
10¬ million livres, which his brother Louis XVI paid for him. An Assembly of
Notables (the members consisted of magistrates, mayors, nobles and clergy) was
convened in February 1787 to ratify the financial reforms sought by the
Controller-General of Finance Charles Alexandre de Calonne. This provided Louis
Stanislas, who abhorred the radical reforms proposed by Calonne, the
opportunity he had long been waiting for to establish himself in politics. The
reforms proposed a new property tax, and new elected provincial assemblies that
would have a say in local taxation. Calonne's proposition was rejected outright
by the notables, and, as a result, Louis XVI dismissed him. The Archbishop of
Toulouse, √âtienne Charles de Lom√©nie de Brienne, acquired Calonne's ministry.
Brienne attempted to salvage Calonne's reforms, but ultimately failed to
convince the notables to approve them. A frustrated Louis XVI dissolved the
assembly. Brienne's reforms were then submitted to the "Parlement de Paris" in
the hopes that they would be approved. (A "parlement" was responsible for
ratifying the King‚Äôs edicts. Each province had its own "parlement", but the
"parlement de Paris" was the most significant of all.) The "Parlement de Paris"
refused to accept Brienne‚Äôs proposals, and pronounced that any new taxation
would have to be approved by an Estates-General (the nominal parliament of
France). Louis XVI and Brienne took a hostile stance against the "parlement's"
rejection, and Louis XVI had to implement a "Lit de justice" (which
automatically registered an edict in the "Parlement de Paris") to ratify the
desired reforms. On 8 May, Jean-Jacques Duval d'Epr√©mesnil and Goislard de
Montsabert, two of the leading members of the "Parlement de Paris" were
arrested. There was rioting in Brittany, Provence, Burgundy and B√©arn in
reaction to their arrest. This unrest was engineered by local magistrates and
nobles, who enticed the people to revolt against the "Lit de Justice", which
was quite unfavourable to the nobles and magistrates. The clergy also joined
the provincial cause, and condemned Brienne's tax reforms. Brienne conceded
defeat in July and agreed to calling the Estates-General to meet in 1789. He
resigned from his post in August and was replaced by the Swiss magnate Jacques
Necker. In November 1788, a second Assembly of Notables was convened by Jacques
Necker, to consider the makeup of the next Estates-General. The "Parlement de
Paris" recommended that the Estates should be the same as they were at the last
assembly, in 1614 (this would mean that the clergy and nobility would have more
representation than the Third Estate). The notables rejected the "dual
representation" proposal. Louis Stanislas was the only notable to vote to
increase the size of the Third Estate. Necker disregarded the notables'
judgment, and convinced Louis XVI to grant the extra representation¬ ‚Äî Louis
duly obliged on 27 December. The outbreak of the French Revolution. The
Estates-General were convened in May 1789 to ratify financial reforms. Louis
Stanislas favoured a stalwart position against the Third Estate and its demands
for tax reform. On 17 June, the Third Estate declared itself a National
Assembly, an Assembly not of the Estates, but of the People. Louis Stanislas
urged the King to act strongly against the declaration, while the King's
popular minister, Jacques Necker, intended to compromise with the new assembly.
Louis XVI was characteristically indecisive. On 9 July, the assembly declared
itself a National Constituent Assembly, that would give France a Constitution.
On 11 July, Louis XVI dismissed Jacques Necker, which led to widespread rioting
across Paris. On 12 July, the sabre charge of Charles-Eug√®ne de Lorraine,
prince de Lambesc's cavalry regiment, the "Royal-Allemand", on a crowd gathered
at the Tuileries gardens, sparked the Storming of the Bastille two days later.
On 16 July, the "comte d‚ÄôArtois" left France with his wife and children,
along with many other courtiers. Artois and his family took up residence in
Turin, the capital city of his father-in-law‚Äôs Kingdom of Sardinia, with the
Cond√© family. Louis Stanislas decided to remain at Versailles. When the royal
family plotted to abscond from Versailles to Metz, Louis Stanislas advised the
King not to leave, to which the latter duly agreed. The royal family was ripped
away from their Palace at Versailles, the day after the 5 October 1789 women's
march on Versailles. In Paris, the "Comte" and his wife lodged in the
Luxembourg Palace, while the rest of the royal family stayed in the Tuileries
Palace. In March 1791, the National Assembly created a law outlining the
regency of Louis Charles in case his father died while he was still too young
to reign. The law created the potential regency as follows: Louis Charles'
nearest male relative in France (presently the "comte de Provence" Louis
Stanislas), and after him, the regency would be given to the "duc
d‚ÄôOrl√©ans", and if he were unavailable, the regency would go to election.
The "comte de Provence" and his wife fled to the Austrian Netherlands in
conjunction with the royal family‚Äôs failed Flight to Varennes in June 1791.
Exile. The early years. When the "comte de Provence" arrived in the Low
Countries, he proclaimed himself "de facto" regent of France. Louis Stanislas
exploited a document that he and Louis XVI had written before the latter's
failed escape to Varennes. The document gave Louis Stanislas the regency in the
event of his brother's death, or inability to perform his role as King. Louis
Stanislas would join the other princes-in-exile at Coblenz soon after his
escape. It was there that the comte d‚ÄôArtois, the Cond√©s and the comte de
Provence, proclaimed that their objective was to invade France. Louis XVI was
greatly annoyed by his brothers' behaviour. Provence sent emissaries to various
European courts asking for financial aid, soldiers, and munition. Artois
secured a castle for the court in exile in the Electorate of Trier, where their
maternal uncle, Clemens Wenceslaus of Saxony, was the Archbishop-Elector. Louis
Stanislas' rallying bore fruit when the rulers of Prussia and Austria gathered
at Dresden. They released the Declaration of Pillnitz in August 1791, which
urged Europe to intervene in France if Louis XVI or his family were threatened.
Provence's endorsement of the declaration was not well received in France, by
the people, or by Louis XVI. In January 1792, the Legislative Assembly declared
that all the "√©migr√©s" were traitors to France. Their property and titles
were confiscated. The monarchy of France was abolished by the National
Convention on 21 September 1792. Louis XVI was executed in January 1793. This
left his young son, Louis Charles, as titular King Louis XVII of France. The
princes-in-exile proclaimed Louis Charles "King Louis XVII". Louis Stanislas
now unilaterally declared himself regent for his nephew, who was too young to
be head of the House of Bourbon (since the French monarchy had been abolished
for several months, Louis XVII never actually ruled, and any claim to regency
would have been in name only). Young Louis XVII's reign did not last long as he
died in June 1795. His only surviving sibling was his sister Marie-Th√©r√®se
Charlotte de France, "Madame Royale," who was not considered a candidate for
the throne because of France's traditional adherence to Salic Law. Thus on 16
June, the princes-in-exile declared the comte de Provence "King Louis XVIII".
The new King accepted their declaration soon after. Louis XVIII busied himself
drafting a manifesto in response to Louis XVII's death. The manifesto, known as
"The Declaration of Verona" was Louis XVIII's attempt to introduce the French
people to his politics. The Declaration of Verona beckoned France back into the
arms of the monarchy, "which for fourteen centuries was the glory of France".
Louis XVIII negotiated Marie-Th√©r√®se‚Äôs release from her Paris prison in
1795. Louis XVIII desperately wanted Marie-Th√©r√®se to marry her first cousin,
Louis Antoine, duc d‚ÄôAngoul√™me, the son of the comte d'Artois. Louis XVIII
deceived his niece by telling her that her parents' last wishes were for her to
marry Louis Antoine, and Marie-Th√©r√®se duly agreed to her uncle-king's
wishes. Louis XVIII was forced to abandon Verona when Napoleon Bonaparte
invaded the Republic of Venice. 1796¬ ‚Äì 1807. Louis XVIII had been vying for
the custody of his niece Marie-Th√©r√®se since her release from the Temple
Tower in December 1795. Louis succeeded when Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor
agreed to relinquish custody of Marie-Th√©r√®se in 1796. She had been staying
in Vienna with her Habsburg relatives since January 1796. Louis XVIII moved to
Blankenburg in the Duchy of Brunswick (Braunschweig) after his departure from
Verona. He lived in a modest two-bedroom apartment over a shop. Louis XVIII was
forced to leave Blankenberg when King Frederick William II of Prussia died. In
light of this, Marie-Th√©r√®se decided to wait a while longer before reuniting
with her uncle. In 1798, Emperor Paul I of Russia offered Louis the use of
Jelgava Palace in Courland (now Latvia). Paul I also guaranteed Louis's safety
and bestowed upon him a generous pension, however, the Emperor later
disregarded this allowance. Marie-Th√©r√®se finally joined Louis XVIII at
Jelgava in 1799. In the winter of 1798‚Äì1799, Louis XVIII wrote a biography on
Marie Antoinette titled "R√©flexions Historiques sur Marie Antoinette". He
attempted to recreate the court life of Versailles at Jelgava, where many old
courtiers lived, reestablishing all the court ceremonies, including the "lever"
and "coucher" (ceremonies that accompanied waking and bedding, respectively).
Marie-Th√©r√®se married her cousin Louis Antoine on 9 June 1799, at Jelgava
Palace. Louis XVIII ordered his wife to attend the marriage ceremony in
Courland without her long-time friend (and rumoured lover) Madame de
Gourbillon. Queen Marie Jos√©phine lived apart from her husband in Schleswig
Holstein. Louis XVIII was trying desperately to display to the world a united
family front. The Queen refused to leave her friend behind with unpleasant
consequences that rivalled the wedding in notoriety. Louis XVIII knew that his
nephew Louis Antoine was not compatible with Marie-Th√©r√®se. Despite this, he
still pressed for the marriage, which proved to be quite unhappy and produced
no children. Louis XVIII attempted to strike up a correspondence with Napoleon
Bonaparte (now First Consul of France) in 1800. Louis XVIII urged Bonaparte to
restore the Bourbons to their throne, but the future emperor was immune to
Louis's requests and continued to consolidate his position as ruler of France.
Louis XVIII encouraged his niece to write her memoirs, as he wished them to be
used as Bourbon propaganda. Louis also used the diaries of Louis XVI's final
attendants in the same way, in 1796 and in 1803. In January 1801, Tsar Paul
told Louis XVIII that he could no longer live in Russia. The court at Jelgava
was so low on funds that it had to auction some of its possessions to afford
the journey out of Russia. Marie-Th√©r√®se even sold a diamond necklace that
the Emperor Paul had given her as a wedding gift. Marie-Th√©r√®se persuaded
Queen Louise of Prussia to give her family refuge in Prussian territory. Louise
consented, but the Bourbons were forced to assume pseudonyms. With Louis XVIII
using the title "Comte d'Isle" (named after his estate in Languedoc), he and
his family assumed residence in Warsaw in the Lazienki Palace from 1801 to
1804, after an arduous voyage from Jelgava. It was very soon after their
arrival that they learned of the death of Paul I. Louis hoped that Paul's
successor, Alexander I of Russia, would repudiate his father's banishment of
the Bourbons (which he later did). Louis XVIII then intended to set off to the
Neapolitan court. Charles, comte d'Artois, asked Louis to send his son, Louis
Antoine, and daughter-in-law, Marie-Th√©r√®se, to him in Edinburgh. Charles had
an allowance from King George III of Great Britain and sent some money to
Louis. He requested that his son Louis Antoine and daughter-in-law Marie
Th√©r√®se to join him in Edinburgh, but they did not at this time. Louis
XVIII's court in exile was being spied on by French police. The court-in-exile
was being financed mainly by interest owed from Francis II on valuables his
aunt, Marie Antoinette, had removed from France and had to cut its expenses
significantly. In 1803, Napoleon tried to force Louis XVIII to renounce his
right to the throne of France, but Louis refused. In May 1804, Napoleon
Bonaparte declared himself Emperor of the French. Louis XVIII and his nephew
departed for Sweden in July for a Bourbon family conference, where Louis XVIII,
the comte d‚ÄôArtois, and the duc d'Angoul√™me issued a statement condemning
Napoleon's decision to declare himself emperor. The King of Prussia issued a
proclamation saying that Louis XVIII would have to leave Prussian territory,
which meant leaving Warsaw. Alexander I of Russia invited Louis XVIII to resume
residence in Jelgava. Louis XVIII had to live under less generous conditions
than those enjoyed under Paul I, and he intended to embark for England as soon
as possible. Louis XVIII created another policy in 1805: a declaration that was
far more liberal than his former ones. It repudiated his Declaration of Verona,
promised to abolish conscription, keep Napoleon I's administrative and judicial
system, reduce taxes, eliminate political prisons, and guarantee amnesty to
everyone who did not oppose a Bourbon Restoration. The opinions expressed in
the declaration were largely those of the comte d‚ÄôAvaray (Louis's best friend
in exile). Louis XVIII was forced once again to leave Jelgava when Alexander of
Russia informed him that his safety could not be guaranteed on continental
Europe. In July 1807, Louis boarded a Swedish frigate to Stockholm, bringing
with him only the duc d'Angoul√™me. Louis did not stay in Sweden for long, and
arrived in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, England, in November 1807. He took up
residence in Gosfield Hall, leased to him by the Marquess of Buckingham.
England. Louis brought his wife and Queen, Marie Jos√©phine, from mainland
Europe in 1808. Louis's stay at Gosfield Hall did not last long, and he moved
to Hartwell House in Buckinghamshire, where over one hundred courtiers were
housed. The King paid ¬£500 in rent each year to the proprietor, Sir George
Lee. The Prince Regent of the United Kingdom was very charitable to the exiled
Bourbons, granting them permanent asylum and giving them extremely generous
allowances. The comte d'Artois did not join the court-in-exile in Hartwell,
continuing his frivolous life in London. Louis's friend the comte d'Avaray left
Hartwell for Madeira in 1809, and died there in 1811. Louis replaced Avaray
with the Comte de Blacas. Louis XVIII's wife, Queen Marie Jos√©phine, died on
13 November 1810. That same winter, Louis suffered a particularly severe case
of gout, which was a recurring problem for him at Hartwell, and he had to be
put in a wheelchair. Napoleon I embarked on an invasion of Russia in 1812. This
war would prove to be the turning point in his fortunes, as the expedition
failed miserably and Napoleon was forced to retreat with an army in tatters. In
1813, Louis XVIII issued another declaration while at Hartwell. "The
Declaration of Hartwell" was more liberal than his "Declaration of 1805",
asserting that all those who served Napoleon or the Republic would not suffer
repercussions for their acts, and that the original owners of the "Biens
nationaux" (lands confiscated from the nobles and clergy during the Revolution)
were to be compensated for their losses. Allied troops entered Paris on 31
March 1814. Louis was, however, unable to walk, and so sent the comte d'Artois
to France in January 1814. Louis XVIII issued letters patent appointing Artois
Lieutenant General of the Kingdom in the event of the Bourbons being restored.
Napoleon I abdicated on 11 April, five days after his Senate had invited the
Bourbons to re-assume the throne of France. Bourbon Restoration. Restoration I.
The comte d'Artois ruled as Lieutenant-General of the Kingdom until his
brother's arrival in Paris on 3 May. Upon his return, the King displayed
himself to his subjects by creating a procession through the city. He took up
residence in the Tuileries Palace the same day. His niece, the duchesse
d'Angoul√™me, fainted at the sight of the Tuileries. Napoleon's senate called
Louis XVIII to the throne on the condition that he would accept the new
constitution, which entailed recognition of the Republic and the Empire, a
bicameral parliament elected every year, and the tri-colour flag of the
aforementioned regimes. Louis XVIII opposed the senate's constitution, and
stated that he was "disbanding the current senate in all the crimes of
Bonaparte, and appealing to the French people". The senatorial constitution was
burned in a theatre in royalist Bordeaux, and the Municipal Council of Lyon
voted for a speech that defamed the senate. The armies occupying Paris demanded
that Louis XVIII implement a constitution. The Charter of 1814 that Louis
created entailed all that Saint-Ouen wished for and more: Freedom of Religion,
a legislature composed of the Chamber of Deputies and the Chamber of Peers, the
press would enjoy a degree of freedom, the "biens nationaux" would remain in
the hands of their current owners. The constitution had 76 articles. Taxation
was to be voted on by the chambers. Catholicism was the official religion of
France. To be eligible for election to the Chamber of Deputies, one had to pay
over 1,000 francs per year in tax, and be over the age of forty. The King
appointed peers to the Chamber of Peers on a hereditary basis, or for life at
his discretion. Deputies were elected every five years, with one fifth of them
up for election each year. There were 90,000 citizens eligible to vote. Louis
XVIII signed the Treaty of Paris on 30 May 1814. The treaty gave France her
1792 borders, which extended east of the Rhine. She had to pay no war
indemnity, and the occupying armies of the Sixth Coalition withdrew instantly
from French soil. These generous terms would be reversed in the next Treaty of
Paris after the Hundred Days (Napoleon's return to France in 1815). It did not
take Louis XVIII long to go back on one of his many promises. He and his
Controller-General of Finance Baron Louis were determined not to let the
exchequer fall into deficit (there was a 75¬ million franc debt inherited from
Napoleon I), and took fiscal measures to ensure this. Louis XVIII assured the
French that the unpopular tax on tobacco, wine and salt would be abolished when
he was restored, but he failed to do so, which led to rioting in Bordeaux.
Expenditure on the army was slashed in the 1815 budget¬ ‚Äî in 1814, the
military had accounted for 55% of government spending. Louis XVIII admitted the
comte d'Artois and his nephews, the duc d'Angoul√™me, and the duc de Berry into
the King's council in May 1814, upon its establishment. The council was
informally headed by the Prince de Talleyrand. Louis XVIII took a large
interest in the goings-on of the Congress of Vienna (set up to redraw the map
of Europe after Napoleon's demise). Talleyrand represented France at the
proceedings. Louis was horrified by Prussia's intention to annex the Kingdom of
Saxony, to which he was attached because his mother was born a Saxon princess,
and he was also concerned that Prussia would dominate Germany. He also wished
the Duchy of Parma to be restored to the Parmese Bourbons, and not to Empress
Marie Louise of France, as was being suggested by the Allies. Louis also
protested the Allies' inaction in Naples, where he wanted the Napoleonic
usurper Joachim Murat removed in favour of the Neapolitan Bourbons. On behalf
of the Allies, Austria agreed to send a force to the Kingdom of Naples to
depose Murat in February 1815, when it became apparent that Murat corresponded
with Napoleon I, which was explicitly forbidden by a recent treaty. Murat never
actually wrote to Napoleon, but Louis, intent on restoring the Neapolitan
Bourbons at any cost, forged the correspondence, and subsidised the Austrian
expedition with 25¬ million francs. Louis XVIII succeeded in getting the
Neapolitan Bourbons restored immediately. Parma was bestowed upon Empress Marie
Louise for life, and the Parmese Bourbons were given the Duchy of Lucca until
the death of Marie Louise. Hundred Days. On 26 February 1815, Napoleon
Bonaparte escaped his island prison of Elba and embarked for France. He arrived
with about 1,000 troops near Cannes on 1 March. Louis XVIII was not
particularly worried by Bonaparte's excursion, as such small numbers of troops
could be easily overcome. There was, however, a major underlying problem for
the Bourbons: Louis XVIII had failed to purge the military of its Bonapartist
troops. This led to mass desertions from the Bourbon armies to Bonaparte's.
Furthermore, Louis XVIII could not join the campaign against Napoleon in the
south of France because he was suffering from another case of gout. Minister of
War Marshall Soult dispatched Louis Philippe d'Orl√©ans, the comte d'Artois and
Marshall MacDonald to apprehend Napoleon. Louis XVIII's underestimation of
Bonaparte proved disastrous. On 19 March, the army stationed outside Paris
defected to Bonaparte, leaving the city vulnerable to attack. That same day,
Louis XVIII quit the capital with a small escort at midnight. Louis decided to
go first to Lille, and then crossed the border into the United Kingdom of the
Netherlands, staying in Ghent. Other leaders, most prominently Alexander I of
Russia, debated that in case of a second victory over the French Empire, the
First Prince of the Blood Louis Philippe d'Orl√©ans should be proclaimed king
instead of Louis XVIII. However, Napoleon did not rule France again for very
long, suffering a decisive defeat at the hands of the armies of the Duke of
Wellington and Field Marshal Bl√ºcher at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June.
Leaders came to the consensus that Louis XVIII should be restored to the throne
of France. 1815¬ ‚Äì 1824. Louis XVIII returned to France promptly after
Napoleon's defeat, to ensure his second restoration "in baggage train of the
enemy", i.e. with Wellington's troops. The Duke of Wellington used King Louis's
person to open up the route to Paris, as some fortresses refused to surrender
to the Allies, but agreed to do so for their King. King Louis arrived at
Cambrai on 26 June, where he released a proclamation stating that all those who
served the Emperor in the Hundred Days would not be persecuted, except for the
"instigators". It was also acknowledged that Louis XVIII's government might
have made mistakes during the First Restoration. On 29 June, a deputation of
five from the Chamber of Deputies and the Chamber of Peers approached
Wellington about putting a foreign Prince on the throne of France. Wellington
rejected their pleas outright, declaring that "XVIII is the best way to
preserve the integrity of France". Wellington ordered the deputies to espouse
King Louis's cause. Louis XVIII entered Paris on 8 July to a boisterous
reception: the Tuileries Palace gardens were thronged with bystanders, and,
according to the Duke of Wellington, the acclamation of the crowds there were
so loud that evening, that he could not converse with the King. Louis XVIII's
role in politics from the Hundred Days onward was voluntarily diminished; he
resigned most of his duties to his council. He and his ministry embarked on a
series of reforms through the summer of 1815. The King's council, an informal
group of ministers that advised Louis XVIII, was dissolved and replaced by a
tighter knit privy council, the ""Minist√®re de Roi"". Artois, Berry and
Angoul√™me were purged from the new ""minist√®re"", and Talleyrand was
appointed as the first "Pr√©sident du Conseil", i.e. Prime Minister of France.
On 14 July, the ministry dissolved the units of the army deemed "rebellious".
Hereditary peerage was re-established to Louis's behest by the ministry. In
August elections for the Chamber of Deputies returned unfavourable results for
Talleyrand. The ministry wished for moderate deputies, but the electorate voted
almost exclusively for ultra-royalists, resulting in the "Chambre introuvable".
The duchesse d'Angoul√™me and the comte d'Artois pressured King for the
dismissal of his obsolete ministry. Talleyrand tendered his resignation on 20
September. Louis XVIII chose Armand-Emmanuel du Plessis, duc de Richelieu to be
his new Prime Minister. Richelieu was chosen because he was accepted by Louis's
family and the reactionary Chamber of Deputies. Anti-Napoleonic sentiment was
high in Southern France, and this was prominently displayed in the White
Terror. The White Terror saw the purge of all important Napoleonic officials
from government, and the execution of others. The people of France committed
barbarous acts against some of these officials. Guillaume Marie Anne Brune (a
Napoleonic marshal) was savagely assassinated, and his remains thrown into the
Rh√¥ne River. Louis XVIII deplored such illegal acts, but vehemently supported
the prosecution of those marshals that helped Napoleon I in the Hundred Days.
Louis XVIII‚Äôs government executed Napoleon's Marshal Ney, Prince de la
Moskowa, in December 1815 for treason. His confidants the Marquis de Bonnay and
the Duc de la Chatre advised him to inflict firm punishments on the
‚Äútraitors‚Äù. The King was reluctant to shed blood, and this greatly
irritated the ultra-reactionary chamber of deputies, who felt that Louis XVIII
was not executing enough. The government issued a proclamation of amnesty to
the ‚Äútraitors‚Äù in January 1816, but the trials that had already begun were
finished in due course. That same declaration also banned any member of the
House of Bonaparte from owning property in, or entering, France. It is
estimated that between 50,000¬ ‚Äì 80,000 officials were purged from the
government during what was known as the Second White Terror. In November 1815,
Louis XVIII‚Äôs government had to sign another Treaty of Paris, formally ending
Napoleon‚Äôs hundred days. The previous treaty had been quite favourable to
France, but this one took a hard-line. France‚Äôs borders were retracted to
their extent at 1790. France had to pay for an army to occupy her, for at least
five years, at a cost of 150¬ million francs per year. France also had to pay a
war indemnity of 700¬ million francs to the allies. In 1818, the Chambers
passed a military law, which increased the size of the army by over 100,000. In
October of the same year, Louis XVIII‚Äôs foreign minister, the Duc de
Richelieu, succeeded in convincing the powers to withdraw their armies early,
in exchange for a sum of over 200¬ million francs. Louis XVIII chose many
centrist cabinets, as he wanted to appease the populace. Much to the dismay of
his brother, the ultra-royalist comte d‚ÄôArtois, he always dreaded the day he
would die, believing that his brother, and heir, Artois, would abandon the
centrist government for an ultra-royalist autocracy, which would not bring
favourable results. King Louis disliked the First Prince of the Blood, Louis-
Philippe d'Orl√©ans, and took every opportunity to snub him. King Louis's
nephew, the duc de Berry, was assassinated at the Paris Opera, on 14 February
1820. The royal family was grief-stricken and Louis XVIII broke an ancient
tradition to attend his nephew's funeral, as previous Kings of France could not
have any association with death. Berry was the only member of the family
thought to be able to beget children. His wife gave birth to a posthumous son
in September Henri, duc de Bordeaux. The future of the Bourbons as kings of
France was in still doubt. The Chamber of Deputies proposed amending the Salic
law to allow the Duchesse d‚ÄôAngoul√™me to accede to the throne. On 12 June
1820, the Chambers ratified legislation that increased the number of deputies
from 258 to 430. The extra deputies were to be elected by the wealthiest
quarter of the population in each d√©partement. These individuals now
effectively had two votes. Around the same time as the ‚Äúlaw of the two
votes‚Äù, Louis XVIII began to receive visits every Wednesday from a lady named
Zo√© Talon, comtesse du Cayla, and ordered that nobody should disturb him while
he was with her. It was rumoured that he inhaled snuff from her breasts, which
earned her the nickname of "tabati√®re" (snuffbox). In 1823, France embarked on
a military intervention in Spain, where a revolt had occurred against the King
Ferdinand VII. France succeeded in crushing the rebellion, which the duc
d‚ÄôAngoul√™me headed. Death. Louis XVIII's health began to fail in the spring
of 1824. He was suffering from obesity, gout and gangrene, both dry and wet, in
his legs and spine. Louis died on 16 September 1824, surrounded by the extended
royal family and some government officials. He was succeeded by his youngest
brother, the comte d‚ÄôArtois, as Charles X. Louis XVIII was the only French
monarch of the 19th century to die while still ruling. He was interred at the
Basilica of St Denis, the necropolis of French kings. In fiction. Louis XVIII
appears briefly in the novel "The Count of Monte Cristo", by Alexandre Dumas.
The Count of Provence was portrayed by Sebastian Armesto in the 2006 film
"Marie Antoinette", a biographical film written and directed by Sofia Coppola,
based on the book, "" by Lady Antonia Fraser. In contradiction with historical
facts, he is portrayed in the film as having a son. In the 1970 film
"Waterloo", Louis XVIII was portrayed by Orson Welles.
