Lucas critique The Lucas critique, named for Robert Lucas' work on
macroeconomic policymaking, argues that it is na√Øve to try to predict the
effects of a change in economic policy entirely on the basis of relationships
observed in historical data, especially highly aggregated historical data. The
Lucas critique is, in essence, a negative result. It tells economists,
primarily, how "not" to do economic analysis. The Lucas critique suggests that
if we want to predict the effect of a policy experiment, we should model the
"deep parameters" (relating to preferences, technology and resource
constraints) that are assumed to govern "individual" behavior; so called
"microfoundations". If these models can account for observed empirical
regularities, we can then predict what individuals will do, "taking into
account" the change in policy, and then aggregate the individual decisions to
calculate the macroeconomic effects of the policy change. Shortly after the
publication of Lucas' article, Kydland and Prescott published the article
"Rules rather than Discretion...", where they not only described general
structures where short-term benefits that are negated in the future through
changes in expectations, but also how time consistency might overcome such
instances. That article and subsequent research lead to a positive research
program for how to do dynamic, quantitative economics. Examples. One important
application of the critique (independent of proposed microfoundations) is its
implication that the historical negative correlation between inflation and
unemployment, known as the Phillips Curve, could break down if the monetary
authorities attempted to exploit it. Permanently raising inflation in hopes
that this would permanently lower unemployment would eventually cause firms'
inflation forecasts to rise, altering their employment decisions. Said another
way, just because high inflation was associated with low unemployment under
early-twentieth-century monetary policy does not mean we should expect high
inflation to lead to low unemployment under all alternative monetary policy
regimes. For an especially simple example, note that Fort Knox has never been
robbed. However, this does not mean the guards can safely be eliminated, since
the incentive not to rob Fort Knox depends on the presence of the guards. In
other words, with the heavy security that exists at the fort today, criminals
are unlikely to attempt a robbery because they know they are unlikely to
succeed. But a change in security policy, such as eliminating the guards for
example, would lead criminals to reappraise the costs and benefits of robbing
the fort. So just because there are no robberies under the current policy does
not mean this should be expected to continue under all possible policies.
