Luck egalitarianism Luck egalitarianism is a view about distributive justice
espoused by a variety of egalitarian and other political philosophers.
According to this view, justice demands that variations in how well off people
are should be wholly attributable to the responsible choices people make and
not to differences in their unchosen circumstances. This expresses the
intuition that it is a bad thing for some people to be worse off than others
through no fault of their own. Theory. Luck egalitarians therefore distinguish
between outcomes that are the result of brute luck (e.g. misfortunes in genetic
makeup, or being struck by a bolt of lightning) and those that are the
consequence of conscious options (such as career choice or fair gambles). Luck
egalitarianism is intended as a fundamental normative idea that might guide our
thinking about justice rather than as an immediate policy prescription. The
idea has its origin in John Rawls's thought that distributive shares should not
be influenced by arbitrary factors. Luck egalitarians disagree among themselves
about the proper way to measure how well off people are (for instance, whether
we should measure material wealth, psychological happiness or some other
factor) and the related issue of how to assess the value of their resources.
Many philosophers think that the term "luck egalitarianism" is a misnomer,
because many so-called "luck egalitarians" (of the 'resourcist' strand at
least) do not in fact want to equalize luck or eliminate uncertainty, but
instead believe that individuals should be equal in the amount of resources
they have when facing luck or uncertainty. Criticism of Theory. The position is
controversial within some currents of egalitarian thought, and the philosopher
Elizabeth S. Anderson has been a vocal critic of it â€” on the ground that,
amongst other things, the fact that something is chosen does not necessarily
make it acceptable. An example of this would be a robber offering someone a
choice between their money and their life. She also claims that luck
egalitarianism expresses a demeaning pity towards the disadvantaged. Neither of
these criticisms is accepted by luck egalitarianism's proponents. Susan Hurley
has argued that any attempt to ground egalitarianism in issues concerning luck
and responsibility must fail, because there is no non-circular way of
specifying an "egalitarian" baseline rather than any other baseline. For
instance, a luck inegalitarian could believe that the baseline from which we
should correct luck is one where huge inequalities exist. Without merely
assuming equality, there seems to be no way of coming to prefer one approach
over the other. Global Luck Egalitarianism. Global luck egalitarianism is a
view about distributive justice at the global level associated with
cosmopolitan moral theory. It starts from the basic intuition that it is a bad
thing for some people to be worse off than others through no fault of their
own, and applies this across borders. Global luck egalitarians
characteristically believe that moral agents may have duties to mitigate the
brute luck of distant others. Proponents of this school of thought are amongst
others Simon Caney and arguably Charles Beitz. Advocates of theory. Prominent
advocates of luck egalitarianism have included Ronald Dworkin, Richard Arneson,
Gerald Cohen, John Roemer, and Eric Rakowski.
