Managerial economics Managerial economics as defined by Edwin Mansfield is
"concerned with application of economic concepts and economic analysis to the
problems of formulating rational managerial decision." It is sometimes referred
to as business economics and is a branch of economics that applies
microeconomic analysis to decision methods of businesses or other management
units. As such, it bridges economic theory and economics in practice.Â Â  â€¢
Ivan Png and Dale Lehman (2007, 3rd ed.). "Managerial Economics". Wiley.
Description and chapter-preview links.Â Â  â€¢ M. L. Trivedi (2002).
"Managerial Economics: Theory & Applications", 2nd ed., Tata McGraw-Hill.
Chapter-preview links. It draws heavily from quantitative techniques such as
regression analysis and correlation, calculus. If there is a unifying theme
that runs through most of managerial economics, it is the attempt to optimize
business decisions given the firm's objectives and given constraints imposed by
scarcity, for example through the use of operations research, mathematical
programming, game theory for strategic decisions,Â Â  â€¢ Thomas J. Webster
(2003). "Managerial Economics: Theory and Practice", ch. 13 & 14, Academic
Press. Description. and other computational methods. At universities, the
subject is taught primarily to advanced undergraduates and graduate business
schools. It is approached as an integration subject. That is, it integrates
many concepts from a wide variety of prerequisite courses. In many countries it
is possible to read for a degree in Business Economics which often covers
managerial economics, financial economics, game theory, business forecasting
and industrial economics. Scope of Managerial economics. Managerial economics
to a certain degree is prescriptive in nature as it suggests course of action
to a managerial problem. Problems can be related to various departments in a
firm like production,accounts, sales, etc. 'Bold text'== Demand decision ==
Demand refers to the willingness to buy a commodity. Demand, here, defines the
market size for a commodity i.e. who will buy the commodity. Analysis of the
demand is important for a firm as its revenue, profits, income of the employees
depend on it. Production decision. A firm needs to answer four basic questions
- what to produce, how to produce and how much to produce and for whom to
produce. What to produce? A firm will produce according to its perception of
the customer demand. It can either produce consumer goods like food, clothing
etc. (which are for consumption purpose) or it can produce capital goods like
machinery etc. (which are for investment purposes). How to produce? Goods can
be produced by certain techniques. Firms have the option of producing goods by
labour intensive technique and capital intensive technique. Labour intensive
technique is the one in which manual labour is used to produce goods. Capital
intensive technique is the one in which machinery like forklift, assembly belts
etc. are used to produce goods. How much to produce? A firm has to decide its
production capacity and also how much of their good a consumer needs and
produce accordingly. For whom to produce? A firm has to decide its target
population (i.e. to whom they will serve products and/or services). Example, it
will not be viable to produce luxurious goods or middle income or low income
group if they can't afford it and produce basic necessity goods for rich class
if they don't need it. Therefore, a firm needs to match its produce according
to the target population it is serving. External links. 1. http://
www.edushareonline.in/Management/eco%20new.pdf 2.http://www.swlearning.com/
economics/hirschey/managerial_econ/chap01.pdf
