Maoism Maoism, formally known as Mao Zedong Thought (), is a political theory
derived from the teachings of the Chinese political leader Mao Zedong
(1893â€“1976). Its followers, known as Maoists, consider it as an anti-
Revisionist form of Marxism-Leninism. Developed during the 1950s and 1960s, it
was widely applied as the political and military guiding ideology of the
Communist Party of China (CPC). Maoism sees the agrarian peasantry, rather than
the working class, as the key revolutionary force which can fundamentally
transform capitalist society towards socialism. Holding that "all political
power proceeds from the barrel of a gun," Maoist organizations mainly draw upon
Mao's ideology of the People's War, mobilizing large parts of rural populations
to revolt against established institutions by engaging in guerrilla warfare.
Maoism can also refer to the egalitarianism that was seen during Mao's era as
opposed to the free-market ideology of Deng Xiaoping; some scholars
additionally define personality cults and political sloganeering as "Maoist"
practices. Contemporary Maoists in China criticize the social inequalities
created by a capitalist and "revisionist" Communist party. Maoism fell into
disfavour in China in 1978, when Deng Xiaoping started the "Reform and Opening"
economic policies that introduced capitalist market principles. Notable Maoist
organizations and armed groups currently exist in several countries,
particularly in the most impoverished sections of the third world. Examples of
contemporary Maoist movements most notably include the Shining Path in Peru,
the Naxalite insurgency in India, and the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist);
the latter of which is the only current Maoist party holding power through a
democratic process. Origins. Although often described as an evolution of
Marxism/Leninism, Maoism is defined more by its theoretical and ideological
departures from orthodox Marxism or Leninism than by its similarities to the
Western versions of modern socialism. The origins of Maoism stem not from
Marxist writings alone, but also from the modern Chinese intellectual tradition
in which Mao was raised.still on going. The modern Chinese intellectual
tradition. The modern Chinese intellectual tradition of the turn of the
twentieth century is defined by two central concepts, iconoclasm and
nationalism. Iconoclastic revolution/anti-Confucianism. By the turn of the
twentieth century, a proportionately small yet socially significant cross-
section of China's traditional elite (i.e. landlords and bureaucrats), found
themselves increasingly skeptical of the efficacy and even the moral validity
of Confucianism. These skeptical iconoclasts formed a new segment of Chinese
society, a modern intelligentsia, whose arrival, or as lauded historian of
China Maurice Meisner would label it, their defection, heralded the beginning
of the destruction of the gentry as a social class in China. The fall of the
last Chinese imperial dynasty in 1911 marked the final failure of the Confucian
moral order, and did much to make Confucianism synonymous with political and
social conservatism in the minds of Chinese intellectuals. It was this
association of conservatism and Confucianism which lent to the iconoclastic
nature of Chinese intellectual thought during the first decades of the
Twentieth century. Chinese iconoclasm was expressed most clearly and
vociferously by Chen Duxiu during the New Culture Movement which occurred
between 1915 and 1919. Proposing the, "total destruction of the traditions and
values of the past," the New Culture Movement was spearheaded by the "New
Youth", a periodical which was published by Chen Duxiu and which was profoundly
influential on a young Mao Zedong whose first published work appeared on the
magazine's pages. Nationalism and the appeal of Marxism. Along with iconoclasm,
radical anti-imperialism dominated the Chinese intellectual tradition and
slowly evolved into a fierce nationalist fervor which influenced Mao's
philosophy immensely and was crucial in adapting Marxism to the Chinese model.
Vital to understanding Chinese nationalist sentiments of the time is the Treaty
of Versailles which was signed in 1919. The Treaty aroused a wave of bitter
nationalist resentment in Chinese intellectuals as lands formerly ceded to
Germany in Shandong were, without consultation with the Chinese, transferred to
Japanese control rather than returned to Chinese sovereignty. The negative
reaction culminated in the May 4th Incident which occurred on that day in 1919.
The protest began with 3,000 students in Beijing displaying their anger at the
announcement of the Versailles Treaty's concessions to Japan yet rapidly took a
violent turn as protesters began attacking the homes and offices of ministers
who were seen as cooperating with, or in the direct pay of the Japanese. The
May 4th Incident and Movement which followed, "catalyzed the political
awakening of a society which had long seemed inert and dormant" Yet another
international event would have a large impact on not only Mao but also the
Chinese intelligensia was the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. Although the
revolution did elicit interest among Chinese intellectuals, socialist
revolution in China was not considered a viable option until after the May 4th
Incident. Afterwards, "To become a Marxist was one way for a Chinese
intellectual to reject both the traditions of the Chinese past and Western
domination of the Chinese present" Maurice Meisner, "Mao's China and After",
page 18. Mao's personal philosophy. Along with the Chinese intellectual
tradition which was prevalent during his youth, it is clear that Mao's personal
philosophy, his idealism and populist leanings, were foundational to the
formation and profile of Maoism. Mao's political ideas emerge from his personal
ethics. One source is commentaries to "A System of Ethics" by Friederich
Paulsen (1917-1918) where he expressed: "I do not agree with the view that to
be moral, the motive of one action has to be benefiting others...Morality does
not have to be defined in relation to others...People like me want to
...satisfy our hearts to the full, and in doing so we automatically have the
most valuable moral codes. Of course there are people and objects in the world,
but they are only for me". His politics were consistent with these personal
values and views. Idealism. Mao believed that human consciousness is the
principal factor in human history. In other words, he may be viewed as an
idealist and, as such, directly contradicted the materialistic determinist
tenets of orthodox Marxism. Mao had the utmost faith that, through the actions
of "dedicated revolutionaries," a new social reality could be formed which
would be in harmony with his ideals. Populism. Mao also believed strongly in
the concept of a unified "people". These notions were what prompted him to
investigate the peasant uprisings in Hunan while the rest of the China's
communists were in the cities and focused on the orthodox Marxist proletariat.
Many of the pillars of Maoism such as the distrust of intellectuals and the
abhorrence of occupational specialty are typical populist ideas. The concept of
"People's War" which is so central to Maoist thought is directly populist in
its origins. Mao believed that intellectuals and party cadres had to become
first students of the masses to become teachers of the masses later. This
concept was vital to the strategy of the "People's War." Nationalism. Mao's
nationalist impulses also played a crucially important role in the adaption of
Marxism to the Chinese model and in the formation of Maoism. Mao truly believed
that China was to play a crucial preliminary role in the socialist revolution
internationally. This belief, or the fervor with which Mao held it, separated
Mao from the other Chinese Communists and led Mao onto the path of what Leon
Trotsky called, "Messianic Revolutionary Nationalism" which was central to his
personal philosophy and is demonstrated in his long-standing hostile
relationship with ComIntern. The Yan'an period. During the period immediately
following the Long March, Mao and the Chinese Communist Party were
headquartered in Yan'an, which is a prefecture-level city in the Shaanxi
province. During this period Mao clearly established himself as a Marxist
theoretician and produced the bulk of the works which would later be canonized
into the "thought of Mao Zedong". The rudimentary philosophical base of Chinese
Communist ideology is laid down in Mao's numerous dialectical treatises and was
conveyed to newly recruited party members. This period truly established
ideological independence from Moscow for Mao and the CCP. Although the Yan'an
period did answer some of the questions, both ideological and theoretical,
which were raised by the Chinese Communist Revolution, it left many of the
crucial questions unresolved; including how the Chinese Communist Party was
supposed to launch a socialist revolution while completely separated from the
urban sphere. Components. Contradiction. Furthermore, each contradiction
(including class struggle, the contradiction holding between relations of
production and the concrete development of forces of production) expresses
itself in a series of other contradictions, some dominant, others not. Thus,
the principal contradiction should be tackled with priority when trying to make
the basic contradiction "solidify". Mao elaborates further on this theme in the
essay On Practice. On the relation between knowledge and practice, between
knowing and doing". Here, "Practice" connects "contradiction" with "class
struggle" in the following way: Inside a mode of production, there are three
realms where practice functions: economic production, scientific
experimentation (which also takes place in economic production and should not
be radically disconnected from the former) and finally, class struggle. These
may be considered the proper objects of economy, scientific knowledge, and
politics. These three spheres deal with matter in its various forms, socially
mediated. As a result, they are the only realms where knowledge may arise
(since truth and knowledge only make sense in relation to matter, according to
Marxist epistemology). Mao emphasizesâ€”like Marx in trying to confront the
"bourgeoisie idealism" of his timeâ€”that knowledge must be based on empirical
evidence. Knowledge results from hypotheses verified in the contrast with a
real object; this real object, despite being mediated by the subjectâ€™s
theoretical frame, retains its materiality and will offer resistance to those
ideas that do not conform to its truth. Thus, in each of these realms
(economic, scientific and political practice), contradictions (principle and
secondary) must be identified, explored and put to function to achieve the
communist goal. This involves the need to know, "scientifically", how the
masses produce (how they live, think, and work), to obtain knowledge of how
class struggle (the main contradiction that articulates a mode of production,
in its various realms) expresses itself. People's war and mass line. Maoism's
political orientation emphasizes the "revolutionary struggle of the vast
majority of people against the exploiting classes and their state structures",
which Mao termed a "People's War". Usually involving peasants, its military
strategies have involved guerrilla war tactics focused on surrounding the
cities from the countryside, with a heavy emphasis on political transformation
through mass involvement of the lower classes of society. Agrarian socialism.
Maoism departs from conventional European-inspired Marxism in that its focus is
on the agrarian countryside, rather than the industrial urban forces. This is
known as Agrarian socialism. Notably, Maoist parties in Peru, Nepal and
Philippines have adopted equal stresses on urban and rural areas, depending on
the country's focus of economic activity. Maoism broke with the state
capitalist framework of the Soviet Union under Nikita Khrushchev and dismisses
it as modern revisionism, a traditional pejorative term among communists
referring to those who fight for capitalism in the name of socialism. New
Democratic revolution. The theory of the New Democracy was known to the Chinese
revolutionaries from the late 40â€™s. This thesis held that for the majority of
the peoples of the planet, the long road to socialism could only be opened by a
â€˜national, popular, democratic, anti-feudal and anti-imperialist revolution
language of the day, run by the communists.' And in the context of New
Democratic revolution, the rationality of such economic policies as to destroy
feudalism on the basis of land to the tiller, to confiscate all foreign and
domestic economic establishments with a monopolistic character and to limit,
control and guide private capital that do not control public life, have been
proved in practice. Mao's intellectual Marxist development. Maoâ€™s
"Intellectual" Marxist development can be divided into five major periods: (1)
The Initial Marxist Period from 1920â€“1926; (2) the formative Maoist period
from 1927â€“1935; (3) the mature Maoism period from 1935â€“1940; (4) the civil
war period from 1940â€“1949; and (5) the post-1949 period, following the
revolutionary victory. Departure from Leninism. Mao departed from Leninism not
only in his near-total lack of interest in the urban working class but also in
his concept of the nature and role of the Party. For Lenin, the Party was
sacrosanct because it was the incarnation of the "proletarian consciousness,"
and there was no question about who were the teachers and who were the pupils.
For Mao, on the other hand, this question would always be virtually impossible
to answer. Post-revolution. In its post-revolutionary period, Mao Zedong's
thought is defined in the CPC's Constitution as "Marxism-Leninism applied in a
Chinese context", synthesized by Mao Zedong and China's "first-generation
leaders". It asserts that class struggle continues even if the proletariat has
already overthrown the bourgeoisie, and there are capitalist restorationist
elements within the Communist Party itself. Maoism provided the CPC's first
comprehensive theoretical guideline with regards to how to continue socialist
revolution, the creation of a socialist society, socialist military
construction, and highlights various contradictions in society to be addressed
by what is termed "socialist construction". While it continues to be lauded to
be the major force that defeated "imperialism and feudalism" and created a "New
China" by the Communist Party of China, the ideology survives only in name on
the Communist Party's Constitution; Deng Xiaoping abolished most Maoist
practices in 1978, advancing a guiding ideology called "Socialism with Chinese
characteristics. Medical staff of China PLA 165 Hospital and mental hospitals
in Chenzhou, Hunan claims that mental diseases should be defeated in a mental
way, and mental disorders can be cured using "invincible" Maoism. Maoism after
Mao. Shortly after Mao's death in 1976, Deng Xiaoping started the capitalist
reforms of the People's Republic of China (PRC) in 1978 beginning the radical
change of Mao's ideology in the PRC. Although Mao Zedong Thought nominally
remains the state ideology, Deng's admonition to seek truth from facts means
that state policies are judged on their practical consequences; the role of
ideology in determining policy, in many areas, has thus been considerably
reduced. Deng also separated Mao from Maoism, making it clear that Mao was
fallible and hence that the truth of Maoism comes from observing social
consequences rather than by using Mao's quotations as holy writ, as was done in
Mao's lifetime. In addition, the party constitution has been rewritten to give
the capitalist ideas of Deng Xiaoping prominence over those of Mao. One
consequence of this is that groups outside China which describe themselves as
Maoist generally regard China as having repudiated Maoism and restored
capitalism, and there is a wide perception both in and out of China that China
has abandoned Maoism. However, while it is now permissible to question
particular actions of Mao and to talk about excesses taken in the name of
Maoism, there is a prohibition in China on either publicly questioning the
validity of Maoism or questioning whether the current actions of the CPC are
"Maoist." Although Mao Zedong Thought is still listed as one of the four
cardinal principles of the People's Republic of China, its historical role has
been re-assessed. The Communist Party now says that Maoism was necessary to
break China free from its feudal past, but that the actions of Mao are seen to
have led to excesses during the Cultural Revolution. "Chief responsibility for
the grave 'Left' error of the 'cultural revolution,' an error comprehensive in
magnitude and protracted in duration, does indeed lie with Comrade Mao Zedong .
. . . far from making a correct analysis of many problems, he confused right
and wrong and the people with the enemy. . . . Herein lies his tragedy."
Scholars outside China see this re-working of the definition of Maoism as
providing an ideological justification for what they see as the restoration of
the essentials of capitalism in China by Deng and his successors, who sought to
"eradicate all ideological and physiological obstacles to economic reform". In
1978 this led to the Sino-Albanian Split when Albanian leader Enver Hoxha
denounced Deng as a revisionist and formed Hoxhaism as an anti-revisionist form
of Marxism. Mao himself is officially regarded by the CPC as a "great
revolutionary leader" for his role in fighting the Japanese and creating the
People's Republic of China, but Maoism as implemented between 1959 and 1976 is
regarded by today's CPC as an economic and political disaster. In Deng's day,
support of radical Maoism was regarded as a form of "left deviationism" and
being based on a cult of personality, although these 'errors' are officially
attributed to the Gang of Four rather than to Mao himself. Thousands of Maoists
were arrested in the Hua Guofeng period after 1976. The prominent Maoists,
Zhang Chunqiao and Jiang Qing were sentenced to death with two-year-reprieve
while some others were sentenced to life imprisonment or imprisonment over 15
years. Maoism internationally. Maoism outside China. From 1962 onwards, the
challenge to the Soviet hegemony in the World Communist Movement made by the
CPC resulted in various divisions in communist parties around the world. At an
early stage, the Albanian Party of Labour sided with the CPC. So did many of
the mainstream (non-splinter group) communist parties in South-East Asia, like
the Burmese Communist Party, Communist Party of Thailand, and Communist Party
of Indonesia. Some Asian parties, like the Workers Party of Vietnam and the
Workers Party of Korea attempted to take a middle-ground position. The Khmer
Rouge of Cambodia is said to have been a replica of the Maoist regime.
According to BBC The Communist Party of Kampuchea (Cambodia), better known as
the "Khmer Rouge", identified strongly with Maoism, and is generally labeled a
"Maoist" movement today. Maoists, however, are quick to point out that the CPK
strongly deviated from Marxist doctrine, and that the few references to Maoist
China in CPK propaganda were critical of the Chinese. In the west and south, a
plethora of parties and organizations were formed that upheld links to the CPC.
Often they took names such as "Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist)" or
"Revolutionary Communist Party" to distinguish themselves from the traditional
pro-Soviet communist parties. The pro-CPC movements were, in many cases, based
among the wave of student radicalism that engulfed the world in the 1960s and
1970s. Only one Western classic communist party sided with CPC, the Communist
Party of New Zealand. Under the leadership of CPC and Mao Zedong, a parallel
international communist movement emerged to rival that of the Soviets, although
it was never as formalized and homogeneous as the pro-Soviet tendency. After
the death of Mao in 1976 and the resulting power-struggles in China that
followed, the international Maoist movement was divided into three camps. One
group, composed of various ideologically nonaligned groups, gave weak support
to the new Chinese leadership under Deng Xiaoping. Another camp denounced the
new leadership as traitors to the cause of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought.
The third camp sided with the Albanians in denouncing the Three Worlds Theory
of the CPC (see Sino-Albanian Split.) Che Guevara, though initially praising
the Soviet Union prior to, during and shortly after the Cuban Revolution, later
came out in support of Maoism, and advocated the adoption of the ideology
throughout Latin America. The pro-Albanian camp would start to function as an
international group as well, led by Enver Hoxha and the APL, and was also able
to amalgamate many of the communist groups in Latin America, including the
Communist Party of Brazil and Marxist-Leninist Communist Party in Ecuador.
Later Latin American Communists such as Peru's Shining Path also embraced the
tenets of Maoism. The new Chinese leadership showed little interest in the
various foreign groups supporting Mao's China. Many of the foreign parties that
were fraternal parties aligned with the Chinese government before 1975 either
disbanded, abandoned the new Chinese government entirely, or even renounced
Marxism-Leninism and developed into non-communist, social democratic parties.
What is today called the "international Maoist movement" evolved out of the
second campthe parties that opposed Deng and claimed to uphold the legacy of
Mao. India. The Communist Party of India (Maoist) is a Maoist political party
in India which aims to overthrow the government of India. It was founded on
September 21, 2004, through the merger of the Communist Party of India
(Marxistâ€“Leninist) People's War and the Maoist Communist Centre of India
(MCC). The merger was announced to the public on October 14 the same year. In
the merger a provisional central committee was constituted, with the erstwhile
People's War Group leader Muppala Lakshmana Rao alias Ganapathi as General
Secretary. It is currently proscribed as a terrorist organization by the Indian
government for organizing mass killings in furtherance of their ideology.
Nepal. The Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), a national communist
party with a revolutionary background, is a follower of Maoism, although it is
believed that the party has developed its own ideology, Prachanda Path, which
was developed taking Nepal's political, sociological and geographical
constraints into consideration. Still, this party is believed to have taken
Maoism as its doctrine as its name suggests. Norway. In Norway, the maoism of
the ml-movement ("ml-bevegelsen") was described in the 2012 movie by Wong Men
Hoi, "The East is Red". Philippines. In the Philippines, the Communist Party of
the Philippines (CPP) and its New People's Army (NPA) has been waging a
revolutionary war since 1968. Its strength peaked during the dictatorial rule
of Ferdinand Marcos and was the main bulk of the opposition against the
dictatorship. However due to controversies regarding massive purges of its
members in the mid-1980s and political miscalculations, it suffered several
splits within its ranks in 1992 and 1997 forming several separate communist
parties. It maintains active guerrilla fronts throughout the Philippines until
today and is still considered by the military as the main threat to national
security. The CPP, according to the military also allegedly has been leading
and influencing legal left-wing political organizations and engages in
elections. The Marxist-Leninist Party of the Philippines (MLPP), formed by
former Central Luzon Regional Committee members of the CPP after the split in
1997 maintained much of the Maoist orientation from the CPP most especially on
the concept of People's War. However it has put equal emphasis on legal
political struggles along with armed revolution and it sees the proletariat as
the leader of the Philippine revolution in union with the peasantry. The
Rebolusyonaryong Hukbo ng Bayan (People's Revolutionary Army, RHB) is the armed
wing of the MLPP and according to military intelligence sources, the most
active and fastest growing insurgent force in the Philippines recently next to
the CPP. Like its estranged political sibling the MLPP is said to be organizing
legal organizations but does not engage in electoral processes. United States.
In the United States during the late 1960s, parts of the emerging New Left
rejected the Marxism espoused by the Soviet Union and instead adopted pro-
Chinese Communism. The Black Panther Party, especially under the leadership of
Huey Newton, was influenced by Maoist thought. Into the 1970s, Maoists in the
US formed a large part of the New Communist Movement. The Kasama Project (KP),
was initiated by former Revolutionary Communist Party, USA members critical of
what they viewed as the dogmatism and cult of personality of RCP USA. KP
describes itself as seeking to radically re-imagine contemporary revolutionary
politics. It is deeply influenced by Maoist thought, in particular as developed
by the RCP USA, but claims members who arrive from other traditions, such as
anarchism. Another Maoist trend, known as Maoist Internationalism or MIM-
Thought, was initiated by the Maoist Internationalist Movement(MIM). Expanding
on Lenin's theses on the labor aristocracy and more contemporary works such as
J. Sakai's "Settlers, the Mythology of the White Proletariat", this trend
claims historical citizens of imperialist countries form a labor aristocracy.
Concurrent to the collapse of MIM in 2008, some groups began using the term
Maoism-Third Worldism to describe this trend. Today, third worldist Maoist
groups in the USA include the Maoist Internationalist Ministry of Prisons and
the Revolutionary Anti-Imperialist Movement. Spain. The Communist Unification
of Spain is an independent party that follows Marxist-Leninism and Maoism.
Somalia. In Africa, Siad Barre's regime in Somalia is often cited as being pro-
Maoist, as it sided with the People's Republic of China during the Sino-Soviet
split and, as such, China provided support to the regime during its war with
the pro-Soviet nations of Ethiopia, Cuba and South Yemen. Maoist organizations.
Today, there is no consensus on who does and who does not represent Maoism.
Various efforts have sought to regroup the international communist movement
under Maoism since the time of Mao's death in 1976. One notable organization
was the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement (RIM). RIM was founded in 1984
and included such notable organizations as the Communist Party of Peru (PCP),
also known as "Sendero Luminoso" or "Shining Path," the then Communist Party of
Nepal (Maoist), now known as the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) UCPN
(M), and the Revolutionary Communist Party USA (RCP(USA)). Today, the RIM
appears to be defunct or near defunct. The magazine associated with the RIM, A
World To Win, has not published an issue since 2006, though A World To Win News
Service still publishes regularly on the internet. In addition, many of the
one-time RIM organizations have become increasingly critical of each other.
This has resulted in many public splits. For example, recently the RCP USA has
criticized the UCPN(M) as revisionist after the UCPN(M) abandoned its people's
war for the parliamentary road. In addition, Red Sun, a web page that claims to
be affiliated with some faction the Communist Party of Peru, has criticized
both the UCPN(M) and RCP USA. Another movement that has criticized the UCPN(M)
is the Communist Party of India (Maoist) -- although they were never formally a
RIM member, the CPI(Maoist) was formed out of three organizations, some of
which were RIM members, at conferences organized by RIM. Another effort at
regrouping the international communist movement is the International Conference
of Marxist-Leninist Parties and Organizations (ICMLPO). Two notable parties
that participate in the ICMLPO are the Marxist Leninist Party of Germany (MLPD)
and the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). The ICMLPO seeks to unity
around Marxism-Leninism, not Maoism. However, some of the parties and
organizations within the ICMLPO identify as Mao Zedong Thought or Maoist.
Criticisms and interpretations. Maoism has fallen out of favour within the
Communist Party of China, beginning with Deng Xiaoping's reforms in 1978. Deng
believed that Maoism showed the dangers of "ultra-leftism", manifested in the
harm perpetrated by the various mass movements that characterized the Maoist
era. In Chinese Communism, the term "left" can be taken as a euphemism for
Maoist policies. However, Deng stated that the revolutionary side of Maoism
should be considered separate from the governance side, leading to his famous
epithet that Mao was "70% good, 30% bad". China scholars generally agree that
Deng's interpretation of Maoism preserves the legitimacy of Communist rule in
China but at the same time criticizes Mao's brand of economic and political
governance. Critic Graham Young claims that Maoists see Joseph Stalin as the
last true socialist leader of the Soviet Union, but allows that the Maoist
assessments of Stalin vary between the extremely positive and the more
ambivalent. Some political philosophers, such as Martin Cohen, have seen in
Maoism an attempt to combine Confucianism and Socialism - what one such called
'a third way between communism and capitalism'. Enver Hoxha critiqued Maoism
from a Marxist-Leninist perspective, arguing that "new democracy" halts class
struggle, the theory of the three worlds is "counter-revolutionary" and
questioned Mao's guerilla warfare methods. External links. Selected
organizations. Committee of Marxist-Leninist-Maoist parties from around the
world
