Market failure Market failure is a concept within economic theory describing
when the allocation of goods and services by a free market is not efficient.
That is, there exists another conceivable outcome where a market participant
may be made better-off without making someone else worse-off. (The outcome is
not Pareto optimal.) Market failures can be viewed as scenarios where
individuals' pursuit of pure self-interest leads to results that are not
efficient â€“ that can be improved upon from the societal point-of-view. The
first known use of the term by economists was in 1958, but the concept has been
traced back to the Victorian philosopher Henry Sidgwick. Market failures are
often associated with information asymmetries,Â Â  â€¢ Joseph E. Stiglitz
(1998). "The Private Uses of Public Interests: Incentives and Institutions,"
"Journal of Economic Perspectives", 12(2), pp. 3-22. non-competitive markets,
principalâ€“agent problems, externalities, or public goods. The existence of a
market failure is often used as a justification for government intervention in
a particular market. Economists, especially microeconomists, are often
concerned with the causes of market failure and possible means of correction.
Such analysis plays an important role in many types of public policy decisions
and studies. However, some types of government policy interventions, such as
taxes, subsidies, bailouts, wage and price controls, and regulations, including
attempts to correct market failure, may also lead to an inefficient allocation
of resources, sometimes called government failure. Thus, there is sometimes a
choice between imperfect outcomes, i.e. imperfect market outcomes with or
without government interventions. But either way, if a market failure exists
the outcome is not pareto efficient. Mainstream neoclassical and Keynesian
economists believe that it may be possible for a government to improve the
inefficient market outcome, while several heterodox schools of thought disagree
with this. Categories. Different economists have different views about what
events are the sources of market failure. Mainstream economic analysis widely
accepts a market failure (relative to Pareto efficiency) can occur for three
main reasons: if the market is "monopolised" or a small group of businesses
hold significant market power, if production of the good or service results in
an externality, or if the good or service is a "public good". The Nature of the
Market. Agents in a market can gain market power, allowing them to block other
mutually beneficial gains from trade from occurring. This can lead to
inefficiency due to imperfect competition, which can take many different forms,
such as monopolies, monopsonies, or monopolistic competition, if the agent does
not implement perfect price discrimination. In a monopoly, the market
equilibrium will no longer be Pareto optimal. The monopoly will use its market
power to restrict output below the quantity at which the marginal social
benefit is equal to the marginal social cost of the last unit produced, so as
to keep prices and profits high. An issue for this analysis is whether a
situation of market power or monopoly is likely to persist if unaddressed by
policy, or whether competitive or technological change will undermine it over
time. It is then a further question about what circumstances allow a monopoly
to arise. In some cases, monopolies can maintain themselves where there are
"barriers to entry" that prevent other companies from effectively entering and
competing in an industry or market. Or there could exist significant First-
mover advantages in the market that make it difficult for other firms to
compete. In another way, a Natural monopoly is an extreme case of the failure
of competition as a restraint on producers. A natural monopoly is a firm whose
per-unit cost decreases as it increases output; in this situation it is most
efficient (from a cost perspective) to have only a single producer of a good.
The Nature of the Goods. Non-Excludability. Some markets can fail due to the
nature of the goods being exchanged. For instance, goods can display the
attributes of public goods or common goods, wherein sellers are unable to
exclude non-buyers from using a product, as in the development of inventions
that may spread freely once revealed. This can cause underinvestment because
developers cannot capture enough of the benefits from success to make the
development effort worthwhile. This can also lead to resource depletion in the
case of common-pool resources, where, because use of the resource is rival but
non-excludable, there is no incentive for users to conserve the resource. An
example of this is a lake with a natural supply of fish: if people catch the
fish faster than they can reproduce, then the fish population will dwindle
until there are no fish left for future generations. Externalities. A good or
service could also have significant externalities, where gains or losses
associated with the product are borne by people who did not sell or purchase
the product. In this case, the price mechanism fails to properly account for
the true social cost because it differs from the private cost. These
externalities can be innate to the methods of production or other conditions
important to the market. For example, when a firm is producing steel, it
absorbs labor, capital and other inputs, it must pay for these in the
appropriate markets, and these costs will be reflected in the market price for
steel. If the firm also pollutes the atmosphere when it makes steel, however,
and if it is not forced to pay for the use of this resource, then this cost
will be borne not by the firm but by society. Hence, the market price for steel
will fail to incorporate the full opportunity cost to society of producing. In
this case, the market equilibrium in the steel industry will not be optimal.
More steel will be produced than would occur were the firm to have to pay for
all of its costs of production. Consequently, the marginal social cost of the
last unit produced will exceed its marginal social benefit. Traffic congestion
is an example of market failure that incorporates both of these forms of
inefficiency. Public roads are common resources that are available for the
entire population's use, and act as a complement to cars (the more roads there
are, the more useful cars become). Because there is very low cost but high
benefit to individual drivers in using the roads, the roads become congested,
decreasing their usefulness to society. Furthermore, driving can impose hidden
costs on society through pollution. Solutions for this include public
transportation, congestion pricing, tolls, and other ways of making the driver
include the social cost in the decision to drive. Perhaps the best example of
the inefficiency associated with common/public goods and externalities is the
environmental harm caused by pollution and overexploitation of natural
resources. The Nature of the Exchange. Some markets can fail due to the nature
of their exchange. Markets may have significant transaction costs, agency
problems, or informational asymmetry. Such incomplete markets may result in
economic inefficiency but also a possibility of improving efficiency through
market, legal, and regulatory remedies. From contract theory, decisions in
transactions where one party has more or better information than the other is
an asymmetry. This creates an imbalance of power in transactions which can
sometimes cause the transactions to go awry. Examples of this problem are
adverse selection and moral hazard. Most commonly, information asymmetries are
studied in the context of principalâ€“agent problems. George Akerlof, Michael
Spence, and Joseph E. Stiglitz developed the idea and shared the 2001 Nobel
Prize in Economics. Bounded Rationality. Simon suggests that economic agents
employ the use of heuristics to make decisions rather than a strict rigid rule
of optimization. They do this because of the complexity of the situation, and
their inability to process and compute the expected utility of every
alternative action. Deliberation costs might be high and there are often other,
concurrent economic activities also requiring decisions. Property Rights as
Rights of Control. Hugh Gravelle and Ray Rees argue that more fundamentally,
the underlying cause of market failure is often a problem of property rights. A
market is an institution in which individuals or firms exchange not just
commodities, but the "rights" to use them in particular ways for particular
amounts of time. [...] Markets are institutions which organize the "exchange of
control" of commodities, where the nature of the control is defined by the
property rights attached to the commodities. As a result, agents' control over
the uses of their commodities can be imperfect, because the system of rights
which defines that control is incomplete. Typically, this falls into two
generalized rights â€“ "excludability" and "transferability". Excludability
deals with the ability of agents to control who uses their commodity, and for
how long â€“ and the related costs associated with doing so. Transferability
reflects the right of agents to transfer the rights of use from one agent to
another, for instance by selling or leasing a commodity, and the costs
associated with doing so. If a given system of rights does not fully guarantee
these at minimal (or no) cost, then the resulting distribution can be
inefficient. Considerations such as these form an important part of the work of
institutional economics. Nonetheless, views still differ on whether something
displaying these attributes is meaningful without the information provided by
the market price system. Interpretations and policy. The above causes represent
the mainstream view of what market failures mean and of their importance in the
economy. This analysis follows the lead of the neoclassical school, and relies
on the notion of Pareto efficiency â€“ and specifically considers market
failures absent considerations of the "public interest", or equity, citing
definitional concerns. This form of analysis has also been adopted by the
Keynesian or new Keynesian schools in modern macroeconomics, applying it to
Walrasian models of general equilibrium in order to deal with failures to
attain full employment, or the non-adjustment of prices and wages. Many social
democrats and "New Deal liberals", have adopted this analysis for public
policy, so they view market failures as a very common problem of any
unregulated market system and therefore argue for state intervention in the
economy in order to ensure both efficiency and social justice (usually
interpreted in terms of limiting avoidable inequalities in wealth and income).
Both the democratic accountability of these regulations and the technocratic
expertise of the economists play an important role here in shaping the kind and
degree of intervention. Neoliberals follow a similar line, often focusing on
"market-oriented solutions" to market failure: for example, they propose going
beyond the common idea of having the government charge a fee for the right to
pollute (internalizing the external cost, creating a disincentive to pollute)
to allow polluters to sell the pollution permits. Some remedies for market
failure can resemble other market failures. For example, the issue of
systematic underinvestment in research is addressed by the patent system that
creates artificial monopolies for successful inventions. Objections. Public
choice. Economists such as Milton Friedman from the Chicago school and others
from the Public Choice school, argue that market failure does not necessarily
imply that government should attempt to solve market failures, because the
costs of government failure might be worse than those of the market failure it
attempts to fix. This failure of government is seen as the result of the
inherent problems of democracy and other forms of government perceived by this
school and also of the power of special-interest groups (rent seekers) both in
the private sector and in the government bureaucracy. Conditions that many
would regard as negative are often seen as an effect of subversion of the free
market by coercive government intervention. Beyond philosophical objections, a
further issue is the practical difficulty that any single decision maker may
face in trying to understand (and perhaps predict) the numerous interactions
that occur between producers and consumers in any market. Austrian. Advocates
of "laissez-faire" capitalism, such as some economists of the Austrian School,
argue that there is no such phenomenon as "market failures". Israel Kirzner
states that: "Efficiency for a social system means the efficiency with which it
permits its individual members to achieve their individual goals". Inefficiency
only arises when means are chosen by individuals that are inconsistent with
their desired goals. This definition of efficiency differs from that of Pareto
efficiency, and forms the basis of the theoretical argument against the
existence of market failures. However, providing that the conditions of the
first welfare theorem are met, these two definitions agree, and give identical
results. Austrians argue that the market tends to eliminate its inefficiencies
through the process of entrepreneurship driven by the profit motive; something
the government has great difficulty detecting, or correcting. Marxian.
Objections also exist on more fundamental bases, such as that of equity, or
Marxian analysis. Colloquial uses of the term "market failure" reflect the
notion of a market "failing" to provide some desired attribute different from
efficiency â€“ for instance, high levels of inequality can be considered a
"market failure", yet are not Pareto inefficient, and so would not be
considered a market failure by mainstream economics. In addition, many Marxian
economists would argue that the system of individual property rights is a
fundamental problem in itself, and that resources should be allocated in
another way entirely. This is different from concepts of "market failure" which
focuses on specific situations â€“ typically seen as "abnormal" â€“ where
markets have inefficient outcomes. Marxists, in contrast, would say that
markets have inefficient and democratically-unwanted outcomes â€“ viewing
market failure as an inherent feature of any capitalist economy â€“ and
typically omit it from discussion, preferring to ration finite goods not
exclusively through a price mechanism, but based upon need as determined by
society expressed through the community.
