Marxian economics Marxian economics refers to economic theories on the
functioning of capitalism based on the works of Karl Marx. Adherents of Marxian
economics, particularly in academia, distinguish it from Marxism as a political
ideology and sociological theory, arguing that Marx's approach to understanding
the economy is intellectually independent of his advocacy of revolutionary
socialism or his support of proletarian revolution. Adherents consider Marx's
economic theories to be the basis of a viable analytic framework, and an
alternative to more conventional neoclassical economics. Marxian economists do
not lean entirely upon the works of Marx and other widely-known Marxists; they
draw from a range of Marxist and non-Marxist sources. Marx's major work on
political economy was "Capital: A Critique of Political Economy" (better known
by its German title "Das Kapital"), a three-volume work, of which only the
first volume was published in his lifetime (the others were published by
Friedrich Engels from Marx's notes). One of Marx's early works, "Critique of
Political Economy", was mostly incorporated into "Capital", especially the
beginning of Volume I. Marx's notes made in preparation for writing "Capital"
were published years later under the title "Grundrisse." Marx's response to
classical economics. Marx's economics took as its starting point the work of
the best-known economists of his day, the British classical economists. Among
these economists were Adam Smith, Thomas Malthus, and David Ricardo. Smith, in
"The Wealth of Nations", argued that the most important characteristic of a
market economy was that it permitted a rapid growth in productive abilities.
Smith claimed that a growing market stimulated a greater "division of labor"
(i.e., specialization of businesses and/or workers) and this, in turn, led to
greater productivity. Although Smith generally said little about laborers, he
did note that an increased division of labor could at some point cause harm to
those whose jobs became narrower and narrower as the division of labor
expanded. Smith maintained that a laissez-faire economy would naturally correct
itself over time. Marx followed Smith by claiming that the most important
beneficial economic consequence of capitalism was a rapid growth in
productivity abilities. Marx also expanded greatly on the notion that laborers
could come to harm as capitalism became more productive. Additionally, in
"Theories of Surplus Value", Marx noted, "We see the great advance made by Adam
Smith beyond the Physiocrats in the analysis of surplus-value and hence of
capital. In their view, it is only one definite kind of concrete
labourâ€”agricultural labour â€”that creates surplus-value...But to Adam Smith,
it is general social labourâ€”no matter in what use-values it manifests
itselfâ€”the mere quantity of necessary labour, which creates value. Surplus-
value, whether it takes the form of profit, rent, or the secondary form of
interest, is nothing but a part of this labour, appropriated by the owners of
the material conditions of labour in the exchange with living labour." Malthus'
claim, in "An Essay on the Principle of Population", that population growth was
the primary cause of subsistence level wages for laborers provoked Marx to
develop an alternative theory of wage determination. Whereas Malthus presented
an ahistorical theory of population growth, Marx offered a theory of how a
relative surplus population in capitalism tended to push wages to subsistence
levels. Marx saw this relative surplus population as coming from economic
causes and not from biological causes (as in Malthus). This economic-based
theory of surplus population is often labeled as Marx's theory of the reserve
army of labour. Ricardo developed a theory of distribution within capitalism,
that is, a theory of how the output of society is distributed to classes within
society. The most mature version of this theory, presented in On the Principles
of Political Economy and Taxation, was based on a labour theory of value in
which the value of any produced object is equal to the labor embodied in the
object. (Adam Smith also presented a labor theory of value but it was only
incompletely realized.) Also notable in Ricardo's economic theory was that
profit was a deduction from society's output and that wages and profit were
inversely related: an increase in profit came at the expense of a reduction in
wages. Marx built much of the formal economic analysis found in "Capital" on
Ricardo's theory of the economy. Marx's theory. Marx employed a labour theory
of value, which holds that the value of a commodity is the socially necessary
labour time invested in it. In this model, capitalists do not pay workers the
full value of the commodities they produce; rather, they compensate the worker
for the necessary labor only (the worker's wage, which cover only the necessary
means of subsistence in order to maintain him working in the present and his
family in the future as a group). This necessary labor is, Marx supposes, only
a fraction of a full working day - the rest, the surplus-labor, would be
pocketed by the capitalist. Marx theorized that the gap between the value a
worker produces and his wage is a form of unpaid labour, known as surplus
value. Moreover, Marx argues that markets tend to obscure the social
relationships and processes of production; he called this commodity fetishism.
People are highly aware of commodities, and usually don't think about the
relationships and labour they represent. Methodology. Marx used dialectics, a
method that he adapted from the works of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel.
Dialectics focuses on relation and change, and tries to avoid seeing the
universe as composed of separate objects, each with essentially stable
unchanging characteristics. One component of dialectics is abstraction; out of
an undifferentiated mass of data or system conceived of as an organic whole,
one abstracts portions to think about or to refer to. One may abstract objects,
but also â€” and more typically â€” relations, and processes of change. An
abstraction may be extensive or narrow, may focus on generalities or specifics,
and may be made from various points of view. For example, a sale may be
abstracted from a buyer's or a seller's point of view, and one may abstract a
particular sale or sales in general. Another component is the dialectical
deduction of categories. Marx uses Hegel's notion of "categories", which are
"forms", for economics: The commodity "form", the money "form", the capital
"form" etc. have to be systematically deduced instead of being grasped in an
outward way as done by the bourgeois economists. This corresponds to Hegel's
critique of Kant's transcendental philosophy. Marx regarded history as having
passed through several stages. The details of his periodisation vary somewhat
through his works, but it essentially is: Primitive Communism -- Slave
societies -- Feudalism -- Capitalism -- Socialism -- Communism (capitalism
being the present stage and communism the future). Marx occupied himself
primarily with describing capitalism. Historians place the beginning of
capitalism some time between about 1450 (Sombart) and some time in the 17th
century (Hobsbawm). A distinguishing feature of capitalism is that most of the
products of human labour are produced for sale, rather than consumed by the
producers or appropriated, essentially by force, by a ruling elite as in
feudalism or slavery. (For example in feudalism, most agricultural produce was
either consumed by the peasants who grew it, or appropriated by feudal masters.
It almost never was sold for money.) Marx defines a commodity as a product of
human labour that is produced for sale in a market. Thus in capitalism, most of
the products of human labour are commodities. Marx began his major work on
economics, "Capital", with a discussion of commodities; Chapter One is called
"Commodities". Commodities. "The wealth of those societies in which the
capitalist mode of production prevails, presents itself as 'an immense
accumulation of commodities,' its unit being a single commodity." (First
sentence of "Capital," Volume I.) "The common substance that manifests itself
in the exchange value of commodities whenever they are exchanged, is their
value." (Capital, I, Chap I, section 1.) The worth of a commodity can be
conceived of in two different ways, which Marx calls use-value and value. A
commodity's use-value is its usefulness for fulfilling some practical purpose;
for example, the use-value of a piece of food is that it provides nourishment
and pleasurable taste; the use value of a hammer, that it can drive nails.
Value is, on the other hand, a measure of a commodity's worth in comparison to
other commodities. It is closely related to exchange-value, the ratio at which
commodities should be traded for one another, but not identical: value is at a
more general level of abstraction; exchange-value is a realisation or form of
it. Marx argued that if value is a property common to all commodities, then
whatever it is derived from, whatever determines it, must be common to all
commodities. The only relevant thing that is, in Marx's view, common to all
commodities is human labour: they are all produced by human labour. "This
common 'something' cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any other
natural property of commodities.Â .Â .Â . If then we leave out of consideration
the use-value of commodities, they have only one common property left, that of
being products of labour." (Capital I, I, 1.) Marx concluded that the value of
a commodity is simply the amount of human labour required to produce it. Thus
Marx adopted a labour theory of value, as had his predecessors Ricardo and
MacCulloch; Marx himself traced the existence of the theory at least as far
back as an anonymous work, "Some Thoughts on the Interest of Money in General,
and Particularly the Publick Funds, &c.", published in London around 1739 or
1740. Marx placed some restrictions on the validity of his value theory: he
said that in order for it to hold, the commodity must not be a useless item;
and it is not the actual amount of labour that went into producing a particular
individual commodity that determines its value, but the amount of labour that a
worker of average energy and ability, working with average intensity, using the
prevailing techniques of the day, would need to produce it. A formal statement
of the law is: the value of a commodity is equal to the average socially
necessary labour time required for its production. (Capital, I, Iâ€”p 39 in
Progress Publishers, Moscow, ed'n.) Marx's contention was that commodities
tend, at a fairly general level of abstraction, to exchange at value; that is,
if Commodity A, whose value is "V", is traded for Commodity B, it will tend to
fetch an amount of Commodity B whose value is the same, "V". Particular
circumstances will cause divergence from this rule, however. Money. "Paper
money is a token representing gold or money." (Capital, I, Chap III, section 2,
part c.) Marx held that metallic money, such as gold, is a commodity, and its
value is the labour time necessary to produce it (mine it, smelt it, etc.).
Gold and silver are conventionally used as money because they embody a large
amount of labour in a small, durable, form, which is convenient. Paper money is
a representation of gold or silver, almost without value of its own but held in
circulation by state decree. Production. "If, on the other hand, the subject of
labour has, so to say, been filtered through previous labour, we call it raw
material.Â .Â .Â ." ("Capital", I, Chap VII, section 1.) Some subjects of
labour are available directly from Nature: uncaught fish, unmined coal, etc.
Others are results of a previous stage of production; these are known as raw
materials, such as flour or yarn. Workshops, canals, and roads are considered
instruments of labour. ("Capital", I, VII, 1.) Coal for boilers, oil for
wheels, and hay for draft horses is considered raw material, not instruments of
labour. The subjects of labour and instruments of labour together are called
the means of production.Â  Relations of production are the relations human
beings adopt toward each other as part of the production process. In
capitalism, wage labour and private property are part of the relations of
production. Labour. At least, in a "fully" capitalist society almost all labour
is wage labour. In present Western society homemaking is clearly still a huge
area of un-waged labour; however it is becoming increasingly commodified as
women enter the workforce (that is not to say that women should not be
empowered in this way). Convenience foods, day care, hired cleaners, replacing
clothes versus mending them, disposable household products generallyâ€”all
represent subsumption of this formerly non-capitalist area of production into
capitalism. Labour in precapitalist societies is either performed to fulfill
one's own or one's family's wants directly (e.g. subsistence labour), or some
form of forced labour, such as slavery or serfdom; only rarely is labour
performed for a wage. In capitalist society it is the reverse: almost all
labour is wage labour. Since most labour in a capitalist society is labour
exchanged by the worker in return for a price (his wage), it has the form of a
commodity: something sold on the market for a price. Therefore Marx held that
labour in a capitalist society is a commodity. Like any commodity it has a use-
value and a value. Its use valueâ€”the useful thing it providesâ€”is the actual
accomplishing of some task: spinning, weaving, shovelling, babysitting, or
whatever. Its value is determined by the same criterion as is the value of any
commodity: its value is the amount of socially necessary labour time needed to
create it. This is the amount of socially necessary labour time needed to
create the food, housing, clothes, etc. needed to keep the worker alive and
able to work: his means of subsistence. This amount must also include something
to provide for the raising of the worker's children who will someday be needed
to replace him. Marx noted that what is "necessary" for a worker is not merely
determined by biological requirements; it is also socially determined: society
creates some needs for the worker. For example, some clothing even in warm
weather, and some furniture, are not biological necessities, but, in many
societies, are necessities in the present sense. Labour(-power) is unique among
commodities in that it is the only commodity that both has value and creates
value: all commodities have value, only labour(-power) creates value. The value
created by labour(-power) is simply the time during which it was exerted. This
follows from the labour theory of value's definition of value as embodied
labour time. He still makes money on the difference between lt (other workers)
and lv (other workers). Besides looking at surplus-value creation from the
point of view of value, Marx sometimes looked at it from the point of view of
time. This leads to the same process being described in alternate terminology,
as explained in the remainder of this paragraph. The worker creates value
continuously during the time he is working; the longer he works, the more value
he creates. Suppose he is paid by the day. At some point during the day he has
created enough value for the capitalist to pay his wage; the time he works
beyond that point is time during which he creates value that the capitalist
gets to keepâ€”surplus value. Marx thus divided the working day conceptually
into two portions: the first portion, during which the worker creates enough
value to just cover his wages (the value of his means of subsistence, if labour
is paid at value) he called "necessary labour time"; and the rest, during which
he creates surplus value for the capitalist, he called "surplus labour time".
According to these two equations, the value of the means of production (mp) is
simply transferred to the value of the product without alteration; the same
term mp appears in the expenditure and the value of the product. Marx thus
called capital spent on mp "constant" -- because the labour process doesn't
change it. On the other hand, capital spent on labour(-power) "expands" during
production because codice_1 . Marx therefore called it "variable". The ratio
between the wages value of the labour(-power) and the surplus valueâ€”or,
alternatively speaking, the ratio between the necessary and surplus labour
timeâ€”Marx called the rate of surplus value. Marx held that the rate of
surplus-value is determined by struggle between the working class and the
capitalist class. The workers attempt to increase necessary labour time (by
demanding higher wages) and/or decrease surplus labour time. Two of their main
weapons are trade union activity and getting legislation passed to limit the
length of the working day. The capitalists attempt to do the opposite, their
main lever being the fact that a worker will starve if the capitalists refuse
to hire him. Marx presents considerable amounts of data in "Capital" (e.g.
Volume I, Chap's X, XV) on wages and working conditions in England up to the
late 1860s, and on the struggle via the Factory Acts to achieve legislated
limits on the length of the working day for women and children. (Ca. 1833:
limited to 12 hours for children, eight hours for those under 13; 1844: 12
hours for women, 6Â½ or seven hours for children; 1848: 10 hours for women and
young persons.) These applied at first only to parts of the textile industry;
between 1845 and 1863 several other industries, notably baking, were brought
under the purview of these acts. Effect of technical progress. According to
Marx, the amount of actual product (i.e. use-value) that a typical worker
produces in a given amount of time is the productivity of labour. It has tended
to increase under capitalism. This is due to increase in the scale of
enterprise, to specialisation of labour, and to the introduction of machinery.
The immediate result of this is that the value of a given item tends to
decrease, because the labour time necessary to produce it becomes less. In a
given amount of time, labour produces more items, but each unit has less value;
the total value created per time remains the same. This means that the means of
subsistence become cheaper; therefore the value of labour power or necessary
labour time becomes less. If the length of the working day remains the same,
this results in an increase in the surplus labour time and the rate of surplus
value. Technological advancement tends to increase the amount of capital needed
to start a business, and it tends to result in an increasing preponderance of
capital being spent on means of production (constant capital) as opposed to
labour (variable capital). Marx called the ratio of these two kinds of capital
the composition of capital. Current theorizing in Marxian economics. Marxian
economics has been built upon by many others, beginning almost at the moment of
Marx's death. The second and third volumes of "Das Kapital" were edited by his
close associate Friedrich Engels, based on Marx's notes. Marx's "Theories of
Surplus Value" was edited by Karl Kautsky. The Marxian value theory and the
Perron-Frobenius theorem on the positive eigenvector of a positive matrix are
fundamental to mathematical treatments of Marxist economics. Universities
offering one or more courses in Marxian economics, or teach one or more
economics courses on other topics from a perspective that they designate as
Marxian or Marxist, include Colorado State University, New School for Social
Research, School of Oriental and African Studies, Universiteit Maastricht,
University of Bremen, University of California at Riverside, University of
Leeds, University of Maine, University of Manchester, University of
Massachusetts-Amherst, University of Massachusetts-Boston, University of
Missouriâ€“Kansas City, University of Sheffield, University of Utah, and York
University (Toronto). English-language journals include "Capital & Class,"
"Historical Materialism," "Monthly Review," "Rethinking Marxism," "Review of
Radical Political Economics," and "Studies in Political Economy." Criticisms.
Much of the critique of classical Marxian economics came from Marxian
economists that revised Marx's original theory, or by the Austrian school of
economics. V. K. Dmitriev, writing in 1898, Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, writing
in 1906-07, and subsequent critics have alleged that Marx's value theory and
law of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall are internally inconsistent.
In other words, the critics allege that Marx drew conclusions that actually do
not follow from his theoretical premises. Once these alleged errors are
corrected, his conclusion that aggregate price and profit are determined by,
and equal to, aggregate value and surplus value no longer holds true. This
result calls into question his theory that the exploitation of workers is the
sole source of profit. Whether the rate of profit in capitalism has, as Marx
predicted, tended to fall is a subject of debate. N. Okishio, in 1961, devised
a theorem (Okishio's theorem) showing that if capitalists pursue cost-cutting
techniques and if the real wage does not rise, the rate of profit must rise.
The inconsistency allegations have been a prominent feature of Marxian
economics and the debate surrounding it since the 1970s. Andrew Kliman argues
that, since internally inconsistent theories cannot possibly be right, the
inconsistency charges serve to legitimate the suppression of Marx's critique of
political economy and current-day research based upon it, as well as the
correction of Marx's alleged inconsistencies. Critics who have alleged that
Marx has been proved internally inconsistent include former and current Marxian
and/or Sraffian economists, such as Paul Sweezy, Nobuo Okishio, Ian Steedman,
John Roemer, Gary Mongiovi, and David Laibman, who propose that the field be
grounded in their correct versions of Marxian economics instead of in Marx's
critique of political economy in the original form in which he presented and
developed it in "Capital". Proponents of the Temporal Single System
Interpretation (TSSI) of Marx's value theory claim that the supposed
inconsistencies are actually the result of misinterpretation; they argue that
when Marx's theory is understood as "temporal" and "single-system," the alleged
internal inconsistencies disappear. In a recent survey of the debate, a
proponent of the TSSI concludes that "the "proofs" of inconsistency are no
longer defended; the entire case against Marx has been reduced to the
"interpretive" issue."
