Marxist international relations theory Marxist and Neo-Marxist international
relations theories are paradigms which reject the realist/liberal view of state
conflict or cooperation, instead focusing on the economic and material aspects.
It purports to reveal how the economic trumps other concerns, which allows for
the elevation of "class" as the focus of the study. Marxists view the
international system as an integrated capitalist system in pursuit of capital
accumulation. Thus, the period of colonialism brought in sources for raw
materials and captive markets for exports, while decolonialization brought new
opportunities in the form of dependence. Marxist theories receive little
attention in the United States where even democratic socialist parties lack
mainstream political influence. Throughout Africa, Latin America, south-eastern
Asia, and parts of Europe—especially France, Greece, and Italy—Marxist and
other theories are more incorporated and influential into political and social
discourse. Dependency theory. Linked in with Marxist theories is dependency
theory which argues that developed countries, in their pursuit of power,
penetrate developing states through political advisors, missionaries, experts
and multi-national corporations (MNCs) to integrate them into the capitalist
system in order to appropriate natural resources and foster dependence by
developing countries on developed countries. Criticisms. Realists and liberals
criticize Marxist conflict theories for ideological and consequentialist
reasons. Postpositivists disagree with Marxists' elevation of class conflict as
the most significant aspect of human life and the key to understanding all
human history and behavior.
