Maurya Empire The Maurya Empire was a geographically extensive Iron Age
historical power in ancient India, ruled by the Mauryan dynasty from 321 to 185
BCE. Originating from the kingdom of Magadha in the Indo-Gangetic plains
(modern Bihar, eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bengal) in the eastern side of the
Indian subcontinent, the empire had its capital city at Pataliputra (modern
Patna). The Empire was founded in 322 BCE by Chandragupta Maurya, who had
overthrown the Nanda Dynasty and rapidly expanded his power westwards across
central and western India taking advantage of the disruptions of local powers
in the wake of the withdrawal westward by Alexander the Great's Greek and
Persian armies. By 320 BCE the empire had fully occupied Northwestern India,
defeating and conquering the satraps left by Alexander. With an area of
5,000,000Â km2, it was one of the world's largest empires in its time, and the
largest ever in the Indian subcontinent. At its greatest extent, the empire
stretched to the north along the natural boundaries of the Himalayas, and to
the east stretching into what is now Assam. To the west, it conquered beyond
modern Pakistan, annexing Balochistan, south eastern parts of Iran and much of
what is now Afghanistan, including the modern Herat and Kandahar provinces. The
Empire was expanded into India's central and southern regions by the emperors
Chandragupta and Bindusara, but it excluded a small portion of unexplored
tribal and forested regions near Kalinga (modern Orissa), until it was
conquered by Ashoka. Its decline began 60 years after Ashoka's rule ended, and
it dissolved in 185 BCE with the foundation of the Sunga Dynasty in Magadha.
Under Chandragupta, the Mauryan Empire conquered the trans-Indus region, which
was under Macedonian rule. Chandragupta then defeated the invasion led by
Seleucus I, a Greek general from Alexander's army. Under Chandragupta and his
successors, internal and external trade, agriculture and economic activities,
all thrived and expanded across India thanks to the creation of a single and
efficient system of finance, administration, and security. After the Kalinga
War, the Empire experienced half a century of peace and security under Ashoka.
Mauryan India also enjoyed an era of social harmony, religious transformation,
and expansion of the sciences and of knowledge. Chandragupta Maurya's embrace
of Jainism increased social and religious renewal and reform across his
society, while Ashoka's embrace of Buddhism has been said to have been the
foundation of the reign of social and political peace and non-violence across
all of India. Ashoka sponsored the spreading of Buddhist ideals into Sri Lanka,
Southeast Asia, West Asia and Mediterranean Europe. The population of the
empire has been estimated to be about 50-60 million making the Mauryan Empire
one of the most populous empires of the time. Archaeologically, the period of
Mauryan rule in South Asia falls into the era of Northern Black Polished Ware
(NBPW). The "Arthashastra" and the Edicts of Ashoka are the primary sources of
written records of Mauryan times. The Lion Capital of Asoka at Sarnath has been
made the national emblem of India. Early history. Chanakya and Chandragupta
Maurya. The Maurya Empire was founded by Chandragupta Maurya, with help from
Chanakya, a Brahmin teacher at Takshashila. According to several legends,
Chanakya traveled to Magadha, a kingdom that was large and militarily powerful
and feared by its neighbors, but was insulted by its king Dhana Nanda, of the
Nanda Dynasty. Chanakya swore revenge and vowed to destroy the Nanda Empire.
Meanwhile, the conquering armies of Alexander the Great refused to cross the
Beas River and advance further eastward, deterred by the prospect of battling
Magadha. Alexander returned to Babylon and re-deployed most of his troops west
of the Indus river. Soon after Alexander died in Babylon in 323 BCE, his empire
fragmented, and local kings declared their independence, leaving several
smaller disunited satraps. The Greek generals Eudemus, and Peithon, ruled until
around 316 BCE, when Chandragupta Maurya (with the help of Chanakya, who was
now his advisor) utterly defeated the Macedonians and consolidated the region
under the control of his new seat of power in Magadha. Chandragupta Maurya's
rise to power is shrouded in mystery and controversy. On the one hand, a number
of ancient Indian accounts, such as the drama "Mudrarakshasa" ("Poem of
Rakshasa" â€“ "Rakshasa" was the prime minister of Magadha) by Visakhadatta,
describe his royal ancestry and even link him with the Nanda family. A
kshatriya tribe known as the Maurya's are referred to in the earliest Buddhist
texts, Mahaparinibbana Sutta. However, any conclusions are hard to make without
further historical evidence. Chandragupta first emerges in Greek accounts as
"Sandrokottos". As a young man he is said to have met Alexander. He is also
said to have met the Nanda king, angered him, and made a narrow escape.
Chanakya's original intentions were to train a guerilla army under
Chandragupta's command. The Mudrarakshasa of Visakhadutta as well as the Jaina
work Parisishtaparvan talk of Chandragupta's alliance with the Himalayan king
Parvatka, sometimes identified with Porus (Sir John Marshall "Taxila", p18, and
al.). Conquest of Magadha. Chanakya encouraged Chandragupta Maurya and his army
to take over the throne of Magadha. Using his intelligence network,
Chandragupta gathered many young men from across Magadha and other provinces,
men upset over the corrupt and oppressive rule of king Dhana, plus resources
necessary for his army to fight a long series of battles. These men included
the former general of Taxila, other accomplished students of Chanakya, the
representative of King Porus of Kakayee, his son Malayketu, and the rulers of
small states. Preparing to invade Pataliputra, Maurya hatched a plan. A battle
was announced and the Magadhan army was drawn from the city to a distant
battlefield to engage Maurya's forces. Maurya's general and spies meanwhile
bribed the corrupt general of Nanda. He also managed to create an atmosphere of
civil war in the kingdom, which culminated in the death of the heir to the
throne. Chanakya managed to win over popular sentiment. Ultimately Nanda
resigned, handing power to Chandragupta, and went into exile and was never
heard of again. Chanakya contacted the prime minister, Rakshasas, and made him
understand that his loyalty was to Magadha, not to the Magadha dynasty,
insisting that he continue in office. Chanakya also reiterated that choosing to
resist would start a war that would severely affect Magadha and destroy the
city. Rakshasa accepted Chanakya's reasoning, and Chandragupta Maurya was
legitimately installed as the new King of Magadha. Rakshasa became
Chandragupta's chief advisor, and Chanakya assumed the position of an elder
statesman. Chandragupta Maurya. Chandragupta campaigned against the Macedonians
when Seleucus I Nicator, in the process of creating the Seleucid Empire out of
the eastern conquests of Alexander the Great, tried to reconquer the
northwestern parts of India in 305 BCE. Seleucus failed (Seleucidâ€“Mauryan
war), but the two rulers finally concluded a peace treaty: a marital treaty
(Epigamia) was concluded, in which the Greeks offered their Princess for
alliance and help from him. Chandragupta snatched the satrapies of Paropamisade
(Kamboja and Gandhara), Arachosia (Kandhahar) and Gedrosia (Balochistan), and
Seleucus I received 500 war elephants that were to have a decisive role in his
victory against western Hellenistic kings at the Battle of Ipsus in 301 BCE.
Diplomatic relations were established and several Greeks, such as the historian
Megasthenes, Deimakos and Dionysius resided at the Mauryan court. Chandragupta
established a strong centralized state with a complex administration at
Pataliputra, which, according to Megasthenes, was ""surrounded by a wooden wall
pierced by 64 gates and 570 towersâ€” (and) rivaled the splendors of
contemporaneous Persian sites such as Susa and Ecbatana."" Chandragupta's son
Bindusara extended the rule of the Mauryan empire towards southern India. He
also had a Greek ambassador at his court, named Deimachus (Strabo 1â€“70).
Bindusara. Bindusara was the son of the first Mauryan emperor Chandragupta
Maurya and his queen Durdhara. During his reign, the empire expanded
southwards. According to the "Rajavalikatha" a Jain work, the original name of
this emperor was Simhasena. According to a legend mentioned in the Jain texts,
Chandragupta's Guru and advisor Chanakya used to feed the emperor with small
doses of poison to build his immunity against possible poisoning attempts by
the enemies. One day, Chandragupta not knowing about poison, shared his food
with his pregnant wife queen Durdhara who was 7 days away from delivery. The
queen not immune to the poison collapsed and died within few minutes. Chanakya
entered the room the very time she collapsed, and in order to save the child in
the womb, he immediately cut open the dead queen's belly and took the baby out,
by that time a drop of poison had already reached the baby and touched its head
due to which child got a permanent blueish spot (a "bindu") on his forehead.
Thus, the newborn was named "Bindusara". Bindusara, just 22 year-old, inherited
a large empire that consisted of what is now, Northern, Central and Eastern
parts of India along with parts of Afghanistan and Baluchistan. Bindusara
extended this empire to the southern part of India, as far as what is now known
as Karnataka. He brought sixteen states under the Mauryan Empire and thus
conquered almost all of the Indian peninsula (he is said to have conquered the
'land between the two seas' - the peninsular region between the Bay of Bengal
and the Arabian Sea). Bindusara didn't conquer the friendly Dravidian kingdoms
of the Cholas, ruled by King Ilamcetcenni, the Pandyas, and Cheras. Apart from
these southern states, Kalinga (the modern Orissa) was the only kingdom in
India that didn't form the part of Bindusara's empire. It was later conquered
by his son Ashoka, who served as the viceroy of Ujjaini during his father's
reign. Bindusara's life has not been documented as well as that of his father
Chandragupta or of his son Ashoka. Chanakya continued to serve as prime
minister during his reign. According to the mediaeval Tibetan scholar Taranatha
who visited India, Chanakya helped Bindusara "to destroy the nobles and kings
of the sixteen kingdoms and thus to become absolute master of the territory
between the eastern and western oceans." During his rule, the citizens of
Taxila revolted twice. The reason for the first revolt was the
maladministration of Suseema, his eldest son. The reason for the second revolt
is unknown, but Bindusara could not suppress it in his lifetime. It was crushed
by Ashoka after Bindusara's death. Ambassadors from the Seleucid Empire (such
as Deimachus) and Egypt visited his courts. He maintained good relations with
the Hellenic World. Unlike his father Chandragupta (who was a follower of
Jainism), Bindusara believed in the Ajivika sect. Bindusara's guru Pingalavatsa
(alias Janasana) was a Brahmin of the Ajivika sect. Bindusara's wife, Queen
Subhadrangi (alias Queen Aggamahesi) was a Brahmin also of the Ajivika sect
from Champa (present Bhagalpur district). Bindusara is accredited with giving
several grants to Brahmin monasteries ("Brahmana-bhatto"). Bindusara died in
272 BCE (some records say 268 BCE) and was succeeded by his son Ashoka the
Great. Ashoka the Great. Chandragupta's grandson i.e., Bindusara's son was
Ashokavardhan Maurya who was also known as Ashoka or Ashoka The Great (ruled
273- 232 BCE). As a young prince, Ashoka was a brilliant commander who crushed
revolts in Ujjain and Taxila. As monarch he was ambitious and aggressive, re-
asserting the Empire's superiority in southern and western India. But it was
his conquest of Kalinga (1842 CE) which proved to be the pivotal event of his
life. Although Ashoka's army succeeded in overwhelming Kalinga forces of royal
soldiers and civilian units, an estimated 100,000 soldiers and civilians were
killed in the furious warfare, including over 10,000 of Ashoka's own men.
Hundreds of thousands of people were adversely affected by the destruction and
fallout of war. When he personally witnessed the devastation, Ashoka began
feeling remorse. Although the annexation of Kalinga was completed, Ashoka
embraced the teachings of Buddhism, and renounced war and violence. Ashoka
implemented principles of "ahimsa" by banning hunting and violent sports
activity and ending indentured and forced labor (many thousands of people in
war-ravaged Kalinga had been forced into hard labor and servitude). While he
maintained a large and powerful army, to keep the peace and maintain authority,
Ashoka expanded friendly relations with states across Asia and Europe, and he
sponsored Buddhist missions. He undertook a massive public works building
campaign across the country. Over 40 years of peace, harmony and prosperity
made Ashoka one of the most successful and famous monarchs in Indian history.
He remains an idealized figure of inspiration in modern India. The Edicts of
Ashoka, set in stone, are found throughout the Subcontinent. Ranging from as
far west as Afghanistan and as far south as Andhra (Nellore District), Ashoka's
edicts state his policies and accomplishments. Although predominantly written
in Prakrit, two of them were written in Greek, and one in both Greek and
Aramaic. Ashoka's edicts refer to the Greeks, Kambojas, and Gandharas as
peoples forming a frontier region of his empire. They also attest to Ashoka's
having sent envoys to the Greek rulers in the West as far as the Mediterranean.
The edicts precisely name each of the rulers of the Hellenic world at the time
such as "Amtiyoko" (Antiochus), "Tulamaya" (Ptolemy), "Amtikini" (Antigonos),
"Maka" (Magas) and "Alikasudaro" (Alexander) as recipients of Ashoka's
proselytism. The Edicts also accurately locate their territory "600 yojanas
away" (a yojanas being about 7 miles), corresponding to the distance between
the center of India and Greece (roughly 4,000 miles). Administration. The
Empire was divided into four provinces, which one of the four, look like a
giant crescents. with the imperial capital at Pataliputra. From Ashokan edicts,
the names of the four provincial capitals are Tosali (in the east), Ujjain (in
the west), Suvarnagiri (in the south), and Taxila (in the north). The head of
the provincial administration was the "Kumara" (royal prince), who governed the
provinces as king's representative. The "kumara" was assisted by Mahamatyas and
council of ministers. This organizational structure was reflected at the
imperial level with the Emperor and his "Mantriparishad" (Council of
Ministers). Historians theorize that the organization of the Empire was in line
with the extensive bureaucracy described by Kautilya in the Arthashastra: a
sophisticated civil service governed everything from municipal hygiene to
international trade. The expansion and defense of the empire was made possible
by what appears to have been the largest standing army of its time. According
to Megasthenes, the empire wielded a military of 600,000 infantry, 30,000
cavalry, and 9,000 war elephants. A vast espionage system collected
intelligence for both internal and external security purposes. Having renounced
offensive warfare and expansionism, Ashoka nevertheless continued to maintain
this large army, to protect the Empire and instill stability and peace across
West and South Asia. Economy. For the first time in South Asia, political unity
and military security allowed for a common economic system and enhanced trade
and commerce, with increased agricultural productivity. The previous situation
involving hundreds of kingdoms, many small armies, powerful regional
chieftains, and internecine warfare, gave way to a disciplined central
authority. Farmers were freed of tax and crop collection burdens from regional
kings, paying instead to a nationally administered and strict-but-fair system
of taxation as advised by the principles in the "Arthashastra". Chandragupta
Maurya established a single currency across India, and a network of regional
governors and administrators and a civil service provided justice and security
for merchants, farmers and traders. The Mauryan army wiped out many gangs of
bandits, regional private armies, and powerful chieftains who sought to impose
their own supremacy in small areas. Although regimental in revenue collection,
Maurya also sponsored many public works and waterways to enhance productivity,
while internal trade in India expanded greatly due to newfound political unity
and internal peace. Under the Indo-Greek friendship treaty, and during Ashoka's
reign, an international network of trade expanded. The Khyber Pass, on the
modern boundary of Pakistan and Afghanistan, became a strategically important
port of trade and intercourse with the outside world. Greek states and Hellenic
kingdoms in West Asia became important trade partners of India. Trade also
extended through the Malay peninsula into Southeast Asia. India's exports
included silk goods and textiles, spices and exotic foods. The Empire was
enriched further with an exchange of scientific knowledge and technology with
Europe and West Asia. Ashoka also sponsored the construction of thousands of
roads, waterways, canals, hospitals, rest-houses and other public works. The
easing of many over-rigorous administrative practices, including those
regarding taxation and crop collection, helped increase productivity and
economic activity across the Empire. In many ways, the economic situation in
the Mauryan Empire is analogous to the Roman Empire of several centuries later.
Both had extensive trade connections and both had organizations similar to
corporations. While Rome had organizational entities which were largely used
for public state-driven projects, Mauryan India had numerous private commercial
entities. These existed purely for private commerce and developed before the
Mauryan Empire itself. (See also Economic history of India.) Religion.
Hinduism. Hinduism was the major religion at the time of inception of the
empire, Hindu priests and ministers used to be an important part of the
emperor's court, e.g. Chanakya. James Hastings writes that they are devotees of
Narayana (Vishnu), although Shilanka speaking of the Ekandandins in another
connection identifies them as Shaivas (devotees of Shiva). Scholar James
Hastings identifies the name "Mankhaliputta" or "Mankhali" with the "bamboo
staff". Scholar Jitendra N. Banerjea compares them to the Pasupatas Shaivas.
Another scholar, Charpentier, believes that the Ajivikas worshiped Shiva before
Makkhali Goshala. As Chanakya wrote in his text "Chanakya Niti", "Humbly bowing
down before the almighty Lord Sri Vishnu, the Lord of the three worlds, I
recite maxims of the science of political ethics (niti) selected from the
various satras (scriptures)" Even after embracing Buddhism, Ashoka retained the
membership of Hindu Brahmana priests and ministers in his court. Mauryan
society began embracing the philosophy of "ahimsa", and given the increased
prosperity and improved law enforcement, crime and internal conflicts reduced
dramatically. Also greatly discouraged was the caste system and orthodox
discrimination, as Mauryans began to absorb the ideals and values of Jain and
Buddhist teachings along with traditional Vedic Hindu teachings. Buddhism.
Ashoka initially practiced Hinduism but later embraced Buddhism; following the
Kalinga War, he renounced expansionism and aggression, and the harsher
injunctions of the "Arthashastra" on the use of force, intensive policing, and
ruthless measures for tax collection and against rebels. Ashoka sent a mission
led by his son Mahinda and daughter Sanghamitta to Sri Lanka, whose king Tissa
was so charmed with Buddhist ideals that he adopted them himself and made
Buddhism the state religion. Ashoka sent many Buddhist missions to West Asia,
Greece and South East Asia, and commissioned the construction of monasteries,
schools and publication of Buddhist literature across the empire. He is
believed to have built as many as 84,000 stupas across India i.e. Sanchi and
Mahabodhi Temple, and he increased the popularity of Buddhism in Afghanistan,
Thailand and North Asia including Siberia. Ashoka helped convene the Third
Buddhist Council of India and South Asia's Buddhist orders, near his capital, a
council that undertook much work of reform and expansion of the Buddhist
religion. Indian merchants embraced Buddhism and played a large role in
spreading the religion across the Mauryan empire Jainism. Emperor Chandragupta
Maurya embraced Jainism after retiring. At an older age, Chandragupta renounced
his throne and material possessions to join a wandering group of Jain monks.
Chandragupta was a disciple of Acharya Bhadrabahu. It is said that in his last
days, he observed the rigorous but self-purifying Jain ritual of santhara i.e.
fast unto death, at Shravana Belgola in Karnataka. However, his successor,
Emperor Bindusara, was a follower of a Hindu ascetic movement, Ä€jÄ«vika and
distanced himself from Jain and Buddhist movements. Samprati, the grandson of
Ashoka also embraced Jainism. Samrat Samprati was influenced by the teachings
of Jain monk Arya Suhasti Suri and he is known to have built 125,000 derasars
across India. Some of them are still found in towns of Ahmedabad, Viramgam,
Ujjain & Palitana. It is also said that just like Ashoka, Samprati sent
messengers & preachers to Greece, Persia & middle-east for the spread of
Jainism. But to date no research has been done in this area. Thus, Jainism
became a vital force under the Mauryan Rule. Chandragupta and Samprati are
credited for the spread of Jainism in South India. Lakhs of temples & stupas
were erected during their reign. But due to lack of royal patronage & its
strict principles, along with the rise of Shankaracharya and Ramanuja, Jainism,
once the major religion of southern India, began to decline. Architectural
remains. Architectural remains of the Maurya period are rather few. Remains of
a hypostyle building with about 80 columns of a height of about 10 meters have
been found in Kumhrar, 5Â km from Patna Railway station, and is one of the very
few sites that has been connected to the rule of the Mauryas. The style is
rather reminiscent of Persian Achaemenid architecture. The grottoes of Barabar
Caves, are another example of Mauryan architecture, especially the decorated
front of the Lomas Rishi grotto. These were offered by the Mauryas to the
Buddhist sect of the Ä€jÄ«vikas. The most widespread example of Maurya
architecture are the Pillars of Ashoka, often exquisitely decorated, with more
than 40 spread throughout the Indian subcontinent. Natural history in the times
of the Mauryas. The protection of animals in India became serious business by
the time of the Maurya dynasty; being the first empire to provide a unified
political entity in India, the attitude of the Mauryas towards forests, its
denizens and fauna in general is of interest. The Mauryas firstly looked at
forests as a resource. For them, the most important forest product was the
elephant. Military might in those times depended not only upon horses and men
but also battle-elephants; these played a role in the defeat of Seleucus, one
of Alexander's former generals. The Mauryas sought to preserve supplies of
elephants since it was cheaper and took less time to catch, tame and train wild
elephants than to raise them. Kautilya's "Arthashastra" contains not only
maxims on ancient statecraft, but also unambiguously specifies the
responsibilities of officials such as the "Protector of the Elephant Forests".
The Mauryas also designated separate forests to protect supplies of timber, as
well as lions and tigers, for skins. Elsewhere the "Protector of Animals" also
worked to eliminate thieves, tigers and other predators to render the woods
safe for grazing cattle. The Mauryas valued certain forest tracts in strategic
or economic terms and instituted curbs and control measures over them. They
regarded all forest tribes with distrust and controlled them with bribery and
political subjugation. They employed some of them, the food-gatherers or
"aranyaca" to guard borders and trap animals. The sometimes tense and conflict-
ridden relationship nevertheless enabled the Mauryas to guard their vast
empire. However, the edicts of Ashoka reflect more the desire of rulers than
actual events; the mention of a 100 'panas' (coins) fine for poaching deer in
royal hunting preserves shows that rule-breakers did exist. The legal
restrictions conflicted with the practices freely exercised by the common
people in hunting, felling, fishing and setting fires in forests. Contacts with
the Hellenistic world. Reconquest of the Northwest (c. 310 BCE). Chandragupta
ultimately occupied Northwestern India, in the territories formerly ruled by
the Greeks, where he fought the satraps (described as "Prefects" in Western
sources) left in place after Alexander (Justin), among whom may have been
Eudemus, ruler in the western Punjab until his departure in 317 BCE or Peithon,
son of Agenor, ruler of the Greek colonies along the Indus until his departure
for Babylon in 316 BCE. Conflict and alliance with Seleucus (305 BCE). Though
no accounts of the conflict remain, it is clear that Seleucus fared poorly
against the Indian Emperor as he failed in conquering any territory, and in
fact, was forced to surrender much that was already his. Regardless, Seleucus
and Chandragupta ultimately reached a settlement and through a treaty sealed in
305 BCE, Seleucus, according to Strabo, ceded a number of territories to
Chandragupta, including southern Afghanistan and parts of Persia. Accordingly,
Seleucus obtained five hundred war elephants, a military asset which would play
a decisive role at the Battle of Ipsus in 301 BCE. Marital alliance. It is
generally thought that Chandragupta married Seleucus's daughter, or a Greek
Macedonian princess, a gift from Seleucus to formalize an alliance. In a return
gesture, Chandragupta sent 500 war elephants, a military asset which would play
a decisive role at the Battle of Ipsus in 302 BCE. In addition to this treaty,
Seleucus dispatched an ambassador, Megasthenes, to Chandragupta, and later
Deimakos to his son Bindusara, at the Mauryan court at Pataliputra (modern
Patna in Bihar state). Later Ptolemy II Philadelphus, the ruler of Ptolemaic
Egypt and contemporary of Ashoka the Great, is also recorded by Pliny the Elder
as having sent an ambassador named Dionysius to the Mauryan court. Mainstream
scholarship asserts that Chandragupta received vast territory west of the
Indus, including the Hindu Kush, modern day Afghanistan, and the Balochistan
province of Pakistan. Archaeologically, concrete indications of Mauryan rule,
such as the inscriptions of the Edicts of Ashoka, are known as far as Kandahar
in southern Afghanistan. The treaty on "Epigamia" implies lawful marriage
between Greeks and Indians was recognized at the State level, although it is
unclear whether it occurred among dynastic rulers or common people, or both. .
Exchange of ambassadors. Seleucus dispatched an ambassador, Megasthenes, to
Chandragupta, and later Deimakos to his son Bindusara, at the Mauryan court at
Pataliputra (Modern Patna in Bihar state). Later Ptolemy II Philadelphus, the
ruler of Ptolemaic Egypt and contemporary of Ashoka, is also recorded by Pliny
the Elder as having sent an ambassador named Dionysius to the Mauryan court.
Buddhist missions to the West (c. 250 BCE). The Greeks in India even seem to
have played an active role in the propagation of Buddhism, as some of the
emissaries of Ashoka, such as Dharmaraksita, are described in Pali sources as
leading Greek ("Yona") Buddhist monks, active in Buddhist proselytism (the
Mahavamsa, XII). Decline. Ashoka was followed for 50 years by a succession of
weaker kings. Brihadrata, the last ruler of the Mauryan dynasty, held
territories that had shrunk considerably from the time of emperor Ashoka,
although he still upheld the Buddhist faith. Sunga coup (185 BCE). Brihadrata
was assassinated in 185 BCE during a military parade, by the commander-in-chief
of his guard, the Brahmin general Pusyamitra Sunga, who then took over the
throne and established the Sunga dynasty. Buddhist records such as the
Asokavadana write that the assassination of Brhadrata and the rise of the Sunga
empire led to a wave of persecution for Buddhists, and a resurgence of
Hinduism. According to Sir John Marshall, Pusyamitra may have been the main
author of the persecutions, although later Sunga kings seem to have been more
supportive of Buddhism. Other historians, such as Etienne Lamotte and Romila
Thapar, among others, have argued that archaeological evidence in favor of the
allegations of persecution of Buddhists are lacking, and that the extent and
magnitude of the atrocities have been exaggerated. Establishment of the Indo-
Greek Kingdom (180 BCE). The fall of the Mauryas left the Khyber Pass
unguarded, and a wave of foreign invasion followed. The Greco-Bactrian king,
Demetrius, capitalized on the break-up, and he conquered southern Afghanistan
and Pakistan around 180 BCE, forming the Indo-Greek Kingdom. The Indo-Greeks
would maintain holdings on the trans-Indus region, and make forays into central
India, for about a century. Under them, Buddhism flourished, and one of their
kings Menander became a famous figure of Buddhism, he was to establish a new
capital of Sagala, the modern city of Sialkot. However, the extent of their
domains and the lengths of their rule are subject to much debate. Numismatic
evidence indicates that they retained holdings in the subcontinent right up to
the birth of Christ. Although the extent of their successes against indigenous
powers such as the Sungas, Satavahanas, and Kalingas are unclear, what is clear
is that Scythian tribes, renamed Indo-Scythians, brought about the demise of
the Indo-Greeks from around 70 BCE and retained lands in the trans-Indus, the
region of Mathura, and Gujarat. Reasons. The decline of the Maurya Dynasty was
rather rapid after the death of Ashoka/Asoka. One obvious reason for it was the
succession of weak kings. Another immediate cause was the partition of the
Empire into two. Had not the partition taken place, the Greek invasions could
have been held back giving a chance to the Mauryas to re-establish some degree
of their previous power. Regarding the decline much has been written.
Haraprasad Sastri contends that the revolt by Pushyamitra was the result of
brahminical reaction against the pro-Buddhist policies of Ashoka and pro-Jaina
policies of his successors. Basing themselves on this thesis, some maintain the
view that brahminical reaction was responsible for the decline because of the
following reasons. All of these four points can be easily refuted. After all,
the distinction between Hinduism and Buddhism in India was purely sectarian and
never more than the difference between saivism and vaishnavism. The
exclusiveness of religious doctrines is a Semitic conception, which was unknown
to India for a long time. Buddha himself was looked upon in his lifetime and
afterwards as a Hindu saint and avatar and his followers were but another sect
in the great Aryan tradition. Ashoka was a Buddhist in the same way as Harsha
was a Budhist, or Kumarapala was a Jain. But in the view of the people of the
day he was a Hindu monarch following one of the recognized sects. His own
inscriptions bear ample withness to the fact. While his doctrines follow the
middle path, his gifts are to the brahmibns, sramansa (Buddhist priests) and
others equally. His own name of adoption is Devanam Priya, the beloved of the
gods. Which gods? Surely the gods of the Aryan religion. Buddhism had no gods
of its own. The idea that Ashoka was a kind of Buddhist Constantine declearing
himself against paganism is a complete misreading of India conditions. Asoka
was essentially a Hindu, as indeed was the founder of the sect to which he
belonged. Raychaudhury too rebuts the arguments of Sastri. The empire had
shrunk considerably and there was no revolution. Killing the Mauryan King while
he was reviewing the army points to a palace coup d'Ã©tat not a revolution. The
organization were ready to accept any one who could promise a more efficient
organisation. Also if Pushyamitra was really a representative of brahminical
reaction he neighbouting kings would have definitely given him assistance. The
argument that the empire became effete because of Asokan policies is also very
thin. All the evidence suggests that Asoka was a stern monarch although his
reign witnessed only a single campaign. He was shrewd enough in retaining
Kalinga although he expressed his remorse. Well he was wordly-wise to enslave
and-and-half lakh sudras of Kalinga and bring them to the Magadha region to cut
forests and cultivate land. More than this his tours of the empire were not
only meant for the sake of piety but also for keeping an eye on the centrifugal
tendencies of the empire. Which addressing the tribal people Asoka expressed
his willingness to for given. More draconian was Ashoka's message to the forest
tribes who were warned of the power which he possessed. This view of
Raychoudhury on the pacifism of the State cannot be substantiated. Apart from
these two major writers there is a third view as expressed by kosambi. He based
his arguments that unnccessary measures were taken up to increase tax and the
punch-marked coins of the period show evidence of debasement. This contention
too cannot be up held. It is quite possible that debased coins began to
circulate during the period of the later Mauryas. On the other hand the
debasement may also indicate that there was an increased demand for silver in
relation to goods leading to the silver content of the coins being reduced.
More important point is the fact that the material remains of the post-Asokan
era do not suggest any pressure on the economy. Instead the economy prospered
as shown by archaeological evidence at Hastinapura and Sisupalqarh. The reign
of Asoka was an asset to the economy. The unification of the country under
single efficient administration the organization and increase in communications
meant the development of trade as well as an opening of many new commercial
interest. In the post - Asokan period surplus wealth was used by the rising
commercial classes to decorate religious buildings. The sculpture at Barhut and
Sanchi and the Deccan caves was the contribution of this new bourgeoisie. Still
another view regarding of the decline of Mauryas was that the coup of
Pushyamitra was a peoples' revolt against Mauryans oppression and a rejection
of the Maurya adoption of foreign ideas, as far interest in Mauryan Art. This
argument is based on the view that Sunga art (Sculpture at Barhut and Sanchi)
is more earthy and in the folk tradition that Maruyan art. This is more
stretching the argument too far. The character of Sunga art changed because it
served a different purpose and its donors belonged to different social classes.
Also, Sunga art conformed more to the folk traditions because Buddhism itself
had incorporated large elements of popular cults and because the donors of this
art, many of whom may have been artisans, were culturally more in the
mainstream of folk tradition. One more reasoning to support the popular revolt
theory is based on Asoka's ban on the samajas. Asoka did ban festive meetings
and discouraged eating of meat. These too might have entagonised the population
but it is doubtful whether these prohibitions were strictly enforced. The above
argument (people's revolt) also means that Asoka's policy was continued by his
successors also, an assumption not confirmed by historical data. Further more,
it is unlikely that there was sufficient national consciousness among the
varied people of the Mauryan empire. It is also argued by these theorists that
Asokan policy in all its details was continued by the later Mauryas, which is
not a historical fact. Still another argument that is advanced in favour of the
idea of revolt against the Mauryas is that the land tax under the Mauryas was
one-quarter, which was very burden some to the cultivator. But historical
evidence shows something else. The land tax varied from region to region
according to the fertility of the soil and the availability of water. The
figure of one quarter stated by Magasthenes probably referred only to the
fertile and well-watered regions around Pataliputra. Thus the decline of the
Mauryan empire cannot be satisfactorily explained by referring to Military
inactivity, Brahmin resentment, popular uprising or economic pressure. The
causes of the decline were more fundamental. The organization of administration
and the concept of the State were such that they could be sustained by only by
kings of considerably personal ability. After the death of Asoka there was
definitely a weakening at the center particularly after the division of the
empire, which inevitably led to the breaking of provinces from the Mauryan
rule. Also, it should be borne in mind that all the officials owed their
loyalty to the king and not to the State. This meant that a change of king
could result in change of officials leading to the demoralization of the
officers. Mauryas had no system of ensuring the continuation of well-planned
bureaucracy. The next important weakness of the Mauryan Empire was its extreme
centralization and the virtual monopoly of all powers by the king. There was a
total absence of any advisory institution representing public opinion. That is
why the Mauryas depended greatly on the espionage system. Added to this lack of
representative institutions there was no distinction between the executive and
the judiciary of the government. An incapable king may use the officers either
for purposes of oppression or fail to use it for good purpose. And as the
successors of Asoka happened to be weak, the empire inevitably declined. Added
to these two factors, there is no conception of national unity of political
consciousness. It is clear from the fact that even the resistance against the
Greeks as the hated miecchas was not an organized one. The only resistance was
that of the local rulers who were afraid of losing their newly acquired
territory. It is significant that when Porus was fighting Alexander, or when
Subhagasena was paying tribute to Antiochus, they were doing so as isolated
rulers in the northwest of India. They had no support from Pataliputra, nor are
they even mentioned in any Indian sources as offering resistance to the hated
Yavanas. Even the heroic Porus, who, enemy though he was, won the admiration of
the Greeks, is left unrecorded in Indian sources. Another associated point of
great importance is the fact that the Mauryan Empire which was highly
centralized and autocratic was the first and last one of its kind. If the
Mauryan Empire did not survive for long, it could be because of the failure of
the successors of Asoka to hold on to the principles that could make success of
such an empire. Further, the Mauryan empire and the philosophy of the empire
was not in tune with the spirit of the time because Aryanism and brahminism was
very much there. According to the Brahmin or Aryan philosophy, the king was
only an upholder of dharma, but never the crucial or architecture factor
influencing the whole of life. In other words, the sentiment of the people
towards the political factor, that is the State was never established in India.
Such being the reality, when the successors of Asoka failed to make use of the
institution and the thinking that was needed to make a success of a centralized
political authority. The Mauryan Empire declined without anyone's regret. Other
factors of importance that contributed to the decline and lack of national
unity were the ownership of land and inequality of economic levels. Land could
frequently change hands. Fertility wise the region of the Ganges was more
prosperous than northern Deccan. Mauryan administration was not fully tuned to
meet the existing disparities in economic activity. Had the southern region
been more developed, the empire could have witnessed economic homogeneity. Also
the people of the sub-continent were not of uniform cultural level. The
sophisticated cities and the trade centers were a great contrast to the
isolated village communities. All these differences naturally led to the
economic and political structures being different from region to region. It is
also a fact that even the languages spoken were varied. The history of a sub-
continent and their casual relationships. The causes of the decline of the
Mauryan empire must, in large part, be attributed to top heavy administration
where authority was entirely in the hands of a few persons while national
consciousness was unknown.
