Maximilien de Robespierre Maximilien Fran√ßois Marie Isidore de Robespierre (;
6 May 1758 ‚Äì 28 July 1794) was a French lawyer, politician, and one of the
best-known and most influential figures of the French Revolution. As a member
of the Estates-General, the Constituent Assembly and the Jacobin Club, he
advocated against the death penalty and for the abolition of slavery, while
supporting equality of rights, universal suffrage and the establishment of a
republic. He opposed war with Austria and the possibility of a coup by La
Fayette. As a member of the Committee of Public Safety, he was instrumental in
the period of the Revolution commonly known as the Reign of Terror, which ended
a few months after his arrest and execution in July 1794. Influenced by 18th-
century Enlightenment "philosophes" such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau and
Montesquieu, he was a capable articulator of the beliefs of the left-wing
bourgeoisie. He was described as being physically unimposing and immaculate in
attire and personal manners. His supporters called him "The Incorruptible",
while his adversaries called him "dictateur sanguinaire" (bloodthirsty
dictator). Early life. Maximilien de Robespierre was born in Arras, in the old
province of Artois, France. His family has been traced back to the 12th century
in Picardy; some of his direct ancestors in the male line were notaries in the
village of Carvin near Arras from the beginning of the 17th century. He is
sometimes rumoured to have been of Irish descent, and it has been suggested
that his surname could be a corruption of 'Robert Speirs'. George Henry Lewes,
Ernest Hamel, Jules Michelet, Alphonse de Lamartine and Hilaire Belloc have all
cited this theory although there appears to be little supporting evidence. His
paternal grandfather, Maximilien de Robespierre, established himself in Arras
as a lawyer. His father, Maximilien Barth√©l√©my Fran√ßois de Robespierre, also
a lawyer at the "Conseil d'Artois", married Jacqueline Marguerite Carrault, the
daughter of a brewer, in 1758. Maximilien was the oldest of four children and
was conceived out of wedlock; his siblings were Charlotte, Henriette and
Augustin. In 1764, Madame de Robespierre died in childbirth. Her husband
subsequently left Arras and traveled throughout Europe, only occasionally
living in Arras, until his death in Munich in 1777; the children were brought
up by their maternal grandfather and aunts. Maximilien attended the "coll√®ge"
(middle school) of Arras when he was eight years old, already knowing how to
read and write. In October 1769, on the recommendation of the bishop, he
obtained a scholarship at the "Lyc√©e Louis-le-Grand" in Paris. Robespierre
studied at "Louis-le-Grand" until age twenty-three, where he also received his
training as a lawyer. Upon his graduation he received a 600 livre special prize
for twelve years of exemplary academic success and personal good conduct. Here
he learned to admire the idealised Roman Republic and the rhetoric of Cicero,
Cato and other classic figures. His fellow pupils included Camille Desmoulins
and Stanislas Fr√©ron. He also was exposed to Rousseau during this time and
adopted many of the same principles. Robespierre became more intrigued by the
idea of a virtuous self, a man who stands alone accompanied only by his
conscience. Shortly after his coronation, King Louis XVI visited "Louis-le-
Grand". Robespierre, then 17 years old, had been chosen out of five hundred
pupils to deliver a speech to welcome the king; as a prize-winning student, he
had been the clear choice. On the day of the speech, Robespierre and the crowd
waited for the king and queen for several hours in the rain. The king and queen
remained in their coach throughout the ceremony and left immediately afterward.
Early politics. As an adult, and possibly even as a young man, the greatest
influence on Robespierre's political ideas was Jean Jacques Rousseau.
Robespierre's conception of revolutionary virtue and his program for
constructing political sovereignty out of direct democracy came from Rousseau,
and in pursuit of these ideals he eventually became known during the Jacobin
Republic as ‚Äúthe Incorruptible.‚Äù Robespierre believed that the people of
France were fundamentally good and were therefore capable of advancing the
public well-being of the nation. After having completed his law studies,
Robespierre was admitted to the Arras bar. The Bishop of Arras, Louis Fran√ßois
Marc Hilaire de Conzi√©, appointed him criminal judge in the Diocese of Arras
in March 1782. Although this appointment did not prevent him from practicing at
the bar, he soon resigned owing to discomfort in ruling on capital cases
arising from his early opposition to the death penalty. He quickly became a
successful advocate and chose in principle to represent the poor. During court
hearings he was known often to advocate the ideals of the Enlightenment and
argue for the rights of man. Later in his career, he read widely and also
became interested in society in general. He became regarded as one of the best
writers and most popular young men of Arras. In December 1783, he was elected a
member of the academy of Arras, the meetings of which he attended regularly. In
1784, he obtained a medal from the academy of Metz for his essay on the
question of whether the relatives of a condemned criminal should share his
disgrace. He and Pierre Louis de Lacretelle, an advocate and journalist in
Paris, divided the prize. Many of his subsequent essays were less successful,
but Robespierre was compensated for these failures by his popularity in the
literary and musical society at Arras, known as the "Rosatia", of which Lazare
Carnot, who would be his colleague on the Committee of Public Safety, was also
a member. In 1788, he took part in a discussion of how the French provincial
government should be elected, arguing in his "Addresse √  la nation
art√©sienne" that if the former mode of election by the members of the
provincial estates were again adopted, the new Estates-General would not
represent the people of France. It is possible he addressed this issue so that
he could have a chance to take part in the proceedings and thus change the
policies of the monarchy. King Louis XVI later announced new elections for all
provinces, thus allowing Robespierre to run for the position of deputy for the
Third Estate. Although the leading members of the corporation were elected,
Robespierre, their chief opponent, succeeded in getting elected with them. In
the assembly of the "bailliage" rivalry ran still higher, but Robespierre had
begun to make his mark in politics with the "Avis aux habitants de la campagne"
(Arras, 1789). With this he secured the support of the country electors and,
although only thirty, comparatively poor and lacking patronage, he was elected
fifth deputy of the Third Estate of Artois to the Estates-General. When
Robespierre arrived at Versailles, he was relatively unknown, but he soon
became part of the representative National Assembly which then transformed into
the Constituent Assembly. While the Constituent Assembly occupied itself with
drawing up a constitution, Robespierre turned from the assembly of provincial
lawyers and wealthy bourgeois to the people of Paris. He was a frequent speaker
in the Constituent Assembly; he voiced many ideas for the Declaration of the
Rights of Man and Constitutional Provisions, often with great success. He was
eventually recognized as second only to P√©tion de Villeneuve ‚Äì if second he
was ‚Äì as a leader of the small body of the extreme left; "the thirty voices"
as Mirabeau contemptuously called them. Jacobin club. Robespierre soon became
involved with the new Society of the Friends of the Constitution, known
eventually as the Jacobin Club. This had consisted originally of the deputies
from Brittany only. After the Assembly moved to Paris, the Club began to admit
various leaders of the Parisian bourgeoisie to its membership. As time went on,
many of the more intelligent artisans and small shopkeepers became members of
the club. Among such men, Robespierre found a sympathetic audience. As the
wealthier bourgeois of Paris and right-wing deputies seceded from the club of
1789, the influence of the old leaders of the Jacobins, such as Barnave,
Duport, Alexandre de Lameth, diminished. When they, alarmed at the progress of
the Revolution, founded the club of the Feuillants in 1791, the left, including
Robespierre and his friends, dominated the Jacobin Club. On 15 May 1791,
Robespierre proposed and carried the motion that no deputy who sat in the
Constituent could sit in the succeeding Assembly. The flight on 20 June, and
subsequent arrest at Varennes of Louis XVI and his family resulted in
Robespierre declaring himself at the Jacobin Club to be "ni monarchiste ni
r√©publicain" ("neither monarchist nor republican"). But this was not unusual;
very few at this point were avowed republicans. After the massacre on the Champ
de Mars on 17 July 1791, in order to be nearer to the Assembly and the
Jacobins, he moved to live in the house of Maurice Duplay, a cabinetmaker
residing in the Rue Saint-Honor√© and an ardent admirer of Robespierre.
Robespierre lived there (with two short intervals excepted) until his death. In
fact, according to his doctor, Souberbielle, Vilate, a juror on the
Revolutionary Tribunal, and his host's youngest daughter (who would later marry
Philippe Le Bas of the Committee of General Security), he became engaged to the
eldest daughter of his host, √âl√©onore Duplay. On 30 September, on the
dissolution of the Constituent Assembly, the people of Paris crowned P√©tion
and Robespierre as the two incorruptible patriots in an attempt to honor their
purity of principles, their modest ways of living, and their refusal of bribes
and offers. With the dissolution of the Assembly he returned to Arras for a
short visit, where he met with a triumphant reception. In November he returned
to Paris to take the position of public prosecutor of Paris. Opposition to war
with Austria. In February 1792, Jacques Pierre Brissot, one of the leaders of
the Girondist party in the Legislative Assembly, urged that France should
declare war against Austria. Marat and Robespierre opposed him, because they
feared the influence of militarism, which might be turned to the advantage of
the reactionary forces. Robespierre was also convinced that the internal
stability of the country was more important; this opposition from expected
allies irritated the Girondists, and the war became a major point of contention
between the factions. Robespierre countered, "A revolutionary war must be waged
to free subjects and slaves from unjust tyranny, not for the traditional
reasons of defending dynasties and expanding frontiers..." Indeed, argued
Robespierre, such a war could only favor the forces of counter-revolution,
since it would play into the hands of those who opposed the sovereignty of the
people. The risks of Caesarism were clear, for in wartime the powers of the
generals would grow at the expense of ordinary soldiers, and the power of the
king and court at the expense of the Assembly. These dangers should not be
overlooked, he reminded his listeners, "...in troubled periods of history,
generals often became the arbiters of the fate of their countries." In April
1792, Robespierre resigned the post of public prosecutor of Versailles, which
he had officially held, but never practiced, since February, and started a
journal, "Le D√©fenseur de la Constitution." The journal served multiple
purposes: defending Robespierre from the accusations of Girondist leaders,
countering the influence of the royal court in public policy, and also giving
voice to the economic interests of the broader masses in Paris and beyond. The
National Convention. When the Legislative Assembly declared war against Austria
on 20 April 1792, Robespierre responded by working to reduce the political
influence of the officer class, the generals and the king. While arguing for
the welfare of common soldiers, Robespierre urged new promotions to mitigate
domination of the officer class by the aristocratic √âcole Militaire; along
with other Jacobins he also urged the creation of popular militias to defend
France. This sentiment reflected the perspective of more radical Jacobins
including those of the Marseille Club, who in May and June 1792 wrote to
P√©tion and the people of Paris, "Here and at Toulon we have debated the
possibility of forming a column of 100,000 men to sweep away our enemies...
Paris may have need of help. Call on us!" Because French forces had suffered
disastrous defeats and a series of defections at the onset of the war,
Robespierre and Danton feared the possibility of a military coup d'√©tat above
all led by the Marquis de Lafayette, who in June advocated the suppression of
the Jacobin Club. Robespierre publicly attacked him in scathing terms:
"General, while from the midst of your camp you declared war upon me, which you
had thus far spared for the enemies of our state, while you denounced me as an
enemy of liberty to the army, national guard and Nation in letters published by
your purchased papers, I had thought myself only disputing with a general...
but not yet the dictator of France, arbitrator of the state." In early June
Robespierre proposed an end to the Monarchy and the subordination of the
Assembly to the popular will. Following the King's veto of the Legislative
Assembly's efforts to raise a militia and suppress non-juring priests, the
Monarchy faced an abortive insurrection on 20 June, exactly three years after
the Tennis Court Oath. Insurrectionary forces entered Paris without the King's
approval, and on 10 August 1792, these insurrectionary militias led a
successful assault upon the Tuileries Palace with the intention of overthrowing
the Monarchy. On 16 August, Robespierre presented the petition of the Commune
to the Legislative Assembly, demanding the establishment of a revolutionary
tribunal and the summoning of a Convention chosen by universal suffrage.
Dismissed from his command of the French Northern Army, Lafayette fled France
along with other sympathetic officers. In September, Robespierre was elected
first deputy for Paris to the National Convention. Robespierre and his allies
took the benches high at the back of the hall, giving them the label 'the
Montagnards', or 'the Mountain'; below them were the 'Man√®ge' of the
Girondists and then 'the Plain' of the independents. The Girondists at the
Convention accused Robespierre of failing to stop the September Massacres. On
26 September, the Girondist Marc-David Lasource accused Robespierre of wanting
to form a dictatorship. Rumours spread that Robespierre, Marat and Danton were
plotting to establish a triumvirate. On 29 October, Louvet de Couvrai attacked
Robespierre in a speech, possibly written by Madame Roland. On 5 November,
Robespierre defended himself, the Jacobin Club and his supporters in and beyond
Paris. Robespierre's speech marked a profound political break between the
Montagnards and the Girondins, strengthening the former in the context of an
increasingly revolutionary situation punctuated by the fall of Louis XVI, the
invasion of France and the September Massacres in Paris. It also heralded
increased involvement and intervention by the sans-culottes in revolutionary
politics. Execution of Louis XVI. The Convention's unanimous declaration of a
French Republic on 21 September 1792 left open the fate of the King; a
commission was therefore established to examine evidence against him while the
Convention's Legislation Committee considered legal aspects of any future
trial. Most Montagnards favored judgment and execution, while the Girondins
were divided concerning Louis' fate, with some arguing for royal inviolability,
others for clemency, and some advocating lesser punishment or death. On 20
November, opinion turned sharply against Louis following the discovery of a
secret cache of 726 documents consisting of Louis' personal communications. On
15 January 1793, Louis XVI was voted guilty of conspiracy and attacks upon
public safety by 691 of 749 deputies; none voted for his innocence. Four days
later, 387 deputies voted for death as penalty, 334 voted for detention or a
conditional death penalty, and 28 abstained or were absent. Louis was executed
two days later in the "Place de la R√©volution". Destruction of the Girondists.
After the King's execution, the influence of Robespierre, Danton and the
pragmatic politicians increased at the expense of the Girondists. The
Girondists refused to have anything more to do with Danton and because of this
the government became more divided. In May 1793, Desmoulins, at the behest of
Robespierre and Danton, published his "Histoire des Brissotins", an elaboration
on the earlier article "Jean-Pierre Brissot, d√©masqu√©", a scathing attack on
Brissot and the Girondists. Maximin Isnard declared that Paris must be
destroyed if it came out against the provincial deputies. Robespierre preached
a moral "insurrection against the corrupt deputies" at the Jacobin Club. On 2
June, a large crowd of armed men from the Commune of Paris came to the
Convention and arrested thirty-two deputies on charges of counter-revolutionary
activities. Reign of Terror. After the fall of the monarchy, France faced
troubles as the war and the civil war continued. A stable government was needed
to quell the chaos. On 11 March 1793, a Revolutionary Tribunal was established
by Jacobins in the Convention. On 6 April, the nine-member Committee of Public
Safety replaced the larger Committee of General Defense. On 27 July 1793,
Robespierre was elected to the Committee, although he had not sought the
position. The Committee of General Security began to manage the country's
internal police. Terror was formally instituted as a legal policy by the
Convention on 5 September 1793, in a proclamation which read, "It is time that
equality bore its scythe above all heads. It is time to horrify all the
conspirators. So legislators, place Terror on the order of the day! Let us be
in revolution, because everywhere counter-revolution is being woven by our
enemies. The blade of the law should hover over all the guilty." Though
nominally all members of the committee were equal, Robespierre was presented
during the Thermidorian Reaction by the surviving protagonists of the Terror,
especially Bertrand Bar√®re, as prominent. They may have exaggerated his role
to downplay their own contribution and used him as a scapegoat after his death.
Robespierre‚Äôs speeches were exceptional, and he had the power to change the
views of almost any audience. His speaking techniques included invocation of
virtue and morals, and quite often the use of rhetorical questions in order to
identify with the audience. He would gesticulate and use ideas and personal
experiences in life to keep listeners' attentions. His final method was to
state that he was always prepared to die in order to save the Revolution.
Robespierre believed that the Terror was a time of discovering and revealing
the enemy within Paris, within France, the enemy that hid in the safety of
apparent patriotism. Because he believed that the Revolution was still in
progress, and in danger of being sabotaged, he made every attempt to instill in
the populace and Convention the urgency of carrying out the Terror. Robespierre
saw no room for mercy in his Terror, stating that "slowness of judgments is
equal to impunity" and "uncertainty of punishment encourages all the guilty".
Throughout his "Report on the Principles of Political Morality", Robespierre
assailed any stalling of action in defense of the Republic. In his thinking,
there was not enough that could be done fast enough in defence against enemies
at home and abroad. A staunch believer in the teachings of Rousseau,
Robespierre believed that it was his duty as a public servant to push the
Revolution forward, and that the only rational way to do that was to defend it
on all fronts. The "Report" did not merely call for blood but also expounded
many of the original ideas of the 1789 Revolution, such as political equality,
suffrage and abolition of privileges. In the winter of 1793‚Äì94, a majority of
the Committee decided that the H√©bertist party would have to perish or its
opposition within the Committee would overshadow the other factions due to its
influence in the Commune of Paris. Robespierre also had personal reasons for
disliking the H√©bertists for their "atheism" and "bloodthirstiness", which he
associated with the old aristocracy. In early 1794, he broke with Danton, who
had more moderate views on the Terror, and had Camille Desmoulins protest
against it in the third issue of "Le Vieux Cordelier". Robespierre considered
an end of the Terror as meaning the loss of political power he hoped to use to
create the Republic of Virtue. Subsequently, he joined in attacks on the
Dantonists and the H√©bertists. Robespierre charged his opponents with
complicity with foreign powers. From 13 February to 13 March 1794, Robespierre
withdrew from active business on the Committee due to illness. On 15 March, he
reappeared in the Convention. H√©bert and nineteen of his followers were
arrested on 19 March and guillotined on 24 March. Danton, Desmoulins and their
friends were arrested on 30 March and guillotined on 5 April. He used his
influence over the Jacobin Club to dominate the Commune of Paris through his
followers. Two of them, Jean-Baptiste Fleuriot-Lescot and Claude-Fran√ßois de
Payan, were elected mayor and procurator of the Commune respectively.
Robespierre tried to influence the army through his follower Louis de Saint-
Just, whom he sent on a mission to the frontier. Georges Couthon, his ally on
the Committee, introduced and carried on 10 June the drastic Law of 22
Prairial. Under this law, the Tribunal became a simple court of condemnation
without need of witnesses. Cult of the Supreme Being. Robespierre, M. "The Cult
of the Supreme Being," in Modern History Sourcebook, 1997 Throughout the
"Festival of the Supreme Being", Robespierre was beaming with joy; not even the
negativity of his colleagues could disrupt his delight. He was able to speak of
the things about which he was truly passionate, including "Virtue" and
"Nature", typical deist beliefs, and, of course, his disagreements with
atheism. Everything was arranged to the exact specifications that had been
previously set before the ceremony; the ominous and symbolic guillotine had
been moved to the original standing place of the Bastille, all of the people
were placed in the appropriate area designated to them, and everyone was
dressed accordingly. Not only was everything going smoothly, but the Festival
was also Robespierre‚Äôs first appearance in the public eye as an actual leader
for the people, and also as President of the Convention, to which he had been
elected only four days earlier. While for some it was an excitement to see him
at his finest, many other leaders involved in the Festival agreed that
Robespierre had taken things a bit too far. Multiple sources state that
Robespierre came down the mountain in a way that resembled Moses as the leader
of the people, and one of his colleagues, Jacques-Alexis Thuriot, was heard
saying, ‚ÄúLook at the bugger; it‚Äôs not enough for him to be master, he has
to be God.‚Äù While these words may have been a simple release of resentment at
the time, this same idea would come back in an attempt to remove Robespierre
from his lofty position in the very near future. Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier
was not one of Robespierre‚Äôs devotees, and was actually attempting to find
something that Robespierre had done wrong. Vadier was on a mission to attack
Robespierre and his faith, and was also trying to bring down Robespierre‚Äôs
political stature as well. This is when he found Catherine Th√©ot, who was a
seventy-eight-year old, self declared ‚Äúprophetess‚Äù who had, at one point,
been imprisoned in the Bastille. By Th√©ot stating that he was the ‚Äúherald of
the Last Days, prophet of the New Dawn,‚Äù (because his Festival had fallen on
the Pentecost, which she claimed would be the day revealing a ‚Äúdivine
manifestation‚Äù) Catherine Th√©ot made it seem as though Robespierre had made
these claims himself to her. Many of her followers were supporters or friends
of Robespierre as well, which made it seem as though he was attempting to
create a new religion with himself as its god. While Robespierre had nothing to
do with Catherine Th√©ot or her followers, many assumed that he was on his way
to dictatorship, and it sent a current of fear throughout the Convention, which
contributed to his downfall the following July. Downfall. On 23 May, only one
day after the attempted assassination of Collot d'Herbois, Robespierre's life
was also in danger: as a young woman by the name of C√©cile Renault was
arrested after having approached his place of residence with two small knives;
she was executed one month later. At this point, the decree of 22 Prairial
(also known as law of 22 Prairial) was introduced to the public without the
consultation from the Committee of General Security, which in turn doubled the
number of executions permitted by the Committee of Public Safety. This law
permitted executions to be carried out even under simple suspicion of citizens
thought to be counter-revolutionaries without extensive trials. When
Robespierre allowed this law to be passed, the people of France began to
question him and the Committee because they were executing people for seemingly
meaningless reasons, and also because they had passed a law without the help of
the Committee of General Security. This was part of the beginning of
Robespierre's downfall. Reports were coming into Paris about excesses committed
by the envoys sent en-mission to the provinces, particularly Jean-Lambert
Tallien in Bordeaux and Joseph Fouch√© in Lyons. Robespierre had them recalled
to Paris to account for their actions and then expelled them from the Jacobins
club. However they evaded arrest. Fouch√© spent the evenings moving house to
house, warning members of the Convention that Robespierre was after them, while
organising a coup d'√©tat. Robespierre appeared at the Convention on 26 July
(8th Thermidor, year II, according to the Revolutionary calendar), and
delivered a two-hour-long speech. He defended himself against charges of
dictatorship and tyranny, and then proceeded to warn of a conspiracy against
the Republic. Robespierre implied that members of the Convention were a part of
this conspiracy, though when pressed he refused to provide any names. The
speech however alarmed members, particularly given Fouch√©'s warnings. These
members who felt that Robespierre was alluding to them tried to prevent the
speech from being printed, and a bitter debate ensued until Bar√®re forced an
end to it. Later that evening, Robespierre delivered the same speech again at
the Jacobin Club, where it was very well received. The next day, Saint-Just
began to give a speech in support of Robespierre. However, those who had seen
him working on his speech the night before expected accusations to arise from
it. He had time to give only a small part of his speech before Jean-Lambert
Tallien interrupted him. While the accusations began to pile up, Saint-Just
remained uncharacteristically silent. Robespierre then attempted to secure the
tribunal to speak but his voice was shouted down. Robespierre soon found
himself at a loss for words after one deputy called for his arrest and another,
Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier, gave a mocking impression of him. When one deputy
realised Robespierre's inability to respond, the man shouted, "The blood of
Danton chokes him!". The Convention ordered the arrest of Robespierre, his
brother Augustin, Couthon, Saint-Just, Fran√ßois Hanriot and Le Bas. Troops
from the Commune, under General Coffinhal, arrived to free the prisoners and
then marched against the Convention itself. The Convention responded by
ordering troops of its own under Barras to be called out. When the Commune's
troops heard the news of this, order began to break down, and Hanriot ordered
his remaining troops to withdraw to the "H√¥tel de Ville", where Robespierre
and his supporters also gathered. The Convention declared them to be outlaws,
meaning that upon verification the fugitives could be executed within twenty-
four hours without a trial. As the night went on, the forces of the Commune
deserted the "H√¥tel de Ville" and, at around two in the morning, those of the
Convention under the command of Barras arrived there. In order to avoid
capture, Augustin Robespierre threw himself out of a window, only to break both
of his legs; Couthon was found lying at the bottom of a staircase; Le Bas
committed suicide; another radical shot himself in the head. Robespierre tried
to kill himself with a pistol but managed only to shatter his lower jaw,
although some eye-witnesses claimed that Robespierre was shot by Charles-Andr√©
Merda. For the remainder of the night, Robespierre was moved to a table in the
room of the Committee of Public Safety where he awaited execution. He lay on
the table bleeding abundantly until a doctor was brought in to attempt to stop
the bleeding from his jaw. Robespierre's last recorded words may have been
"Merci, monsieur," to a man that had given him a handkerchief for the blood on
his face and clothing. Later, Robespierre was held in the same containment
chamber where Marie Antoinette, the wife of King Louis XVI, had been held. The
next day, 28 July 1794, Robespierre was guillotined without trial in the Place
de la R√©volution. His brother Augustin, Couthon, Saint-Just, Hanriot and
twelve other followers, among them the cobbler Simon, were also executed. When
clearing Robespierre's neck the executioner tore off the bandage that was
holding his shattered jaw in place, producing an agonised scream until the fall
of the blade silenced him. Together with those executed with him, he was buried
in a common grave at the newly opened Errancis Cemetery ("cimeti√®re des
Errancis") (March 1794 ‚Äì April 1797) (near what is now the "Place Prosper-
Goubaux"). A plaque indicating the former site of the cimeti√®re des Errancis
is located at 97 rue de Monceau, Paris 75008. Between 1844 and 1859 (probably
in 1848), the remains of all those buried there were moved to the Catacombs of
Paris. Legacy. Maximilien Robespierre remains a controversial figure to this
day. Apart from one Metro station in Paris, there are no memorials or monuments
to him in France. By making himself the embodiment of virtue and of total
commitment, he took control of the Revolution in its most radical and bloody
phase ‚Äì the Jacobin republic. His goal in the Terror was to use the
guillotine to create what he called a 'republic of virtue', wherein terror and
virtue, his principles, would be imposed. He argued, "Terror is nothing more
than speedy, severe and inflexible justice; it is thus an emanation of virtue;
it is less a principle in itself, than a consequence of the general principle
of democracy, applied to the most pressing needs of the "patrie"." Terror was
thus a tool to accomplish his overarching goals for democracy. Historian Ruth
Scurr wrote that as for Robespierre's vision for France he wanted a "democracy
for the people, who are intrinsically good and pure of heart; a democracy in
which poverty is honorable, power innocuous, and the vulnerable safe from
oppression; a democracy that worships nature‚Äînot nature as it really is,
cruel and disgusting, but nature sanitized, majestic, and, above all, good." In
terms of historiography, he has several defenders. Marxist historian Albert
Soboul viewed most of the measures of the Committee for Public Safety necessary
for the defense of the Revolution and mainly regretted the destruction of the
H√©bertists and other "enrag√©s".  He was a bourgeois; Albert Soboul, according
to Ishay, argues that he and Saint-Just "were too preoccupied in defeating the
interest of the bourgeoisie to give their total support to the sans-culottes,
and yet too attentive to the needs of the sans-culottes to get support from the
middle class." For Marxists like Soboul Robespierre's petit-bourgeois class
interests were fatal to his mission. Robespierre has continued to fascinate
biographers. Notable recent books in English include Colin Haydon and William
Doyle's "Robespierre" (1999), John Hardman's "Robespierre" (1999), Ruth Scurr's
"Fatal Purity: Robespierre and the French Revolution", Otto J. Scott's
"Robespierre: The Voice of Virtue" (2011), and most recently "Robespierre: A
Revolutionary Life" by Peter McPhee (2012).
