May Day May Day on May 1 is an ancient Northern Hemisphere spring festival and
usually a public holiday; it is also a traditional spring holiday in many
cultures. Traditional May Day celebrations. May Day is related to the Celtic
festival of Beltane and the Germanic festival of Walpurgis Night. May Day falls
exactly half a year from November 1, another cross-quarter day which is also
associated with various northern European pagan and the year in the Northern
hemisphere, and it has traditionally been an occasion for popular and often
raucous celebrations. As Europe became Christianized, the pagan holidays lost
their religious character and either changed into popular secular celebrations,
as with May Day, or were merged with or replaced by new Christian holidays as
with Christmas, Easter, Pentecost and All Saint's Day. In the twentieth and
continuing into the twenty-first century, many neopagans began reconstructing
the old traditions and celebrating May Day as a pagan religious festival again.
Origins. The earliest May Day celebrations appeared in pre-Christian times,
with the festival of Flora, the Roman goddess of flowers, and the Walpurgis
Night celebrations of the Germanic countries. It is also associated with the
Gaelic Beltane. Many pagan celebrations were abandoned or Christianized during
the process of conversion in Europe. A more secular version of May Day
continues to be observed in Europe and America. In this form, May Day may be
best known for its tradition of dancing the maypole dance and crowning of the
Queen of the May. Various Neopagan groups celebrate reconstructed (to varying
degrees) versions of these customs on May 1st. The day was a traditional summer
holiday in many pre-Christian European pagan cultures. While February 1 was the
first day of Spring, May 1 was the first day of summer; hence, the summer
solstice on June 25 (now June 21) was Midsummer. In the Roman Catholic
tradition, May is observed as Mary's month, and in these circles May Day is
usually a celebration of the Blessed Virgin Mary. In this connection, in works
of art, school skits, and so forth, Mary's head will often be adorned with
flowers in a May crowning. Fading in popularity since the late 20th century is
the giving of "May baskets," small baskets of sweets and/or flowers, usually
left anonymously on neighbours' doorsteps. Europe. Great Britain. Traditional
British May Day rites and celebrations include Morris dancing, crowning a May
Queen and celebrations involving a Maypole. Much of this tradition derives from
the pagan Anglo-Saxon customs held during "√ûrimilci-m≈çna√æ" (the Old English
name for the month of May meaning "Month of Three Milkings") along with many
Celtic traditions. May Day has been a traditional day of festivities throughout
the centuries. May Day is most associated with towns and villages celebrating
springtime fertility and revelry with village fetes and community gatherings.
Since the reform of the Catholic Calendar, May 1st is the Feast of St Joseph
the Worker, the patron saint of workers. Seeding has been completed by this
date and it was convenient to give farm labourers a day off. Perhaps the most
significant of the traditions is the Maypole, around which traditional dancers
circle with ribbons. The May Day bank holiday, on the first Monday in May, was
traditionally the only one to affect the state school calendar, although new
arrangements in some areas to even out the length of school terms mean that the
Good Friday and Easter Monday bank holidays, which vary from year to year, may
also fall during term time. The May Day bank holiday was created in 1978. In
February 2011, the UK Parliament was reported to be considering scrapping the
bank holiday associated with May Day, replacing it with a bank holiday in
October, possibly co-inciding with Trafalgar Day (celebrated on 21 October), to
create a "United Kingdom Day". May Day was abolished and its celebration banned
by puritan parliaments during the Interregnum, but reinstated with the
restoration of Charles II in 1660. 1 May 1707 was the day the Act of Union came
into effect, joining England and Scotland to form the Kingdom of Great Britain.
[[File:John Collier Queen Guinevre's Maying.jpg|thumb|right| To spy some secret
scandal if he might,]] In Oxford, it is traditional for May Morning revellers
to gather below the Great Tower of Magdalen College at 6:00¬ am to listen to
the college choir sing traditional madrigals as a conclusion to the previous
night's celebrations. It is then thought to be traditional for some people to
jump off Magdalen Bridge into the River Cherwell. However this has actually
only been fashionable since the 1970s, possibly due to the presence of TV
cameras. In recent years, the bridge has been closed on 1 May to prevent people
from jumping, as the water under the bridge is only deep and jumping from the
bridge has resulted in serious injury in the past. There are still people who
insist on climbing the barriers and leaping into the water, causing themselves
injury. In Durham, students of the University of Durham gather on Prebend's
Bridge to see the sunrise and enjoy festivities, folk music, dancing, madrigal
singing and a barbecue breakfast. This is an emerging Durham tradition, with
patchy observance since 2001. Whitstable, Kent, hosts a good example of more
traditional May Day festivities, where the Jack in the Green festival was
revived in 1976 and continues to lead an annual procession of morris dancers
through the town on the May Bank Holiday. A separate revival occurred in
Hastings in 1983 and has become a major event in the town calendar. A
traditional Sweeps Festival is performed over the May bank holiday in
Rochester, Kent, where the Jack in the Green is woken at dawn on 1 May by
Morris dancers. At 7:15¬ p.m. on 1 May each year, the Kettle Bridge Clogs
morris dancing side dance across Barming Bridge (otherwise known as the Kettle
Bridge), which spans the River Medway near Maidstone, to mark the official
start of their morris dancing season. Also know as Ashtoria Day in Northern
parts of rural Cumbria. A celebration of unity and female bonding. Although not
very well known, it is often cause for huge celebration. The Maydayrun involves
thousands of motorbikes taking a trip from London (Locksbottom) to the Hastings
seafront, East Sussex. The event has been taking place for almost 30 years now
and has grown in interest from around the country, both commercially and
publicly. The event is not officially organised; the police only manage the
traffic, and volunteers manage the parking. Padstow in Cornwall holds its
annual 'Obby-Oss' (Hobby Horse) day of festivities. This is believed to be one
of the oldest fertility rites in the UK; revellers dance with the Oss through
the streets of the town and even through the private gardens of the citizens,
accompanied by accordion players and followers dressed in white with red or
blue sashes who sing the traditional 'May Day' song. The whole town is
decorated with springtime greenery, and every year thousands of onlookers
attend. Prior to the 19th century distinctive May day celebrations were
widespread throughout West Cornwall, and are being revived in St. Ives and
Penzance. Kingsand, Cawsand and Millbrook in Cornwall celebrate Flower Boat
Ritual on the May Day bank holiday. A model of the ship The Black Prince is
covered in flowers and is taken in procession from the Quay at Millbrook to the
beach at Cawsand where it is cast adrift. The houses in the villages are
decorated with flowers and people traditionally wear red and white clothes.
There are further celebrations in Cawsand Square with Morris dancing and May
pole dancing. In St Andrews, some of the students gather on the beach late on
April 30 and run into the North Sea at sunrise on May Day, occasionally naked.
This is accompanied by torchlit processions and much elated celebration. Both
Edinburgh and Glasgow organize Mayday festivals and rallies. In Edinburgh, the
Beltane Fire Festival is held on the evening of May eve and into the early
hours of May Day on the city's Calton Hill. An older Edinburgh tradition has it
that young women who climb Arthur's Seat and wash their faces in the morning
dew will have lifelong beauty. Romania. On May Day the Romanians celebrate the
"arminden" (or ‚Äúarmindeni‚Äù), the beginning of summer, symbolically tied
with the protection of crops and farm animals. The name comes from Slavonic
"Jeremiin≈≠ dƒ≠nƒ≠" meaning prophet Jeremiah‚Äôs day but the celebration rites
and habits of this day are apotropaic and pagan (possibly originating in the
cult of the god Pan). The day is also called "ziua pelinului" (mugwort day) or
"ziua be»õivilor" (drunkards‚Äô day) and it is celebrated, in order to insure
good wine in autumn and, for people and farm animals alike, good health and
protection from the elements of nature (storms, hail, illness, pests). People
would have parties in the nature with ‚ÄúlƒÉutari‚Äù (fiddlers), for those who
can afford. There, it is customary to roast and eat lamb, also eat new mutton
cheese and drink mugwort flavoured wine or just red wine to refresh the blood
and get protection from diseases. On the way back, the men wear lilac or
mugwort flowers at their hats. Other apotropaic rites include, in some areas of
the country, people washing their faces with the morning dew (for good health)
and adorning the gates for good luck and abundance with green branches or with
birch saplings (for the houses with maiden girls). The entries to the animals
shelters are also adorned with green branches. All branches are left in place
until the wheat harvest when they are used in the fire which will bake the
first bread from the new wheat. On May Day eve, country women won‚Äôt work in
the field as well as in the house to avoid devastating storms and hail coming
down on the village. Arminden is also ‚Äúziua boilor‚Äù (oxen day) and thus the
animals won‚Äôt be used for work, or else they could die or their owners could
get ill. It is said that the weather is always good on May Day to allow people
to celebrate. Ireland. May Day has been celebrated in Ireland since pagan times
as the feast of Bealtaine and in latter times as Mary's day. Traditionally,
bonfires were lit to mark the coming of summer and to banish the long nights of
winter. Officially Irish May Day holiday is the first Monday in May. Old
traditions such as bonfires are no longer widely observed, though the practice
still persists in some communities, such as Arklow, County Wicklow. France. On
May 1, 1561, King Charles IX of France received a lily of the valley as a lucky
charm. He decided to offer a lily of the valley each year to the ladies of the
court. At the beginning of the 20th century, it became custom to give a sprig
of lily of the valley, a symbol of springtime, on May 1. The government permits
individuals and workers' organisations to sell them tax-free. Nowadays, people
may present loved ones either with bunches of lily of the valley or dog rose
flowers. Germany. In rural regions of Germany, especially the Harz Mountains,
Walpurgisnacht celebrations of pagan origin are traditionally held on the night
before May Day, including bonfires and the wrapping of a "Maibaum" (maypole).
Young people use this opportunity to party, while the day itself is used by
many families to get some fresh air. Motto: "Tanz in den Mai!" (""Dance into
May!""). In the Rhineland, May 1 is also celebrated by the delivery of a
maypole, a tree covered in streamers to the house of a girl the night before.
The tree is typically from a love interest, though a tree wrapped only in white
streamers is a sign of dislike. Females usually place roses or rice in form of
a heart at the house of their beloved one. It is common to stick the heart to a
window or place it in front of the doormat. On leap years, it is the
responsibility of the females to place the maypole. All the action is usually
done secretly and it is an individual's choice whether to give a hint of their
identity or stay anonymous. May Day was not established as a public holiday
until 1933. As Labour Day, many political parties and unions host activities
related to work and employment. Finland. Celebrations among the younger
generations take place on May Day Eve, see Walpurgis Night in Finland, most
prominent being the afternoon 'crowning' of statues in towns around the country
with a student cap. May Day is known as Vappu, from the Swedish term. This is a
public holiday that is the only carnival-style street festivity in the country.
People young and old, particularly students, party outside, picnic and wear
caps or other decorative clothing. Some Finns make a special lemonade from
lemons, brown sugar, and yeast called "sima". It contains very little alcohol,
so even children can drink it. You can also buy a similar product in all
stores. Some Finns also make doughnuts and a crisp pastry fried in oil made
from a similar, more liquid dough. Balloons and other decorations like
serpentines are seen everywhere. Sweden. The more traditional festivities have
moved to the day before, Walpurgis night ("Valborgsm√§ssoafton"), known in some
locales as simply "Last of April". The first of May is instead celebrated as
International Workers' Day. North America. Canada. May Day is celebrated in
some parts of the Province of British Columbia. Celebrations often take place
not on May 1 but during the Victoria Day long weekend, later in the month and
when the weather is likely to be better. The honour of having the longest
continually-observed May Day in the British Commonwealth‚Äîsince 1870‚Äîis
claimed by the BC city of New Westminster. United States. May Day was also
celebrated by some early European settlers of the American continent. In some
parts of the United States, May Baskets are made. These are small baskets
usually filled with flowers or treats and left at someone's doorstep. The giver
rings the bell and runs away. The person receiving the basket tries to catch
the fleeing giver. If they catch the person, a kiss is exchanged. Modern May
Day ceremonies in the U.S. vary greatly from region to region and many unite
both the holiday's "Green Root" (pagan) and "Red Root" (labor) traditions. May
1 is also recognized in the U.S. as Law Day. Hawaii. In Hawaii, May Day is also
known as Lei Day, and is normally set aside as a day to celebrate island
culture in general and native Hawaiian culture in particular. Invented by a
poet and a local newspaper columnist Eric Kosciuszko in the 1920s, it has since
been adopted by state and local government as well as the residents, and has
taken on the sense of a general spring celebration. The first Lei Day was
proposed in 1927 in Honolulu by poet and artist Don Blanding. Leonard "Red" and
Ruth Hawk composed "May Day is Lei Day in Hawai'i," the traditional holiday
song. Originally it was a contemporary fox trot, later rearranged as the
Hawaiian hula song performed today.
