Medium of exchange A medium of exchange is an intermediary used in trade to
avoid the inconveniences of a pure barter system. By contrast, as William
Stanley Jevons argued, in a barter system there must be a coincidence of wants
before two people can trade â€“ one must want exactly what the other has to
offer, when and where it is offered, so that the exchange can occur. A medium
of exchange permits the value of goods to be assessed and rendered in terms of
the intermediary, most often, a form of money widely accepted to buy any other
good. Definition. Money is the common Medium of Exchange and its most important
and essential function is that it is 'measure of value'... Hifzur Rab has shown
that market measures or sets value of various goods and services using the
medium of exchange/money as 'unit' i.e., standard or the Yard Stick of
Measurement of Wealth. There is no other alternative to the mechanism used by
market to set or determine or measure value of various goods and services and
therefore wealth. Just determination of prices is an essential condition for
justice in exchange, efficient allocation of resources, economic growth welfare
and justice.Money helps us in gaining power of buying. To serve as a measure of
value, a medium of exchange, be it a good or signal, needs to have constant
inherent value of its own or it must be firmly linked to a definite basket of
goods and services. It should have constant intrinsic value and stable
purchasing power. Gold was long popular as a medium of exchange "and" store of
value because it was inert, was convenient to move due to even small amounts of
gold having considerable value, had a constant value due to its special
physical and chemical properties, and was cherished by men. Critics of the
prevailing system of fiat money argue that fiat money is the root cause of the
continuum of economic crises, since it leads to the dominance of fraud,
corruption, and manipulation precisely because it does not satisfy the criteria
for a medium of exchange cited above. Specifically, prevailing fiat money is
free float and depending upon its supply market finds or sets a value to it
that continues to change as the supply of money is changed with respect to the
economy's demand. Increasing free floating money supply with respect to needs
of the economy reduces the quantity of the basket of the goods and services to
which it is linked by the market and that provides it purchasing power. Thus it
is not a unit or standard measure of wealth and its manipulation impedes the
market mechanism by that it sets/determine just prices. That leads us to a
situation where no value-related economic data is just or reliable. On the
other hand, Chartalists claim that the ability to manipulate the value of fiat
money is an advantage, in that fiscal stimulus is more easily available in
times of economic crisis. Requisites needed for a medium of exchange. Although
the unit of account must be in some way related to the medium of exchange in
use, e.g. coinage should be in denominations of that unit making accounting
much easier to perform, it has often been the case that media of exchange have
no natural relationship to that unit, and must be 'minted' or in some way
marked as having that value. Also there may be variances in quality of the
underlying good which may not have fully agreed commodity grading. The
difference between the two functions becomes obvious when one considers the
fact that coins were very often 'shaved', precious metal removed from them,
leaving them still useful as an identifiable coin in the marketplace, for a
certain number of units in trade, but which no longer had the quantity of metal
supplied by the coin's minter. It was observed as early as Oresme, Copernicus
and then in 1558 by Sir Thomas Gresham, that bad money drives out good in any
marketplace (Gresham's Law states "Where legal tender laws exist, bad money
drives out good money"). A more precise definition is this: "A currency that is
artificially overvalued by law will drive out of circulation a currency that is
artificially undervalued by that law." Gresham's law is therefore a specific
application of the general law of price controls. A common explanation is that
people will always keep the less adultered, less clipped, sweated, less filed,
less trimmed coin, and offer the other in the marketplace for the full units
for which it is marked. It is inevitably the bad coins proffered, good ones
retained. The fact that a bank or mint has always been able to generate a
medium of exchange marked for more units than it is worth as a store of value,
is the basis of banking. Central banking is based on the principle that no
medium needs more than the guarantee of the state that it can be redeemed for
payment of debt as "legal tender" - thus, all money equally backed by the state
is good money, within that state. As long as that state produces anything of
value to others, its medium of exchange has some value, and its currency may
also be useful as a standard of deferred payment among others, even those who
never deal with that state directly in foreign exchange. Of all functions of
money, the medium of exchange function has historically been the most
problematic because of counterfeiting, the systematic and deliberate creation
of bad money with no authorization to do so, leading to the driving out of the
good money entirely. Other functions rely not on recognition of some token or
weight of metal in a marketplace, where time to detect any counterfeit is
limited and benefits for successful passing-off are high, but on more stable
long term social contracts: one cannot easily force a whole society to accept a
different standard of deferred payment, require even small groups of people to
uphold a floor price for a store of value, still less to re-price everything
and rewrite all accounts to a unit of account (the most stable function). Thus
it tends to be the medium of exchange function that constrains what can be used
as a form of financial capital. It was once common in the United States to
widely accept a check (cheque) as a medium of exchange, several parties
endorsing it perhaps multiple times before it would eventually be deposited for
its value in units of account, and thus redeemed. This practice became less
common as it was exploited by forgers and led to a domino effect of bounced
checks - a forerunner of the kind of fragility that electronic systems would
eventually bring. In the age of electronic money it was, and remains, common to
use very long strings of difficult-to-reproduce numbers, generated by
encryption methods, to authenticate transactions and commitments as having come
from trusted parties. Thus the medium of exchange function has become wholly a
part of the marketplace and its signals, and is utterly integrated with the
unit of account function, so that, given the integrity of the public key system
on which these are based, they become to that degree inseparable. This has
clear advantages - counterfeiting is difficult or impossible unless the whole
system is compromised, say by a new factoring algorithm. But at that point, the
entire system is broken and the whole infrastructure is obsolete - new keys
must be re-generated and the new system will also depend on some assumptions
about difficulty of factoring. Due to this inherent fragility, which is even
more profound with electronic voting, some economists argue that units of
account should not ever be abstracted or confused with the nominal units or
tokens used in exchange. A medium is just that, a medium, and should not be
confused for the message.
