Money multiplier In monetary economics, a money multiplier is one of various
closely related ratios of commercial bank money to central bank money under a
fractional-reserve banking system. Most often, it measures the "maximum" amount
of commercial bank money that can be created by a given unit of central bank
money. That is, in a fractional-reserve banking system, the total amount of
loans that commercial banks are allowed to extend (the commercial bank money
that they can legally create) is a multiple of reserves; this multiple is the
reciprocal of the reserve ratio, and it is an economic multiplier. In
equations, writing "M" for commercial bank money (loans), "R" for reserves
(central bank money), and "RR" for the reserve ratio, the reserve ratio
requirement is that formula_1 the fraction of reserves must be "at least" the
reserve ratio. Taking the reciprocal, formula_2 which yields formula_3 meaning
that commercial bank money is "at most" reserves times formula_4 the latter
being the multiplier. If banks lend out close to the maximum allowed by their
reserves, then the inequality becomes an approximate equality, and commercial
bank money is central bank money times the multiplier. If banks instead lend
less than the maximum, accumulating excess reserves, then commercial bank money
will be "less" than central bank money times the theoretical multiplier. In the
United States since 1959, banks lent out close to the maximum allowed for the
49-year period from 1959 until August 2008, maintaining a low level of excess
reserves, then accumulated significant excess reserves over the period
September 2008 through the present (November 2009). Thus, in the first period,
commercial bank money was almost exactly central bank money times the
multiplier, but this relationship broke down from September 2008. As a formula
and legal quantity, the money multiplier is not controversial – it is simply
the maximum that commercial banks are allowed to lend out. However, there are
various heterodox theories concerning the mechanism of money creation in a
fractional-reserve banking system, and the implication for monetary policy.
Definition. The money multiplier is defined in various ways. Most simply, it
can be defined either as the statistic of "commercial bank money"/"central bank
money", based on the actual observed quantities of various empirical measures
of money supply, such as M2 (broad money) over M0 (base money), or it can be
the theoretical "maximum commercial bank money/central bank money" ratio,
defined as the reciprocal of the reserve ratio, formula_5 The multiplier in the
first (statistic) sense fluctuates continuously based on changes in commercial
bank money and central bank money (though it is "at most" the theoretical
multiplier), while the multiplier in the second (legal) sense depends only on
the reserve ratio, and thus does not change unless the law changes. For
purposes of monetary policy, what is of most interest is the "predicted impact"
of changes in central bank money on commercial bank money, and in various
models of monetary creation, the associated multiple (the ratio of these two
changes) is called the money multiplier (associated to that model). For
example, if one assumes that people hold a constant fraction of deposits as
cash, one may add a "currency drain" variable (currency–deposit ratio), and
obtain a multiplier of formula_6 These concepts are not generally distinguished
by different names; if one wishes to distinguish them, one may gloss them by
names such as empirical (or observed) multiplier, legal (or theoretical)
multiplier, or model multiplier, but these are not standard usages. Similarly,
one may distinguish the "observed" reserve–deposit ratio from the legal
(minimum) reserve ratio, and the "observed" currency–deposit ratio from an
assumed model one. Note that in this case the reserve–deposit ratio and
currency–deposit ratio are "outputs" of observations, and fluctuate over
time. If one then uses these observed ratios as model parameters ("inputs") for
the predictions of effects of monetary policy and assumes that they remain
constant, computing a constant multiplier, the resulting predictions are valid
only if these ratios do not in fact change. Sometimes this holds, and sometimes
it does not; for example, increases in central bank money may result in
increases in commercial bank money – and will, if these ratios (and thus
multiplier) stay constant – or may result in increases in excess reserves but
little or no change in commercial bank money, in which case the
reserve–deposit ratio will grow and the multiplier will fall. Mechanism.
There are two suggested mechanisms for how money creation occurs in a
fractional-reserve banking system: either reserves are first injected by the
central bank, and then lent on by the commercial banks, or loans are first
extended by commercial banks, and then backed by reserves borrowed from the
central bank. The "reserves first" model is that taught in mainstream economics
textbooks, while the "loans first" model is advanced by endogenous money
theorists. Reserves first model. In the "reserves first" model of money
creation, a given reserve is lent out by a bank, then deposited at a bank
(possibly different), which is then lent out again, the process repeating and
the ultimate result being a geometric series. Formula. This formula stems from
the fact that the sum of the "amount loaned out" column above can be expressed
mathematically as a geometric series with a common ratio of formula_8 can be
used, where Currency Drain Ratio is the percentage of money that people want to
hold as cash and the Desired Reserve Ratio is the sum of the Required Reserve
Ratio and the Excess Reserve Ratio. Deposits = \sum_{n = 0}^{\infty}\left[\left
(1 - \alpha - \beta - \gamma\right)\right]^{n} = \frac{1}{\alpha + \beta +
\gamma}. Publicly Held Currency = \gamma \cdot Deposits = \frac{\gamma}{\alpha
+ \beta + \gamma} Loans = \left(1 - \alpha - \beta\right) \cdot Deposits =
\frac{1 - \alpha - \beta}{\alpha + \beta + \gamma} By summing up the two
quantities, the theoretical money multiplier is defined as m = \frac{Money
Stock}{Monetary Base} = \frac{Deposits + Publicly Held Currency}{Monetary Base}
= \frac{1 + \gamma}{\alpha + \beta + \gamma} where formula_13 and formula_14
The process described above by the geometric series can be represented in the
following table, where Example. This number is multiplied by the initial
deposit to show the maximum amount of money it can be expanded to. Another way
to look at the monetary multiplier is derived from the concept of money supply
and money base. It is the number of dollars of money supply that can be created
for every dollar of monetary base. Money supply, denoted by M, is the stock of
money held by public. It is measured by the amount of currency and deposits.
Money Base, denoted by B, is the summation of currency and reserves. Currency
and Reserves are monetary policy that can be affected by the Federal Reserve.
For example, the Federal Reserve can increase currency by printing more money
and they can similarly increase reserve by requiring a higher percentage of
deposits to be stored in the Federal Reserve. M=Money Supply C=Currency
D=Deposits B=Money Base R=Reserve Multiply the right side by formula_26. Since
this equals to 1, it is mathematically justified to multiply it to only the
right side. Then multiple the right side of the equation by the Money Base So
we get: formula_28 is the multiplier. Therefore, if money base is held
constant, the ratio of D/R and D/C affects the money supply. When the ratio of
deposits to reserves (D/R) reduces, the multiplier reduces. Similarly, if the
ratio of deposits to currency (D/C) falls, the multiplier falls as well. The
multiplier effect is relevant to considering monetary and fiscal policies, as
well how the banking system works. For example, the deposit, the monetary
amount a customer deposits at a bank, is used by the bank to loan out to
others, thereby generating the money supply. Most banks are FDIC insured
(Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation), so that customers are assured that
their savings, up to a certain amount, is insured by the federal government.
Banks are required to reserve a certain ratio of the customer's deposits in
reserve, either in the form of vault cash or of a deposit maintained by a
Federal Reserve Bank.[http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/
reservereq.htm#table1] . Therefore, if the Federal Reserve Bank (and hence its
monetary policy) requires a higher percentage of reserve, then it lowers the
bank's financial ability to loan. Loans first model. In the alternative model
of money creation, loans are first extended by commercial banks – say, $1,000
of loans (following the example above), which may then require that the bank
borrow $100 of reserves either from depositors (or other private sources of
financing), or from the central bank. However it is also possible that the loan
is used to pay another bank customer who deposits it back with the bank, thus
negating the need for any form of reserve to be borrowed by the bank. This view
is advanced in endogenous money theories, such as the Post-Keynesian school of
monetary circuit theory, as advanced by such economists as Basil Moore and
Steve Keen. Implications for monetary policy. The multiplier plays a key role
in monetary policy, and the distinction between the multiplier being the
"maximum" amount of commercial bank money created by a given unit of central
bank money and approximately "equal" to the amount created has important
implications in monetary policy. If banks maintain low levels of excess
reserves, as they did in the US from 1959 to August 2008, then central banks
can finely control broad (commercial bank) money supply by controlling central
bank money creation, as the multiplier gives a direct and fixed connection
between these. Restated, increases in central bank money may not result in
commercial bank money because the money is not "required" to be lent out – it
may instead result in a growth of unlent reserves (excess reserves). This
situation is referred to as "pushing on a string": withdrawal of central bank
money "compels" commercial banks to curtail lending (one can "pull" money via
this mechanism), but input of central bank money does not compel commercial
banks to lend (one cannot "push" via this mechanism). This described growth in
excess reserves has indeed occurred in the Financial crisis of 2007–2010, US
bank excess reserves growing over 500-fold, from under $2 billion in August
2008 to over $1,000 billion in November 2009.
