Monetarism Monetarism is a tendency in economic thought that emphasizes the
role of governments in controlling the amount of money in circulation. It is
the view within monetary economics that variation in the money supply has major
influences on national output in the short run and the price level over longer
periods and that objectives of monetary policy are best met by targeting the
growth rate of the money supply. Monetarism today is mainly associated with the
work of Milton Friedman, who was among the generation of economists to accept
Keynesian economics and then criticize it on its own terms. Friedman and Anna
Schwartz wrote an influential book, "A Monetary History of the United States,
1867-1960", and argued that "inflation is always and everywhere a monetary
phenomenon." Though he opposed the existence of the Federal Reserve, Friedman
advocated, given its existence, a central bank policy aimed at keeping the
supply and demand for money at equilibrium, as measured by growth in
productivity and demand. Description. Monetarism is an economic theory which
focuses on the macroeconomic effects of the supply of money and central
banking. Formulated by Milton Friedman, it argues that excessive expansion of
the money supply is inherently inflationary, and that monetary authorities
should focus solely on maintaining price stability. This theory draws its roots
from two almost diametrically opposed ideas: the hard money policies that
dominated monetary thinking in the late 19th century, and the monetary theories
of John Maynard Keynes, who, working in the inter-war period during the failure
of the restored gold standard, proposed a demand-driven model for money which
was the foundation of macroeconomics. While Keynes had focused on the value
stability of currency, with the resulting panics based on an insufficient money
supply leading to alternate currency and collapse, then Friedman focused on
price stability, which is the equilibrium between supply and demand for money.
The result was summarized in a historical analysis of monetary policy,
"Monetary History of the United States 1867-1960", which Friedman coauthored
with Anna Schwartz. The book attributed inflation to excess money supply
generated by a central bank. It attributed deflationary spirals to the reverse
effect of a failure of a central bank to support the money supply during a
liquidity crunch. Friedman originally proposed a fixed "monetary rule", called
Friedman's k-percent rule, where the money supply would be calculated by known
macroeconomic and financial factors, targeting a specific level or range of
inflation. Under this rule, there would be no leeway for the central reserve
bank as money supply increases could be determined "by a computer", and
business could anticipate all monetary policy decisions. Rise. Clark Warburton
is credited with making the first solid empirical case for the monetarist
interpretation of business fluctuations in a series of papers from 1945.p.Â 493
Within mainstream economics, the rise of monetarism accelerated from Milton
Friedman's 1956 restatement of the quantity theory of money. Friedman argued
that the demand for money could be described as depending on a small number of
economic variables. Thus, where the money supply expanded, people would not
simply wish to hold the extra money in idle money balances; i.e., if they were
in equilibrium before the increase, they were already holding money balances to
suit their requirements, and thus after the increase they would have money
balances surplus to their requirements. These excess money balances would
therefore be spent and hence aggregate demand would rise. Similarly, if the
money supply were reduced people would want to replenish their holdings of
money by reducing their spending. In this, Friedman challenged a simplification
attributed to Keynes suggesting that "money does not matter." Thus the word
'monetarist' was coined. The rise of the popularity of monetarism also picked
up in political circles when Keynesian economics seemed unable to explain or
cure the seemingly contradictory problems of rising unemployment and inflation
in response to the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in 1972 and the oil
shocks of 1973. On the one hand, higher unemployment seemed to call for
Keynesian reflation, but on the other hand rising inflation seemed to call for
Keynesian disinflation. In 1979, President Jimmy Carter appointed a Federal
Reserve chief Paul Volcker who made inflation fighting his primary objective,
and restricted the money supply (in accordance with the Friedman rule) to tame
inflation in the economy. The result was the creation of the desired price
stability. Monetarists not only sought to explain present problems; they also
interpreted historical ones. Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz in their book "A
Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960" argued that the Great
Depression of 1930 was caused by a massive contraction of the money supply and
not by the lack of investment Keynes had argued. They also maintained that
post-war inflation was caused by an over-expansion of the money supply. They
made famous the assertion of monetarism that 'inflation is always and
everywhere a monetary phenomenon'. Many Keynesian economists initially believed
that the Keynesian vs. monetarist debate was solely about whether fiscal or
monetary policy was the more effective tool of demand management. By the mid-
1970s, however, the debate had moved on to other issues as monetarists began
presenting a fundamental challenge to Keynesianism. Many monetarists sought to
resurrect the pre-Keynesian view that market economies are inherently stable in
the absence of major unexpected fluctuations in the money supply. Because of
this belief in the stability of free-market economies they asserted that active
demand management (e.g. by the means of increasing government spending) is
unnecessary and indeed likely to be harmful. The basis of this argument is an
equilibrium between "stimulus" fiscal spending and future interest rates. In
effect, Friedman's model argues that current fiscal spending creates as much of
a drag on the economy by increased interest rates as it creates present
consumption: that it has no real effect on total demand, merely that of
shifting demand from the investment sector (I) to the consumer sector (C). When
Margaret Thatcher, leader of the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom, won
the 1979 general election defeating the incumbent Labour Party led by James
Callaghan, Britain had endured several years of severe inflation, which was
rarely below 10% and by the time of the election in May 1979 stood at 10.3%.and
Edward Heath), but her success in the Falklands war led to a recovery in her
popularity which contributed to the Conservative victory in the 1983 general
election. This came at a time of a global recession, and Thatcher's monetarist
policies earned her the respect of political leaders worldwide as Britain was a
world leader in the fight against the recession and one of the first nations to
re-establish economic growth. Callaghan himself had adopted policies echoing
monetarism while serving as prime minister from 1976 to 1979, adopting
deflationary policies and reducing public spending in response to high
inflation and national debt. He initially had some success, as inflation was
below 10% by the summer of 1978, although unemployment now stood at 1,500,000.
However, by the time of his election defeat barely a year later, inflation had
soared to 27%. Practice. A realistic theory should be able to explain the
deflationary waves of the late 19th century, the Great Depression, and the
stagflation period beginning with the uncoupling of exchange rates in 1972.
Monetarists argue that there was no inflationary investment boom in the 1920s.
Instead, monetarist thinking centers on the contraction of the M1 during the
1931-1933 period, and argues from there that the Federal Reserve could have
avoided the Great Depression by moves to provide sufficient liquidity. In
essence, they argue that there was an insufficient supply of money. From their
conclusion that incorrect central bank policy is at the root of large swings in
inflation and price instability, monetarists argued that the primary motivation
for excessive easing of central bank policy is to finance fiscal deficits by
the central government. Hence, restraint of government spending is the most
important single target to restrain excessive monetary growth. With the failure
of demand-driven fiscal policies to restrain inflation and produce growth in
the 1970s, the way was paved for a new policy of fighting inflation through the
central bank, which would be the bank's cardinal responsibility. In typical
economic theory, this would be accompanied by austerity shock treatment, as is
generally recommended by the International Monetary Fund: such a course was
taken in the United Kingdom, where government spending was slashed in the late
'70s and early '80s under the political ascendance of Margaret Thatcher. In the
United States, the opposite approach was taken and real government spending
increased much faster during Reagan's first four years (4.22%/year) than it did
under Carter (2.55%/year). In the ensuing short term, unemployment in both
countries remained stubbornly high while central banks raised interest rates to
restrain credit. These policies dramatically reduced inflation rates in both
countries (the United States' inflation rate fell from almost 14% in 1980 to
around 3% in 1983 ), allowing liberalization of credit and the reduction of
interest rates, which led ultimately to the inflationary economic booms of the
1980s. Arguments have been raised, however, that the fall of the inflation rate
may be less from control of the money supply and more to do with the
unemployment level's effect on demand; some also claim the use of credit to
fuel economic expansion is itself an anti-monetarist tool, as it can be argued
that an increase in money supply alone constitutes inflation. Monetarism re-
asserted itself in central bank policy in western governments at the end of the
1980s and beginning of the 1990s, with a contraction both in spending and in
the money supply, ending the booms experienced in the US and UK. With the crash
of 1987, questioning of the prevailing monetarist policy began. Monetarists
argued that the 1987 stock market decline was simply a correction between
conflicting monetary policies in the United States and Europe. Critics of this
viewpoint became louder as Japan slid into a sustained deflationary spiral and
the collapse of the savings-and-loan banking system in the United States
pointed to larger structural changes in the economy. In the late 1980s, Paul
Volcker was succeeded by Alan Greenspan, a leading monetarist. His handling of
monetary policy in the run-up to the 1991 recession was criticized from the
right as being excessively tight, and costing George H. W. Bush re-election.
The incoming Democratic president Bill Clinton reappointed Alan Greenspan, and
kept him as a core member of his economic team. Greenspan, while still
fundamentally monetarist in orientation, argued that doctrinaire application of
theory was insufficiently flexible for central banks to meet emerging
situations. The crucial test of this flexible response by the Federal Reserve
was the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998, which the Federal Reserve met by
flooding the world with dollars, and organizing a bailout of Long-Term Capital
Management. Some have argued that 1997-1998 represented a monetary policy bind,
just as the early 1970s had represented a fiscal policy bind, and that while
asset inflation had crept into the United States (which demanded that the Fed
tighten the money supply), the Federal Reserve needed to ease liquidity in
response to the capital flight from Asia. Greenspan himself noted this when he
stated that the American stock market showed signs of irrationally high
valuations. In 2000, Alan Greenspan raised interest rates several times. These
actions were believed by many to have caused the bursting of the dot-com
bubble. In late 2001, as a decisive reaction to the September 11 attacks and
the various corporate scandals which undermined the economy, the Greenspan-led
Federal Reserve initiated a series of interest rate cuts that brought the
Federal Funds rate down to 1% in 2004. His critics, notably Steve Forbes,
attributed the rapid rise in commodity prices and gold to Greenspan's loose
monetary policy, and by late 2004 the price of gold was higher than its 12 year
moving average; these same forces were also blamed for excessive asset
inflation and the weakening of the dollar . These policies of Alan Greenspan
are blamed by the followers of the Austrian School for creating excessive
liquidity, causing lending standards to deteriorate, and resulting in the
housing bubble of 2004-2006. Currently, the American Federal Reserve follows a
modified form of monetarism, where broader ranges of intervention are possible
in light of temporary instabilities in market dynamics. This form does not yet
have a generally accepted name. In Europe, the European Central Bank follows a
more orthodox form of monetarism, with tighter controls over inflation and
spending targets as mandated by the Economic and Monetary Union of the European
Union under the Maastricht Treaty to support the euro. This more orthodox
monetary policy followed credit easing in the late 1980s through 1990s to fund
German reunification, which was blamed for the weakening of European currencies
in the late 1990s. Current state. Since 1990, the classical form of monetarism
has been questioned because of events which many economists have interpreted as
being inexplicable in monetarist terms, namely the unhinging of the money
supply growth from inflation in the 1990s and the failure of pure monetary
policy to stimulate the economy in the 2001-2003 period. Alan Greenspan, former
chairman of the Federal Reserve, argued that the 1990s decoupling was explained
by a virtuous cycle of productivity and investment on one hand, and a certain
degree of "irrational exuberance" in the investment sector. Economist Robert
Solow of MIT suggested that the 2001-2003 failure of the expected economic
recovery should be attributed not to monetary policy failure but to the
breakdown in productivity growth in crucial sectors of the economy, most
particularly retail trade. He noted that five sectors produced all of the
productivity gains of the 1990s, and that while the growth of retail and
wholesale trade produced the smallest growth, they were by far the largest
sectors of the economy experiencing net increase of productivity. "2% may be
peanuts, but being the single largest sector of the economy, that's an awful
lot of peanuts." There are also arguments which link monetarism and
macroeconomics, and treat monetarism as a special case of Keynesian theory. The
central test case over the validity of these theories would be the possibility
of a liquidity trap, like that experienced by Japan. Ben Bernanke, Princeton
professor and current chairman of the US Federal Reserve, has argued that
monetary policy could respond to zero interest rate conditions by direct
expansion of the money supply. In his words, "We have the keys to the printing
press, and we are not afraid to use them." Another popular economist, Paul
Krugman, has advanced the counterargument that this would have a corresponding
devaluationary effect, like the sustained low interest rates of 2001-2004
produced against world currencies. Historian David Hackett Fischer, in his
study "The Great Wave", questioned the implicit basis of monetarism by
examining long periods of secular inflation that stretched over decades. In
doing so, he produced data which suggest that prior to a wave of monetary
inflation, there is a wave of commodity inflation, which governments respond
to, rather than lead. Whether this formulation undermines the monetary data
which underpin the fundamental work of monetarism is still a matter of
contention. Monetarists of the Milton Friedman school of thought believed in
the 1970s and 1980s that the growth of the money supply should be based on
certain formulations related to economic growth. As such, they can be regarded
as advocates of a monetary policy based on a "quantity of money" target. This
can be contrasted with the monetary policy advocated by supply-side economics
and the Austrian School which are based on a "value of money" target (albeit
from different ends of the formula). Austrian economists criticise monetarism
for not recognizing the citizens' subjective value of money and trying to
create an objective value through supply and demand. These disagreements, along
with the role of monetary policies in trade liberalization, international
investment, and central bank policy, remain lively topics of investigation and
arguments. Gold standard. Most monetarists oppose the gold standard. Friedman,
for example, viewed a pure gold standard as impractical. For example, whereas
one of the benefits of the gold standard is that the intrinsic limitations to
the growth of the money supply by the use of gold or silver would prevent
inflation, if the growth of population or increase in trade outpaces the money
supply, there would be no way to counteract deflation and reduced liquidity
(and any attendant recession) except for the mining of more gold or silver
under a gold or silver standard. Criticisms. Redistributional effects of
monetary policy. Inflation targeting is not a neutral pareto improvement. Any
choice of target redistributes from some groups to others â making some worse
off. For example, high inflation harms holders of fixed rate debt â including
pensioneers, holders of fixed income securities, employees with protected jobs
and annuity-like compensation (including most government employees, and policy
makers, and most tenured academics), and creditors. It benefits net debtors â
particularly if they have fixed rate debt or debt with interest rate caps. It
also benefits owners of commodities, real estate, foreign currencies, equity in
export oriented firms, local employees in trade sensitive and offshoring-
capable sectors, and the unemployed. Low inflation benefits holders of fixed
rate debt, business that export to the target country, importers, employees who
gain from offshoring, retired people on fixed pensions and people with
protected annuity like wages (academics, government employees, and policy
makers). Low inflation therefore tends to favor rentiers â increasing their
wealth by boosting the purchasing power of their assets, and transfers wealth
away from debtors, owners of real estate, owners of commodities, local import
sensitive businesses, and the insecurely employed. In theory, this could be
corrected â restoring its neutrality (and Pareto improvement), however
transaction costs, moral hazard, information asymmetry and political resistance
would make such wealth transfers grossly impractical. To the extent that
Monetary policy creates a known and predictable transfer of wealth between a
priori known counterparties, it is not a neutral economic tool and cannot be
divorced from political considerations and preferred constituencies.
Furthermore, such constituencies will try to influence choice of monetary
policy targets â rentiers/creditors and pensioners will prefer tight monetary
policy, debtors will prefer looser monetary policy, as will exporters and other
participants in (internationally) tradeable sectors of the economy, owners of
commodities and real estate, and the precariously employed If redistribution of
wealth via such mechanisms has differential efficiency impact and impacts the
network of business formation and production within and between trading
nations, some monetary policy targets may also move an economy away from an
efficient frontier. Moral hazard of monetary policy making agents. From a
principal agent perspective, monetary policy makers face a personal moral
hazard â since their compensation typically takes the form of a secure fixed
annuity. This would incentivize them to favor tight monetary policy â even at
the expense of lower real GDP growth. Compensation schemes that made their
personal wealth inversely related to the unemployment rate would create a moral
hazard in favor of overly loose monetary policy. Compensation schemes that made
their personal wealth contingent on real GDP growth may be more efficient by
reducing their overall moral hazard.
