Monopoly profit Monopoly Profit - Basic Definition.  In economics, a firm is a
monopoly when, because of the lack of any viable competition, it is able to
become the sole producer of the industry's product. In a normal competitive
situation, the price the firm gets for its product is exactly the same as the
Marginal cost of producing the product. Because the monopoly firm does not have
to worry about losing customers to competitors, it can set a price that is
significantly higher the Marginal (Economic) cost of producing (the last unit
of) the product. Therefore, a monopoly Situation usually allows the firm to set
a monopoly price which is higher than the price that would be found in a more
competitive industry., and to generate an economic profit over and above the
normal profit that is typically found in a perfectly competitive industry. The
economic profit obtained by a monopoly firm is referred to as monopoly profit.
The existence of a monopoly, and therefore the existence of a monopoly price
and monopoly profit, depend on the existence of barriers to entry: these stop
other firms from entering into the industry and sapping away profits.   In a
perfectly competitive market, firms are said to be price takers: since a
customer can buy widgets from one producer as easily as another, any widget
producer on the market faces a "horizontal" demand curve at the equilibrium
price: if the firm tries to sell widgets above the equilibrium price, customers
will simply buy their widgets elsewhere and the firm will lose all of their
business. (In most actual markets, of course, a situation in which "exactly"
comparable goods are available "just" as easily from one firm as from another
does not exist ? though this situation does seem to exist in Commodity markets,
the theory of perfect competition is usually a useful idealized model rather
than a naturalistic description).   By contrast, lack of competition in a
market creates a downward sloping demand curve for a monopolist or oligopolist:
although they will lose some business by raising prices, they will not lose it
all, and it may be more profitable in most situations to sell at a higher
price. Though monopolists are constrained by consumer demand, they are not
price takers. The monopolist can either have a target level of output that will
ensure the monopoly price for the given consumer demand it faces in the
industry, or it can set the monopoly price at the onset and adjust output to
ensure no excess inventories occur as a result of the output level.
Essentially, they can set their own price and accept a level of output
determined by the market, or they can set their output quantity and accept the
price determined by the market. The price and output are co-determined by
consumer demand and the firm's production cost structure.   A firm with
monopoly power setting prices will typically set price at the profit maximizing
level. The most "profitable" price that they can set (what will become the
monopoly price) is where the optimum output level (where marginal cost (MC)
equals marginal revenue (MR), although not in the diagram below, because it is
drawn incorrectly) meets the demand curve. Under normal market conditions for a
monopolist, this price will be higher than the marginal cost of producing the
product, thereby indicating the price paid by the consumer, which is equal to
the marginal benefit for the consumer, is above the firm's marginal cost. In
the chart below the shaded area represents the profits of the monopolist,
except that it is incorrect because the graph does not set MR = MC for the case
of monopoly. The lower half represents the normal profits that would go to a
competitive firm (ignoring output losses). The upper half represent the
additional economic profit going to the monopolist.   Persistence. In the
absence of barriers to entry and collusion in a market, the existence of a
monopoly, and therefore monopoly profit, cannot persist in the long run. (Note
that a barrier can be caused by increasing returns to scale â€” a bigger firm
can produce more cheaply. If the most efficient size firm serves the whole
market, we have a "natural monopoly," and no other firms will "rush" to enter.)
Normally, when economic profit exists within an industry, economic agents rush
to form new firms in the industry in an effort to obtain at least a portion of
the existing economic profit. As new firms enter the industry, they increase
the supply of the product available in the Market, and these new firms are
forced to charge a lower price to entice consumers to buy the additional supply
these new firms are supplying (they compete for customers). Since consumers
will flock toward the lowest price (in search of a bargain), older firms within
the industry actually face losing their existing customers to the new firms
entering the industry, and are therefore forced to lower their prices to match
the lower prices set by the new firms. New firms will continue to enter the
industry until the price of the product is lowered to the point that it is the
same as the average economic cost of producing the product, and all of the
economic profit disappears. When this happens, economic agents outside of the
industry find no advantage to entering the industry, supply of the product
stops increasing, and the price charged for the product stabilizes.
Essentially, a competitive situation always leads to an equilibrium solution".
Normally, a firm that introduces a brand new product can initially secure a
monopoly for a short while. At this stage, the initial price the consumer must
pay for the product is high, and the demand for, as well as the available of
the product in the market, will be limited. In the long run, however, when the
profitability of the product is well established, the number of firms that
produce this product will increase until the available supply of the product
eventually becomes relatively large, the price of the product shrinks down to
the level of the average "Economic cost" of producing the product. When this
finally occurs, all monopoly associated with producing and selling the product
disappears, and the initial monopoly turns into a (perfectly) competitive
industry. When consumers have full information about the prices available in
the market and the quality of the products sold by the various firms, there
cannot be a persistent monopolistic situation in the absence of barriers to
entry and collusion. Various barriers to entry include patent rights and
monopolization of a natural resource needed to produce a product. The American
firm Alcoa Aluminum is a historical example of a monopoly due to natural
resource control; their control of "practically every source of bauxite in the
United States" (bauxite is used to produced aluminum) was one key reason that
"Alcoa was, for a long time, the sole producer of aluminum in the United
States." Government intervention. Anti-Trust (Competition) Laws were created to
prevent powerful firms from using their economic power to artificially create
the barriers to entry they need to protect their monopoly profits. This
includes the use of predatory pricing toward smaller competitors. In the United
States, Microsoft Corporation was initially convicted of breaking the Anti-
Trust Laws and engaging in anti-competitive behavior in order to form one such
barrier in "United States v. Microsoft"; after a successful appeal on technical
grounds, Microsoft agreed to a settlement with the Department of Justice in
which they were faced with stringent oversight procedures and explicit
requirements designed to prevent this predatory behavior. Microsoft was
successfully convicted of similar anti-competitive behavior in the European
Economic Community's second highest court, the Luxembourg-based Court of First
Instance, in 2007. If firms in an industry collude they can also limit
production, thereby restricting supply to ensure the price of the product
remains high enough to ensure all of the firms in the industry achieve an
economic profit. [[File:monopolyPower
AddCompetion.JPG|thumb|center|upright=3.2|Introducing new Competition in what
was previously a monopoly removes monopoly profit.   Only 2 Firms are shown
here to make Illustration of the additional Competition easier in a Graphical
Presentation. In Normal Circumstances, it takes more than 2 firms to form a
"Competitive Situation", and having only 2 firms forms a ""Duopoly (See
Oligopoly)""]] The diagram to the right depicts an industry that initially
starts out with a single firm that enjoys a monopoly and the initial monopoly
profit that comes with it. Later, a second firm enters into the industry,
lowering its price to obtain customers that usually do not purchase the product
at the high monopoly price. As the initial monopoly firm loses customers, it is
forced to lower its price to retain profitability. In the competition for sales
to customers, the firms lower their prices even further, which increases the
consumer demand for the product, and thereby entices the firms to raise
production and which then increases the industry's total production and sales.
Finally, the price and production in the industry stabilizes into its
"competitive equilibrium"; the price paid by the consumers are just high enough
to cover the average economic cost of producing the product, and the available
quantity of the product doubles from its initial sales (under the monopoly). If
a government feels it is impractical to have a competitive market, it will
sometimes try to regulate the monopoly by controlling the price the monopoly
charges for its product. The old AT&T (regulated) monopoly, which existed
before the courts ordered its breakup and tried to force competition in the
market, had to get government approval to raise its prices. The government
examined the monopoly's costs, and determined whether or not the monopoly
should be able raise its price and if the government felt that the cost did not
justify a higher price, it rejected the monopoly's application for a higher
price. Though a regulated monopoly will not have a monopoly profit that is high
as it would be in an unregulated situation, it still can have an economic
profit that is still well above a competitive firm has in a truly competitive
market. The government examines the marginal cost associated with raising the
production level up to its presently desirable quantity, and allows the
regulated monopoly to charge a price that is no greater than this marginal
cost. Though the monopoly's profit is lower than it is in an unregulated
Situation, it can still make a positive economic profit.
