Motion of no confidence A motion of no confidence is primarily a statement or
vote which states that a person in a superior position - be it government,
managerial, etc - is no longer deemed fit to hold that position. This may be
based on said person falling short in some respect, failing to carry out
obligations, or making choices that other members feel are detrimental. In law,
a motion of no confidence (alternatively vote of no confidence, censure motion,
no-confidence motion, or (unsuccessful) confidence motion) is a parliamentary
motion which when passed would demonstrate to the head of state that the
elected parliament no longer has confidence in (one or more members of) the
appointed government. Overview. In determining whether another individual can
command the confidence of parliament, the head of state examines whether that
individual has the backing of a parliamentary party, a coalition of parties and
MPs, or an agreement of support with enough parliamentary seats to withstand
any confidence challenges. If this cannot be done, parliament is dissolved and
a general election is called. In some cases, the sitting government will
request that the head of state dissolve the elected parliament and call a new
election without seeking the forming of another Government, such that it would
remain in power during the election period. The head of state may agree to do
this, depending on factors such as time until a mandated election, reasonable
expectation of the forming of another government or in very rare circumstances,
on royal prerogative alone. However, where the head of state believes the
government no longer has the confidence of the "responsible" house (i.e., the
directly elected lower chamber which can select and dismiss it; in some states
both houses of parliament are responsible), a head of state may refuse a
request for a parliamentary dissolution, so forcing an immediate resignation.
This procedure is either formalized through constitutional convention, as is
the case in Westminster style parliaments such as the United Kingdom, Canada
and Australia, or explicitly stated in a written constitution, as is the case
with Germany and Spain. Sometimes, the government will choose to declare that
one of its bills is a motions of confidence. This may be used to prevent
dissident members of parliament from voting against it. Sometimes (depending on
the country) a government may lose a vote because the opposition ends debate
prematurely when too many government members are away. In the Westminster
system, the defeat of a supply bill (one that concerns the spending of money)
automatically requires (by convention) the resignation of the government or
dissolution of Parliament, much like a non-confidence vote, since a government
that cannot spend money is hamstrung. This is called loss of supply. Where the
upper house of a Westminster system country has the right to refuse supply,
such as in Australia during the events of 1975, the convention becomes a grey
area as Westminster governments are not normally expected to maintain the
confidence of the upper house. Variations. There are a number of variations in
this procedure. For example, in Germany, Spain, and Israel, a vote of no
confidence requires that the opposition, on the same ballot, propose a
candidate of their own whom they want to be appointed as successor by the
respective head of state. Thus the motion of no confidence is required to be at
the same time as a motion of confidence for a new candidate (this variation is
called a constructive vote of no confidence). The idea was to prevent crises of
the state such as those found near the end of the German Weimar Republic by
ensuring that whoever is head of government has enough support to govern.
Unlike the British system, the German Chancellor does not have to resign in
response to the failure of a vote of confidence, provided it has been initiated
by herself/himself and not by the parliamentary opposition, but rather may ask
the Federal President to call general elections - a request the President may
or may not fulfill. A motion of no confidence in some countries can be proposed
in the government collectively or by any individual member, including the Prime
Minister. In Spain it is presented by the Prime Minister after consultation.
Sometimes motions of no confidence are proposed, even though they have no
likelihood of passage, simply to pressure a government or to embarrass its own
critics who nevertheless for political reasons consider not to vote against it.
In many parliamentary democracies, strict time limits exist as to the proposing
of a no confidence motion, with a vote only allowed once every three, four or
six months. Thus knowing when to use a motion of no confidence is a matter of
political judgement; using a motion of no confidence on a relatively trivial
matter may prove counterproductive to its proposer if a more important issue
suddenly arises which warrants a motion of no confidence, because a motion
cannot be proposed if one had been voted on recently and cannot be proposed
again for a number of months. In the consensus government system of the
Northwest Territories and Nunavut, Canada, in which the premier is chosen among
and by a vote of the members of the non-partisan legislature, a vote of no
confidence removes the premier and cabinet from office and permits the members
to elect a new premier. In the British Parliament, a no-confidence motion
generally first appears as an early day motion, although the vote on the
Queen's Speech also constitutes a confidence motion. Presidential systems. In
presidential systems, the legislature may occasionally pass motions of no
confidence, as was done by the United States Congress to Secretary of State
Dean Acheson in the 1950s and was contemplated against Attorney General Alberto
Gonzales, but these motions are of symbolic effect only. Presidential systems
also usually have the procedure of impeachment by which an executive or
judicial officer can be removed. In certain parts of the United States and
Venezuela, the recall election fills a similar role of removing an unpopular
government, but, in contrast to a motion of no confidence, this vote involves
the entire electorate. Russia. In the Russian Federation the lower house of
parliament (the State Duma) may by a simple majority (i.e. at least 226 votes
out of 450) pass a motion of no confidence against the Government of Russia as
a whole. In this case the matter goes for consideration of the President, who
may choose to dismiss the cabinet (which the President can do at any moment of
time at his own discretion anyway) or just to ignore the Duma's decision.
Should the Duma pass a second motion of no confidence against the same
composition of the cabinet within three months, the President will be forced to
make a concrete decision - to dismiss the government or to dissolve the Duma
itself and call for new general elections. The State Duma may not be dissolved
on these grounds if it was elected less than a year ago, if it has already
initiated impeachment proceedings against the President of Russia himself by
bringing respective accusations, if less than six months is left until
elections of the President or if there is a state of emergency or martial law
throughout the whole territory of Russia. In the above mentioned cases the
President would therefore be effectively forced to dismiss the Government.
History. The first motion of no confidence occurred in March 1782 when,
following news of the British defeat at Yorktown in the American Revolutionary
War the previous October, the Parliament of Great Britain voted that they "can
no longer repose confidence in the present ministers". Prime Minister Lord
North responded by asking King George III to accept his resignation. This did
not immediately create a constitutional convention. During the early 19th
century, however, attempts by prime ministers such as Robert Peel to govern in
the absence of a parliamentary majority proved unsuccessful, and by the mid-
19th century, the ability of a motion of no confidence to break a government
was firmly established in the UK. In the United Kingdom, there have been a
total of 11 prime ministers defeated through a no-confidence motion. There has
been only one (against James Callaghan) since 1925. In modern times, passage of
a motion of no confidence is a relatively rare event in two-party democracies.
In almost all cases, party discipline is sufficient to allow a majority party
to defeat a motion of no confidence, and if faced with possible defections in
the government party, the government is likely to change its policies rather
than lose a vote of no confidence. The cases in which a motion of no confidence
has passed are generally those in which the government party has a slim
majority which is eliminated by either by-elections or defections, such as the
1979 vote of no confidence in the Callaghan government of the UK which was
carried by one vote, forcing a UK General Election and the election of Margaret
Thatcher's government. Motions of No Confidence are far more common in multi-
party systems in which a minority party must form a coalition government. This
can result in the situation in which there are many short-lived governments
because the party structure allows small parties to break a government without
means to create a government. This has widely been regarded as the cause of
instability for the French Fourth Republic and the German Weimar Republic. More
recent examples of this phenomenon have been in Italy between the 1950s and
1990s, Israel, and Japan. To deal with this situation, the French placed large
amount of executive power in the office of President of France, which is immune
from Motions of No Confidence. In 2008, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper,
of the re-elected minority government of Canada, requested that Governor
General MichaÃ«lle Jean prorogue Parliament. The request was granted, and it
allowed the Prime Minister to delay a potential vote on the non-confidence
motion presented by the opposition. (See 2008â2009 Canadian parliamentary
dispute.)
