MoveOn.org ad controversy The MoveOn.org ad controversy began when the anti-war
liberal advocacy group MoveOn.org published a full-page ad in "The New York
Times" on September 10, 2007 accusing General David H. Petraeus of "cooking the
books for the White House". The ad also labeled him "General Betray Us". The
organization created the ad in response to Petraeus' Report to Congress on the
Situation in Iraq. MoveOn hosted pages on its website about the ad and their
reasons behind it from 2007 to June 23, 2010. On June 23, 2010, after President
Obama nominated General Petraeus to be the new top U.S. and NATO commander in
Afghanistan (taking over the position from retiring General Stanley
McChrystal), MoveOn erased these webpages and any reference to them from its
website. Contents. Criticism. "The Washington Post's" Fact Checker stated that
the General's report of "sharply declining Iraqi casualty rates is certainly
open to analysis, debate, and challenge" but that "MoveOn.org does not provide
adequate factual support for its larger assertion that Petraeus is 'constantly
at war with the facts' and is 'cooking the books' for the White House".
Controversies. Payment controversy. "The New York Times" initially charged
MoveOn.org $65,000 for the ad using its "standby rate." "The Washington Post"
has stated that the full one-time rate is $142,000 for an ad receiving
guaranteed placement on a specific day. "Times" public editor and Pulitzer
Prize-winner Clark Hoyt later stated in an editorial that the organization was
mistakenly charged a rate to which it was not entitled under the newspaper's
policies. Moveon.org repaid the difference to the "Times" on September 25,
2007. "The New York Post" quoted a "Times" public relations director saying the
full one-time rate was $182,000, an additional $40,000 above what has been paid
back. Conservative columnist George Will has argued that "the paper made a huge
and patently illegal contribution to MoveOn.org's issue advocacy ad." He also
stated that ""The Times"' performance in this matter confirms an axiom: There
can be unseemly exposure of mind as well as of body." Copyright controversy.
Google and MoveOn have been accused of selective adherence to trademark law for
removing ads from Google Adwords for Maine Senator Susan Collins, citing
infringement of MoveOn trademarks. "Wired" stated on October 15, 2007 that the
"left-leaning political advocacy group, MoveOn.org, is backing down" and will
allow Google to show the ads. "We don't want to support a policy that denies
people freedom of expression," Moveon.org communications director Jennifer
Lindenauer said. Response. Political response. Independent Democratic Senator
Joe Lieberman, White House Press Secretary Tony Snow, and several Republican
Presidential candidates criticized the ad. President George W. Bush called the
ad "disgusting." Republican Presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani called it
"character assassination on an American general who is putting his life at
risk." Democratic Senator John Kerry also criticized the ad. Democratic
Presidential candidate Joe Biden said on "Fox News Sunday", "They went, in that
one instance, I think, overboard. But the point they were trying to make was
still valid." Democratic Presidential candidate Hillary Clinton said on "Meet
The Press", "I don't condone anything like that, and I have voted against those
who would impugn the patriotism and the service of the people who wear the
uniform of our country". Several other Democratic Senators and Representatives
distanced themselves from the ad. Democratic Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi,
who has published a blog statement condemning Petraeus' report, has said "I
would have preferred that they not do such an ad." "The New York Times" has
stated that "Democrats acknowledge that the MoveOn advertisement was a
distraction and illustrated the difficulties of working with liberal advocacy
groups". Former President Bill Clinton has criticized what he called the
"disingenuous" "feigned outrage" of the Republicans on CNN's The Situation
Room. Minnesota Senatorial candidate Al Franken argued in a "Star Tribune"
editorial "It is, of course, ridiculous that the United States Senate spent a
day debating and voting on a resolution condemning an advertisement while our
troops remained in Iraq, fighting a war with no end." Linguist George Lakoff
argued that the "ad has raised vital questions that need a thorough and open
discussion. The ad worked brilliantly to reveal, via its framing, an essential
but previously hidden truth: the Bush Administration and its active supporters
have betrayed the trust of the troops and the American people." Liberal blogger
Arianna Huffington argued that "Was the MoveOn ad blunt? Yes. Did it go for the
? No doubt. But while the way it chose to make its points can be debated, the
accuracy of those points cannot." Anti-war activist and Congressional candidate
Cindy Sheehan stated that "I have often been critical of MoveOn.org, basically
because I feel, for the most part that they support Democrats to the detriment
of democracy... The occupation of Iraq is a disaster and I applaud MoveOn for
moving a little closer to the true 'anti-war' movement and encourage them to
come with us farther." Council of Foreign Relations fellow Peter Beinart argued
that "It is terribly unfortunate that MoveOn.org is essentially calling
Petraeus a Republican hack, but it’s the logical result of the position the
Bush administration has put him in." Fellow Max Boot accused Moveon.org of
"desperate attempts to besmirch one of the most admired soldiers in the entire
American armed forces" and argued that the ad will "backfire". Pete Hegseth, an
Iraq War veteran and executive director of Vets for Freedom, published an
article in the "Weekly Standard" calling the ad "utterly shameful." He argued
that "It shows contempt for America's military leadership, as well as for the
troops who have confidence in him, as our fellow soldiers in Iraq certainly
do." "Time" magazine blogger Joe Klein posted that "It is no small thing to
accuse a military man of betraying his country. It is also palpably untrue in
this case. Whoever cooked up this ad is guilty of a disgraceful act of
malicious ." He also posted that "This is a distraction from the main event."
MoveOn.org stands by their ad, stating that the General "offered a twisted
version of the truth designed to support prolonging the war" and that "the
public needs to know that Petraeus is neither objective nor trustworthy when it
comes to assessing progress in Iraq". The organization also stated that the ad
had been targeted by a "concerted right-wing smear campaign". "The Politico"
has stated that Moveon.org "welcomes the controversy." Eli Pariser has said,
"Sometimes you have to call a spade a spade, even if it’s a respected
general". Legislative response. On September 20, the Senate passed an amendment
by Republican John Cornyn of Texas designed to "strongly condemn personal
attacks on the honor and integrity of General Petraeus". All 49 Republican
Senators and 22 Democratic Senators voted in support. Democratic Presidential
candidates Hillary Clinton and Chris Dodd voted against the amendment while
Barack Obama and Joseph Biden did not vote. Obama issued a statement calling
the resolution, put forward by Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, "a
stunt. By not casting a vote, I registered my protest against these empty
politics." The House passed an amendment to a continuing budget resolution
which condemned the ad "in the strongest terms" by a 341-79 vote on September
26. Democratic Senator Barbara Boxer of California drafted a similar amendment
on September 20. The text condemned the Petraeus ad as well as a 2002 ad
attacking then-Senator Max Cleland of Georgia during the 2002 midterm elections
and the Swift Vets and POWs for Truth ads attacking John Kerry during the 2004
Presidential election. Democratic Senator Carl Levin of Michigan said, "They're
all disgraceful ads and we ought to treat them the same way". The vote was 50-
47 in favor, but since 60 votes were required to pass it, the amendment did not
carry. "The Washington Post" stated on September 20 that "Democrats blamed the
group MoveOn.org for giving moderate Republicans a ready excuse for staying
with Bush and for giving Bush and his supporters a way to divert attention away
from the war". Eli Pariser, executive director of MoveOn.org Political Action,
has stated that "It is unconscionable and outrageous that instead of doing the
people's work and ending this war, Congress chooses meaningless and distracting
gestures. Popular response. A Rasmussen Reports survey found that 23% of
Americans approve of the ad while 58% disapprove. "The Economist" stated on
September 27 that "the group had raised $500,000 the day the Senate voted, its
biggest one-day fundraising total all year. Over four days, in the midst of the
row, it took in $1.6m"An ad too far" in "The Economist" Counter-ads. Republican
presidential candidate Rudy Giuliani ran his own full-page ad in "The New York
Times" on September 14. Giuliani asked for and received a similar reduced fee
as Moveon.org, paying $65,000. Conservative nonprofit lobbying organization
Freedom's Watch created two video ads in response to MoveOn.org's ad. On
September 24, Freedom's Watch ran a full-page ad in "The New York Times"
attacking Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad-- calling him a "terrorist".
The ad asserted that Ahmadinejad "has supported attacks on our soldiers and our
allies". The organization may also start a national ad campaign on the same
topic. A September 28 Associated Press article stated that "Freedom's Watch and
MoveOn.org could be the left and right bookends not only on the war, but on a
number of issues that will decide the 2008 elections and shape congressional
debate beyond." Removal. MoveOn hosted pages on its website about the ad and
their reasons behind it from 2007 to June 23, 2010. On June 23, 2010, MoveOn
erased these webpages and any reference to them from its website. The change
took place in the aftermath of President Obama's nomination of Petraeus to be
the new top U.S. and NATO commander in Afghanistan upon General Stanley
McCrystal's retirement. Political blog Weasel Zippers was the first media agent
to notice the change. Commentator Jon Bershad of Mediaite stated, "Since MoveOn
is an advocacy group with no claims to unbiased content, there’s nothing
unethical about scrubbing the site." Commentator Logan Penza of The Moderate
Voice criticized the change as a "cover-up" and argued that "ow can a group
supposedly dedicated to holding government accountable so obviously seek to
avoid any accountability for its own excesses?"
