Municipal corporation A municipal corporation is the legal term for a local
governing body, including (but not necessarily limited to) cities, counties,
towns, townships, charter townships, villages, and boroughs. Municipal
incorporation occurs when such municipalities become self-governing entities
under the laws of the state or province in which they are located. Often, this
event is marked by the award or declaration of a municipal charter. With the
notable exception of the City of London Corporation, the term has fallen out of
favour in the United Kingdom, but the concept remains central to local
government in the United Kingdom, as well as former British colonies such as
India and Canada. Municipal charters. A city charter or town charter
(generically, municipal charter) is a legal document establishing a
municipality such as a city or town. The concept developed in Europe during the
middle ages. It's considered to be a municipal version of a constitution.
Traditionally the granting of a charter gave a settlement and its inhabitants
the right to town privileges under the feudal system. Townspeople who lived in
chartered towns were burghers, as opposed to serfs who lived in villages. Towns
were often "free", in the sense that they were directly protected by the king
or emperor, and were not part of a feudal fief. Today the process for granting
charters is determined by the type of government of the state in question. In
monarchies, charters are still often a royal charter given by the Crown or the
state authorities acting on behalf of the Crown. In federations, the granting
of charters may be within the jurisdiction of the lower level of government
such as a state or province. By country. Brazil. In Brazil, municipal
corporations are called "munic√≠pios" and are created by means of local
legislation at state level, or after passing a referendum vote of the affected
population. All municipal corporations must also abide by an Organic Municipal
Law which is passed and amended (when needed) at municipal level. Canada. In
Canada charters are granted by provincial authorities. Germany. In Germany,
municipal corporations existed since antiquity and through medieval times,
until they became out of favour during the absolutism. In order to strengthen
the public spirit the city law of Prussia dated 19 November 1808 picked up this
concept. It is the basis of today's municipal law. India. In India a Municipal
Corporation is a local government body that administers a city of population
200,000 or more. Under the panchayati raj system, it interacts directly with
the state government, though it is administratively part of the district it is
located in. The largest Municipal Corporations in India currently are Mumbai,
followed by Delhi, Kolkata, Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Surat and
Pune. The Corporation of Chennai is the oldest Municipal Corporation in the
world outside UK. The Municipal Corporation consists of members elected from
the wards of the city. The Mayor and Deputy Mayor are elected by the members
among themselves. A Municipal Commissioner, who is from the Indian
Administrative Service is appointed to head the administrative staff of the
Municipal Corporation, implement the decisions of the Corporation and prepare
its annual budget. The Municipal Corporation is responsible for roads, public
transportation, water supply, records of births and deaths (delegated from
central government Births and Deaths Registration Act), sanitation that
includes waste management, sewage, drainage and flood control, public safety
services like fire and ambulance services, gardens and maintenance of
buildings. The sources of income of the Corporation are property tax,
entertainment tax, octroi (now abolished from many cities) and usage fees for
utilities. Republic of Ireland. In Ireland, municipal corporations existed in
boroughs since medieval times. The Corporation of Dublin, officially styled
"the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the City of
Dublin" had existed since the 13th century. Corporations were established under
the royal charter establishing the city or borough. The Municipal Corporations
(Ireland) Act 1840 abolished all but ten of the boroughs and their
corporations. The Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898 created two different
types of borough, county boroughs had essentially equal status to counties -
these comprised Dublin, Cork, Limerick, and Waterford (as well as Belfast and
Derry, which are now in Northern Ireland). The other boroughs were non-county
boroughs. The Local Government Act 2001 abolished the title of municipal
corporation. Corporations of county boroughs (renamed cities) were renamed City
Councils. Non county boroughs were abolished, but those towns which were
previously non-county boroughs were allowed to use the title of Borough
Council. Royal charters remain in force for ceremonial and civic purposes only.
South Africa. The municipality of Durban was called the Durban Corporation.
Sweden. In Sweden until 1951, cities were established by royal charter; see
City status in Sweden. Philippines. From the beginning of American colonial
rule, Philippines cities were formally established through laws enacted by the
various national legislatures in the country. The Philippine Commission gave
the city of Manila its charter in 1901, while the city of Baguio was
established by the Philippine Assembly which was composed by elected members
instead of appointed ones. During the Commonwealth era, the National Assembly
established an additional ten cities. Since achieving independence from the
United States in 1946 the Philippine Congress has established 124 more cities
(as of September 2007), the majority of which required the holding of a
plebiscite within the proposed city's jurisdiction to ratify the city's
charter. United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom, cities are granted that status
by Royal letters patent: see city status in the United Kingdom. United States.
In the United States, such municipal corporations are established by charters
that are granted either directly by a state legislature by means of local
legislation, or indirectly under a general municipal corporation law, usually
after the proposed charter has passed a referendum vote of the affected
population.
