MVDDS dispute The MVDDS dispute refers to several legal disputes and political
controversies that surrounded Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approval
of MVDDS terrestrial wireless broadband technology. The controversy arose over
the lobbying efforts of Northpoint Technology, a developer of MVDDS, to receive
approval and licensing for the technology. The dispute later transformed into
several court cases against the FCC and satellite television providers, as well
as a patent infringement case against MDS America and MDS International. As a
result of the dispute, Northpoint lost the patents. Development of MVDDS.
Multichannel Video Distribution and Data Service (MVDDS) is a land-based system
for sending wireless broadband signals over a part of the electromagnetic
spectrum usually reserved for satellite television (within the frequency range
of 12.2 to 12.7 GHz). The technology allows sharing the spectrum with the
satellite signals without interference. MDSA began developing an MVDDS
technology in the mid-1980s which it later called HyperCable. The CEO of MDS
America, the company that was to be the product's distributor in the United
States and the primary investor in MDS International, showed in 2001 that the
technology had been used in 20 locations worldwide since 1996. Meanwhile,
American company Northpoint Technology, Ltd. began developing its own MVDDS
system in the early 1990s. It filed its first patent applications by 1994,
using ideas from engineers Saleem and Carmen Tawil, and was formally founded in
1996 with investment money from various prominent individuals. The Chair of
Northpoint was Sophia Collier, also the head of Citizen's Advisers. The
Executive Vice President was Antoinette Cook Bush, the stepdaughter of
prominent Democratic activist Vernon Jordan. In addition, the Tawils and
Katherine (Chula) Reynolds, a member of the King Ranch family, were directors.
FCC licensing controversy. In 1999, Northpoint and two other companies applied
to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for permission to provide MVDDS
service. Northpoint filed its application in a filing window for non-
geostationary satellite systems, and claimed that its terrestrial system was
entitled to the same rights given to other applications filed in that window,
which employed the same frequency range. Pressed by satellite firms uneager at
the prospect of sharing their spectrum with other providers, Congress passed
language requiring the FCC to select an independent engineering firm to perform
tests that would protect the fact to ensure that MVDDS would not interfere with
satellite transmissions. The MITRE Corporation, a not-for-profit engineering
company that studies engineering issues for the government, was hired by the
FCC to make the determination. Since MDS America did not file a proposal to use
the spectrum within the time period the FCC specified, their technology was not
tested by MITRE. MITRE's report concluded that the MVDDS spectrum sharing
technology it tested did pose a "significant threat" of interference with
satellite television signals, but that a wide variety of mitigation techniques
could potentially be used to reduce the interference and make bandsharing
feasible. Based on this analysis, in 2002 the FCC adopted rules that allowed
for MVDDS bandsharing. However, the FCC rejected Northpoint's petition for a
license, and instead decided to hold a public auction to sell off the land-
based use of the spectrum. Northpoint claimed the FCC's decision was unfair,
since satellite companies had received a special exemption from Congress from
having to bid for spectrum. Through the political connections of its founders
and paid lobbyists, the company succeeded in having language that would block
the auction inserted into a Senate spending bill. This provoked criticism from
Senator John McCain, who called it "an example of the power of money and
special interests", and others, including the Bush administration. After other
charges of influence peddling surfaced, the language in the bill was eventually
dropped. Northpoint sought other avenues to challenge the FCC decision. It
filed several petitions with the FCC to reconsider the auction, but they were
all denied. The MVDDS auction took place in January 2004 without Northpoint's
participation, and ten licenses were awarded for the 12Â GHz bandwidth. The
company continued its challenge in the United States court of appeals, but the
court rejected Northpoint's claim that it had been treated unfairly. Northpoint
v. MDSA and MDSI. After the FCC decision in 2002, MDS America asked permission
of the FCC to test and prove its own MVDDS system. The FCC granted it an
experimental license, and the company arranged for tests to be held in Florida
using equipment furnished by its subsidiary, MDS International. When Northpoint
became aware of this, it informed MDS America that performing the tests would
infringe its patents. After the tests were concluded, Northpoint sued MDS
America and MDS International for patent infringement. The case revolved around
the question of how easily the technology described in Northpoint's
patentsâ€”specifically, the directional antennaâ€”could be implemented. The
defendants argued that the patent did not fully disclose how the antenna would
avoid receiving undesired signals, and that besides the antenna's physical
direction, many additional parameters must be fine-tuned. Additionally, the
defense introduced a 1970 paper which they claimed showed Northpoint's patented
physical direction idea constituted prior art. The jury for the case, which was
filed in the Southern Florida district court, determined that though MDS
America (but not MDS International) had infringed Northpoint's patent claims,
the patent claims were invalid to begin with. On appeal, the Federal circuit
court affirmed the jury's decisions. The case attracted attention in the media,
with even an official at the French embassy weighing in. Lawyers have noted
that the results of the case show that as much detail as possible on
implementation should be included by patent prosecutors. The invalidation of
the MVDDS patents ended all Northpoint's actions in MVDDS and their website is
no longer online.
