Nakamura number In cooperative game theory and social choice theory, the
Nakamura number measures the degree of rationality of preference aggregation
rules (collective decision rules), such as voting rules. It is an indicator of
the extent to which an aggregation rule can yield well-defined choices. In
contrast, The larger the Nakamura number a rule has, the greater the number of
alternatives the rule can rationally deal with. For example, since (except in
the case of four individuals (voters)) the Nakamura number of majority rule is
three, the rule can deal with up to two alternatives rationally (without
causing a paradox). The number is named after Kenjiro Nakamura (1947–1979), a
Japanese game theorist who proved the above fact that the rationality of
collective choice critically depends on the number of alternatives. Overview.
To introduce a precise definition of the Nakamura number, we give an example of
a "game" (underlying the rule in question) to which a Nakamura number will be
assigned. Suppose the set of individuals consists of individuals 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5. A Nakamura number can be assigned to such collections, which we call
"simple games". More precisely, a simple game is just an arbitrary collection
of coalitions; the coalitions belonging to the collection are said to be
"winning"; the others "losing". If all the (at least three, in the example
above) members of a winning coalition prefer alternative x to alternative y,
then the society (of five individuals, in the example above) will adopt the
same ranking ("social preference"). The Nakamura number of a simple game is
defined as the minimum number of winning coalitions with empty intersection.
(By intersecting this number of winning coalitions, one can sometimes obtain an
empty set. But by intersecting less than this number, one can never obtain an
empty set.) The Nakamura number of the simple game above is three, for example,
since the intersection of any two winning coalitions contains at least one
individual but the intersection of the following three winning coalitions is
empty: formula_7, formula_8, formula_9. the number of alternatives is less than
the Nakamura number of the simple game. Here, the core of a simple game with
respect to the profile of preferences is the set of all alternatives formula_10
such that there is no alternative formula_11 that every individual in a winning
coalition prefers to formula_10; that is, the set of "maximal" elements of the
social preference. For the majority game example above, the theorem implies
that the core will be empty (no alternative will be deemed "best") for some
profile, if there are three or more alternatives. Variants of Nakamura's
theorem exist that provide a condition for the core to be nonempty (i) for all
profiles of "acyclic" preferences; (ii) for all profiles of "transitive"
preferences; and (iii) for all profiles of "linear orders". There is a
different kind of variant (Kumabe and Mihara, 2011), which dispenses with
"acyclicity", the weak requirement of rationality. The variant gives a
condition for the core to be nonempty for all profiles of preferences that have
"maximal elements". For "ranking" alternatives, there is a very well known
result called "Arrow's impossibility theorem" in social choice theory, which
points out the difficulty for a group of individuals in ranking three or more
alternatives. For "choosing" from a set of alternatives (instead of "ranking"
them), Nakamura's theorem is more relevant. An interesting question is how
large the Nakamura number can be. It has been shown that for a (finite or)
algorithmically "computable" simple game that has no "veto player" to have a
Nakamura number greater than three, the game has to be "non-strong". This means
that there is a "losing" (i.e., not winning) coalition whose complement is also
losing. This in turn implies that nonemptyness of the core is assured for a set
of three or more alternatives only if the core may contain several alternatives
that cannot be strictly ranked. Framework. Let formula_13 be a (finite or
infinite) nonempty set of "individuals". The subsets of formula_13 are called
coalitions. A simple game (voting game) is a collection formula_15 of
coalitions. We assume that formula_15 is nonempty and does not contain an empty
set. The coalitions belonging to formula_15 are "winning"; the others are
"losing". A simple game formula_15 is monotonic if formula_19 and formula_20
imply formula_21. It is proper if formula_19 implies formula_23. It is strong
if formula_24 implesformula_25. A veto player (vetoer) is an individual that
belongs to all winning coalitions. A simple game is nonweak if it has no veto
player. It is finite if there is a finite set (called a "carrier") formula_26
such that for all coalitions formula_27, we have formula_19 iff formula_29. Let
formula_30 be a (finite or infinite) set of "alternatives", whose cardinal
number (the number of elements) formula_31 is at least two. if formula_34 (read
"formula_10 is preferred to formula_11"), then formula_37. We say that a
preference formula_32 is "acyclic" (does not contain "cycles") if for any
finite number of alternatives formula_39, whenever formula_40, formula_41,…,
formula_42, we have formula_43. Note that acyclic relations are asymmetric,
hence preferences. A profile is a list formula_44 of individual preferences
formula_45. Here formula_46 means that individual formula_47 prefers
alternative formula_10 to formula_11 at profile formula_50. A "simple game with
ordinal preferences" is a pair formula_51 consisting of a simple game
formula_15 and a profile formula_50. Given formula_51, a "dominance" (social
preference) relation formula_55 is defined on formula_30 by formula_57 if and
only if there is a winning coalition formula_19 satisfying formula_46 for all
formula_60. The core formula_61 of formula_51 is the set of alternatives
undominated by formula_55 The Nakamura number: the definition and examples. The
Nakamura number formula_69 of a simple game formula_15 is the size (cardinal
number) without a veto player has a Nakamura number greater than 3 only if it
is proper and nonstrong. Nakamura's theorem for acyclic preferences. Nakamura's
theorem (Nakamura, 1979, Theorems 2.3 and 2.5). Let formula_15 be a simple
game. Then the core formula_61 is nonempty for all profiles formula_50 of
acyclic preferences if and only if formula_30 is finite and formula_75. Remarks
A variant of Nakamura's theorem for preferences that may contain cycles. In
this section, we discard the usual assumption of acyclic preferences. Instead,
we restrict preferences to those having a maximal element on a given "agenda"
("opportunity set" that a group of individuals are confronted with), a subset
of some underlying set of alternatives. Accordingly, it is appropriate to think
of formula_30 as an "agenda" here. An alternative formula_93 is a "maximal"
element with respect to formula_45 (i.e., formula_45 has a maximal element
formula_10) if there is no formula_97 such that formula_98. If a preference is
acyclic over the underlying set of alternatives, then it has a maximal element
on every "finite" subset formula_30. We introduce a strengthening of the core
before stating the variant of Nakamura's theorem. An alternative formula_10 can
be in the core formula_61 even if there is a winning coalition of individuals
formula_47 that are "dissatisfied" with formula_10 (i.e., each formula_47
prefers some formula_105 to formula_10). It is easy to prove that formula_109
depends only on the set of maximal elements of each individual and is included
in the union of such sets. Moreover, for each profile formula_50, we have
formula_117. A variant of Nakamura's theorem (Kumabe and Mihara, 2011, Theorem
2). Remarks
