National Association of Secretaries of State The National Association of
Secretaries of State (NASS), founded in 1904, is the oldest non-partisan
professional organization of public officials in the United States, composed of
the Secretaries of State of U.S. states and territories. Currently, all
secretaries of state, including Washington D.C., Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin
Islands, and Guam) are members of NASS. NASS maintains its office in
Washington, D.C., and promotes positions on issues of interest to Secretaries
of State: voter turnout, voting procedures, business services, electronic
government, securities, and government archives. Pennsylvania Secretary of
State Pedro A. Cort√©s became the first Puerto Rican president of the
organization, and the last one to hold the position for a full one-year term,
followed by Maine's Matt Dunlap, whose term was cut short by his electoral
defeat in the 2010 midterm elections. Minnessota's Mark Ritchie filled the
remainder of Dunlap's term. During the organization's annual summer meeting in
San Juan in July 2012, Alabama Secretary of State Beth Chapman turned over the
presidency to Nevada's Ross Miller. Positions of NASS. NASS has taken a stand
on the issue of the United States presidential primaries, promoting the
Rotating Regional Primary System. (July 2007) [http://nass.org/
index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=74&Itemid=210] NASS has called on the
National Institute for Standards and Technology and the U.S. Election
Assistance Commission to publish a plain English guide to the new Voluntary
Voting System Guidelines. (July 2007) [http://nass.org/
index.php?option=com_content&task=blogcategory&id=28&Itemid=159] NASS has also
published a position paper on Federal legislation, calling on the Congress to
respect states rights. (February 2007) [http://nass.org/
index.php?option=com_content&task=blogcategory&id=28&Itemid=159]
