National Breast Cancer Awareness Month Breast Cancer Awareness Month (BCAM),
also referred to in America as National Breast Cancer Awareness Month (NBCAM),
is an annual international health campaign organized by major breast cancer
charities every October to increase awareness of the disease and to raise funds
for research into its cause, prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure. The
campaign also offers information and support to those affected by breast
cancer. As well as providing a platform for breast cancer charities to raise
awareness of their work and of the disease, BCAM is also a prime opportunity to
remind women to be breast aware for earlier detection. History. NBCAM was
founded in 1985 as a partnership between the American Cancer Society and the
pharmaceutical division of Imperial Chemical Industries (now part of
AstraZeneca, maker of several anti-breast cancer drugs). The aim of the NBCAM
from the start has been to promote mammography as the most effective weapon in
the fight against breast cancer. In 1993 Evelyn Lauder, Senior Corporate Vice
President of the Est√©e Lauder Companies founded The Breast Cancer Research
Foundation and established the pink ribbon as its symbol, though this was not
the first time the ribbon was used to symbolize breast cancer. In the fall of
1991, the Susan G. Komen Foundation had handed out pink ribbons to participants
in its New York City race for breast cancer survivors. Activities and events.
The National Race for the Cure. In October 1983 the Race for the Cure was held
for the first time in Dallas, Texas, where 800 people participated. According
to the organizers, by 2002 the number of participants reached 1.3 million and
the event was held in over 100 US cities. The event is also being organized in
several other parts of the World. Rani Breast Cancer Trust rbct.org
headquartered in Chandigarh, India organizes the annual Breast Cancer
Walkathon, a unique treadmill walkathon event for awareness. Breast Cancer
Today. There are various two-day-long walks to raise money for breast cancer
research institutes. Avon sponsors a 39 mile (60¬ km) walk. A walk in Atlanta
offers varying lengths of up to 30 miles. Canada's large "Weekend to End Breast
Cancer" features a 60¬ km walk. St. Louis, MO offers a one-day-long breast
cancer walk. This walk consists of three miles. Susan G. Komen 3 Day 'For the
Cure'. This sixty mile fundraising walk, which is spread across 3 days, raises
money for breast cancer research. This walk, which benefits Susan G. Komen for
the Cure occurs in several cities in the United States. The Breast Cancer 3-Day
was previously sponsored and managed by Avon. Ride to Empower. The Ride to
Empower started in 2008 and raises money for Breast Cancer Network of
Strength's programs. The Ride to Empower is a destination bike ride, with fully
supported route lengths ranging from a 100 miles to less than 32 miles. The
location for the Ride to Empower changes yearly. Pink days. During Breast
Cancer Awareness Month each October, people raise money by organizing
activities such as theme parties or a "pink day" (when employees wear pink
clothing or accessories) at work. The money raised is donated to the
organizers' choice of breast cancer care or research programs. An increasingly
prominent "pink day" is Global Pink Hijab Day celebrated by many to raise
awareness and funds for breast cancer. National Football League. During the
month of October, the National Football League promotes breast cancer awareness
by incorporating pink on its websites, graphics, and advertisements. Players
also show support by wearing pink gloves, cleats, captains patches, and other
apparel during games. Pink comic strips. Over 50 comic strip artists used pink
on October 10, 2010, using the pink ribbon with the words "Cartoonists Care".
King Features Syndicate inspired the plan. Male breast cancer. Male breast
cancer, which is rare, is generally overlooked. In 2009 the male breast cancer
advocacy groups Out of the Shadow of Pink, A Man's Pink, and the Brandon
Greening Foundation for Breast Cancer in Men joined together to globally
establish the third week of October as "Male Breast Cancer Awareness Week".
Criticisms. Corporate Sponsorship. It has been alleged that "the BCAM idea 'was
conceived and paid for by a British chemical company that both profits from
this epidemic and may be contributing to its cause...'". Sometimes referred to
as "National Breast Cancer Industry Month", critics of NBCAM point to a
conflict of interest between corporations sponsoring breast cancer awareness
while profiting from diagnosis and treatment. The breast cancer advocacy
organization, Breast Cancer Action, has said repeatedly in newsletters and
other information sources that October has become a public relations campaign
that avoids discussion of the causes and prevention of breast cancer and
instead focuses on ‚Äúawareness‚Äù as a way to encourage women to get their
mammograms. The term "pinkwashing" has been used by Breast Cancer Action to
describe the actions of companies which manufacture and use chemicals which
show a link with breast cancer and at the same time publicly support charities
focused on curing the disease. Other criticisms center on the marketing of
"pink products" and tie ins, citing that more money is spent marketing these
campaigns than is donated to the cause. Cure as "Treatment" vs. "Prevention".
The Cancer Prevention Coalition has criticized the basic message of NBCAM as a
form of victim blaming because it focuses on "early detection and treatment"
while ignoring environmental factors. According Aaron Blair, Ph.D., chief of
the Occupational Epidemiology Branch in National Cancer Institute's Division of
Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, "For breast cancer, hormone use is one of the
major factors affecting risk." According to Rose Marie Williams, a columnist
for the Townsend Letter, drug, chemical, and biotechnology companies have a
vested interest in treating the disease rather than finding ways to minimize
its rate of incidence. Recent studies show that breast cancer is linked to
several environmental and genetic factors which can be controlled or mitigated.
