National Alliance on Mental Illness The National Alliance on Mental Illness
(also known as NAMI) was founded in 1979 as the National Alliance for the
Mentally Ill. NAMI is a nation-wide American advocacy group, representing
families and people affected by mental illness. NAMI claims to be a grass roots
organization and has affiliates in every American state and in thousands of
local communities in the country. NAMI's mission is to provide support,
psychoeducation, and research for people and their families living with mental
illness through various public education and awareness activities. Funding. The
funding of NAMI by multiple pharmaceutical companies was exposed by the
investigative magazine Mother Jones in 1999, including that an Eli Lilly &
Company executive was then "on loan" to NAMI working out of NAMI headquarters.
NAMI receives considerably more than half its budget from pharmaceutical
companies, and because of this was accused of a conflict of interest by a
prominent NAMI member, E. Fuller Torrey (in 2008), and of failing to disclose
that funding when promoting the medications sold by its funders. NAMI came
under scrutiny by U.S. Senator Charles E. Grassley in April 2009. Senator
Grassley's investigation of NAMI confirmed that a majority of their funding was
coming from the pharmaceutical companies. In a story written by "New York
Times" Journalist Gardiner Harris in 2009, NAMI received over 66 percent of
their funding from Pharma. Gardiner, reporting off the findings of a Senate
Investigation conducted by Senator Grassley (R) of Iowa.[http://
www.nytimes.com/2009/10/22/health/22nami.html] (Harris, Gardinder. "New York
Times", October 21, 2009) References. Jeffrey Thomas. 2006. U.S. Nonprofit
Group Is "Nationâ€™s Voice on Mental Illness". American Information Program.
America Engaging the World. December 21. NAMI Start. 2008. Community Support
Programs Branch - History. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration Health Information Network. National Mental Health Information
Center. September 24. NAMI & CSP. Committee on Veterans Affairs: Hearings. U.S.
Senate Committee on Veterans' Affairs. U.S. Senate Committee on Veterans'
Affairs Sub-hearing. NAMI and U.S. Govt..
