National language A national language is a language (or language variant, i.e.
dialect) which has some connection‚Äî"de facto" or "de jure"‚Äîwith a people
and perhaps by extension the territory they occupy. The term is used variously.
A national language may for instance represent the national identity of a
nation or country. National language may alternatively be a designation given
to one or more languages spoken as first languages in the territory of a
country. The last seems often to be given the title "official language."
Standard languages, such as Standard German, Standard French, and Standard
Spanish, may serve as national (language-in-common), regional, and
international languages. Official versus national languages. "National
language" and "official language" are best understood as two concepts or legal
categories with ranges of meaning that may coincide, or may be intentionally
separate. Obviously a stateless nation is not in the position to legislate an
official language, but their language may be considered a national language.
Some languages may be recognized popularly as "national languages," while
others may enjoy a high degree of official recognition. Some examples of
national languages that are not official languages include Cherokee, and Navajo
(and other living Native American languages). In many African countries, some
or all indigenous African languages are legally recognized as "national
languages" with "official language" status being given to the former colonial
language (English, French, Portuguese, or Spanish). Certain languages may enjoy
government recognition or even status as official languages in some countries
while not in others. National and official languages. Algeria. Berber is a
national language in Algeria. Andorra. Andorra's national language is Catalan,
however the Catalan language is a regional language in Spain (Catalonia,
Valencian Community, Balearic Islands, the Catalan-Aragonese borderlands known
as La Franja and the Murcian municipality of El Carche), France (Pyr√©n√©es
Orientales) and in Italy (Alghero). Bulgaria. Bulgarian language is the
national language in Bulgaria. Canada. Canada's official languages since the
Official Languages Act of 1969 are English (Canadian English) and French
(Canadian French). Depending on one's views of what constitue a "nation" these
two langaues may be consided two equal national langues of a nation called
"Canada", or the national langauges of two nations within one state, English
Canada and French Canada. Quebec nationalists consider Quebec French the
national language of the Quebec nation. Besides this there many Aboriginal
languages of Canada which are the national langauges of one or more of Canada'a
First Nations groups (formerly "Indians"), Inuit (formerly "Eskimos"), and
Metis (mixed First Nations-European people). Notably the Cree language is
spoken (with variations) from Alberta to Labrador. Greater China. In China,
plenty of spoken variants exist in different parts of the country. In ancient
times, several local dialects were chosen as the official spoken language, such
as the dialects from Hangzhou, Nanjing, etc. After the Xinhai Revolution in
1911, the Kuomintang (Chinese nationalists) founded the Republic of China
(ROC). In order to promote a sense of national unity and enhance the efficiency
of communications within the nation, the ROC decided to designate a national
language. The Beijing dialect of Mandarin and Guangzhou dialect of Cantonese
were the most popular options. Ultimately the Beijing dialect was chosen as the
national language and given the name ÂúãË™û in Chinese (Pinyin: Gu√≥y«î, "lit."
national language, commonly known as "Standard Chinese" in English). In the
beginning, there were attempts to introduce elements from other Chinese spoken
variants into the national language, in addition to those existing in the
Beijing dialect, but this was deemed too difficult and was abandoned in 1924.
Since then, the Beijing dialect became the major source of standard national
pronunciation, due to its prestigious status in the preceding Qing Dynasty.
Elements from other dialects exist in the standard language. After the Chinese
Civil War in 1949, the Chinese Communist Party established the People's
Republic of China (PRC) in mainland China. The Kuomintang regime of the
Republic of China retreated to the island of Taiwan and maintained the same
policy. Similarly, the People's Republic of China, which administers mainland
China, continued the effort and renamed the national language, largely based on
the Beijing dialect, as ÊôÆÈÄöËØù (Pinyin: p«ît≈çnghu√ , "lit." common speech).
Finland. Finland has two national languages: namely the Finnish language and
the Swedish language according to the Constitution of Finland. The Language Act
details the use of them by public authorities. However, there is an aboriginal
nation Sami and another group Romani that have their languages mentioned as
legal to be maintained and developed by such groups. The Sami have partial
right to use Sami languages in official situations according to other laws. The
Swedish language (6% of the people) is a valid language everywhere in Finland,
whereas the Finnish language (92% of the people) is most widely used, but the
latter is not legally valid everywhere. Despite the large difference in the
numbers of users, Swedish is not officially classified as a minority language
but equal to Finnish. Both national languages are compulsory subjects in school
(except for children with a third language as mother tongue) and a language
test is a prerequisite for governmental offices where a university degree is
required. India. Article 343 of the Constitution of India specifies that the
Official language of India is Hindi in Devanagari script, with English as an
additional language for official work. Article 345 states that a state of India
may officially adopt one or more languages in use in the state or Hindi/English
as the language or languages to be used for all or any of the official purposes
of that state. However, as neither the Constitution nor any Indian law defines
any national language, India has no national language. This was affirmed by the
Gujarat High Court in 2009; while observing that a majority of the nation
accept Hindi as a national language, speak Hindi and write Hindi in Devanagari
script, the court opined that India officially does not have a national
language . Lebanon. In Lebanon, the Arabic language is the "official national"
language. Malta. The Maltese language is the national language of Malta. It is
also the official language of the island, together with English. Maltese only
is recognised as "national" in Chapter 1 of the Laws of Malta. Namibia.
Although English is the only nationwide official language in Namibia, there are
also 20 "National languages", which are each spoken by more or less sizeable
portions of the population and are considered Namibia's cultural heritage. All
national languages have the rights of a minority language and may even serve as
a lingua franca in certain regions. Among Namibia's national languages are
German, Afrikaans, Oshiwambo, Otjiherero, Portuguese, as well as the languages
of the Himba, Nama, San, Kavango and Damara. Nigeria. Besides official English,
Nigeria recognizes three 'majority', or national, languages. These are the big
three, Hausa, Igbo, and Yoruba, each with some 20 million speakers or more.
Pakistan. Article 251(1) of the 1973 Constitution of Pakistan, titled "National
language", specifies: "The National language of Pakistan is Urdu, and
arrangements shall be made for its being used for official and other purposes
within fifteen years from the commencing day.Although it has been declared as
an official language , so far all the documentation, legislation,legal orders
and every thing related on legal front is done in British English.Mostly the
studies at the higher level i.e Masters , M.Phil and Phd. level is done in
English."National Language Authority is an organization established to make
these arrangements since 1979. Philippines. The 1973 Philippine constitution
designated Pilipino (a Tagalog-based language) and English as official
languages, "until otherwise provided by law" and mandated development and
formal adoption of a common national language to be known as Filipino. The 1987
constitution designated the Filipino language, which is based on Tagalog with
the inclusion of terms from all recognized languages of the Philippines, as the
national language. It also designated both Filipino and English as the official
languages for purposes of communication and instruction, and designated the
regional languages as auxiliary official languages in the regions to serve as
auxiliary media of instruction therein. More than 170 languages are spoken in
the Philippines and almost all of them belong to the Borneo‚ÄìPhilippines
languages group of the Austronesian language family. In 2007, a six part series
titled "The Case of Ilokano as a National Language" authored by Dr. Aurelio
Solver Agcaoili of the University of Hawaii appeared in the Culture, Essays,
Lifestyle of Tawid News Magazine. , leaders from the Ilocos region and other
Ilocano-dominated provinces were considering the possible declaration of
Ilocano language as an official language in their provinces along with the
national language to foster the continuity of their language and heritage.
Russia. The Russian language is the only official language of Russia, but 27
other languages are considered official in different regions in Russia.
Singapore. Singapore has four official languages: English, Chinese, Malay and
Tamil. Although English is the primary language of business and government and
the main language used in education, Malay is designated as the national
language. This is due to the geographical and historical ties to Malaysia as
well as the recognition of ethnic Malays (about 14% of the population) as the
indigenous people of Singapore. Traditionally, the lingua franca among the
different ethnic groups in Singapore was Bazaar Malay, a Malay-based creole.
Since independence, the government has been promoting English as the main
language of Singapore. The bilingual education policy requires students to
study only two languages: English and a "mother tongue" corresponding to the
student's ethnicity. Malay is only offered to non-Malay students as an optional
third language in secondary schools. As a result, English has displaced Bazaar
Malay as the common language among Singaporeans. Therefore, despite the status
of Malay as the national language, the majority of the population do not speak
the language. Notable official usage of Malay includes the national anthem
Majulah Singapura, and drill commands in the Singapore Armed Forces. South
Africa. South Africa has 11 official languages. Namely: Afrikaans, English,
Ndebele, Northern Sotho, Sotho, Swazi, Tswana, Tsonga, Venda, Xhosa and Zulu.
South African Sign Language and Dutch are distinct in South Africa though
incompletely emerged national standard languages which also subsumes a cluster
of semi-standardised dialects. Turkey. Ethnically, 10-18% of Turkey's
population have got an Kurdish origin, and their language is Kurdish. But the
95-98% of population can speak Turkish as native by their birth. In that fact,
Turkish is a national language of Turkey. Also there are many other ethnic
origins like Circassians, Arabians or Bosnians, and they all can speak Turkish
as native language. United Kingdom. The English is the "de facto" official
language of the United Kingdom and is spoken monolingually by an estimated 95%
of the British population. Interestingly, official regional languages exist
without reference to a national language. United States. In the United States,
English is the national language only in an informal sense, by numbers and by
historical and contemporary association. The United States Constitution does
not explicitly declare any official language, although the constitution is
written in English, as is all federal legislation. On 11 February 2009,
Representative Steve King (R-IA.) introduced House Bill H.R.997, to declare
English as the official language of the United States. On 5 May 2009, Senator
Jim Inhofe (R-OK) introduced Senate Bill S.991 as a companion bill. On 26
February 2009, Representative Steve King (R-IA.) introduced House Bill
H.R.1229, a bill to amend title 4, United States Code, to declare English as
the official language of the Government of the United States, and for other
purposes. On 6 May 2009, Senator Jim Inhofe (R-OK) introduced Bill S.992 as a
companion bill. On 10 March 2011, Representative Steve King (R-IA.) introduced
House Bill H.R.997, a bill to amend title 4, United States Code, to declare
English as the official language of the Government of the United States, and
for other purposes. On 8 March 2011, Senator Jim Inhofe (R-OK) introduced Bill
S.503 as a companion bill. On 17 March 2011, Representative Peter T. King (R-
NY.) introduced House Bill H.R.1164, a bill to amend title 4, United States
Code, to declare English as the official language of the Government of the
United States. Previous incarnations of these bills were co-written and
supported by California millionaire Ron Unz. Vietnam. In Vietnam, the
Vietnamese language is the national language.
