National Income and Product Accounts The national income and product accounts
(NIPA) are part of the national accounts of the United States. They are
produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce. They
are one of the main sources of data on general economic activity in the United
States. They use double-entry accounting to report the monetary value and
sources of output produced in the country and the distribution of incomes that
production generates. Data are available at the national and industry levels.
Seven summary accounts are published, as well as a much larger number of more
specific accounts. The first summary account shows gross domestic product (GDP)
and its major components. The table summarizes national income on the left
(debit, revenue) side and national product on the right (credit, expense) side
of a two-column accounting report. Thus the left side gives GDP by the income
method, and the right side gives GDP by the expenditure method. The GDP is
given on the bottom line of both sides of the report. GDP must have the same
value on both sides of the account. This is because income and expenditure are
defined in a way that forces them to be equal (see accounting identity). We
show the 2003 table later in this article; we present the left side first for
convenient screen display. The U.S. report (updated quarterly) is available in
several forms, including interactive, from links on the Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA) NIPA ([http://www.bea.gov/index.htm]) page. International norms
for national accounting methods are given by the United Nations System of
National Accounts. The NIPAs are prepared by the staff of the Directorate for
National Economic Accounts within the BEA. The source data largely originate
from public sources, such as government surveys and administrative data, and
they are supplemented by data from private sources, such as data from trade
associations (BEA 2008: 1â€“6). __TOC__ Accounting for national income: the
left side of the report. The income side of the national income and product
account report begins with the kinds of income people might have. Employee
compensation includes the wages and salaries paid to anyone whose income is
subject to income tax withholding. Since wages and salaries affect more
individuals and families directly than the other sources of income, it has by
far the largest value. Table 1: revenue uses of GDP. Proprietors' income is the
payments to those who own non-corporate businesses, including sole proprietors
and partners. inventory value adjustment (IVA) and capital consumption
adjustment (CCA) are corrections for changes in the value of proprietor's
inventory (goods that may be sold within one year) and capital (goods like
machines and buildings that are not expected to be sold within one year) under
rules set by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Rental income of persons
excludes rent paid to corporate real estate companies. Real estate is capital
rather than inventory by definition, so there is no IVA. Corporate profits with
IVA and CCA is like the entries for proprietors' income and rental income
except that the organization is a corporation. Corporate profit is shown before
taxes, which are part of taxes on production and imports, two lines down.
Business current transfer payments is not explained here. Net interest and
miscellaneous payments is interest paid minus interest received plus payments
to individuals and corporations that are not elsewhere classified (NEC). Taxes
on production and imports does not include corporate income tax payments to the
states and to the federal government. Taxes on production and imports were
previously classified as "indirect business taxes" and include excise taxes,
sales taxes, property taxes, and other taxes relating to business production.
While the report includes the net value of interest payments and receipts, both
the taxes paid and subsidies from the government are shown. National income
(NI) is the sum of employees, proprietors, rental, corporate, interest, and
government income less the subsidies government pays to any of those groups.
Net national product (NNP) is National Income plus or minus the statistical
discrepancy that accumulates when aggregating data from millions of individual
reports. In this case, the statistical discrepancy is US$25.6Â billion, or
about 0.23% of gross domestic product. A discrepancy that small (less than
three-tenths of one percent) is immaterial under accounting standards. Gross
national product is net national product plus an allowance for the consumption
of fixed capital, mostly buildings and machines, usually called depreciation.
Capital is used up in production but it does not vanish. Finally, GDP is gross
national product plus payments from the rest of the world that are income to
residents of the U.S. minus payments from the US to the rest of the world that
count as income where they are received. Accounting for national product: the
right side of the report. Macroeconomics defines GDP, from the production
perspective, as the sum of personal consumption, investment, net exports, and
government expenditures; . Table 2: Production sources of gross domestic GDP.
The production side report also begins with individuals and families, in this
case their personal consumption expenditures on goods and services, C in the
definition. Durable goods are expected to last more than a year (furniture,
appliances, cars, etc.) and to have little or no secondary resale market.
Nondurable goods are used up within a year (food, clothing, medicine...).
Services includes everything else, everything we buy that has little or no
physical presence, like banking, health care, insurance, movie tickets, and so
on. Gross private domestic investment includes expenditures on goods that are
expected to be used for an extended period of time, I in the definition.
Residential investment includes owner occupied and rental housing.
Nonresidential investment includes buildings, machinery, and equipment used for
commercial or industrial purposes (small business, agriculture, manufacturing,
service, etc.). The last element of Investment accounts for any change in the
value of previous investments that are still in use, called inventory. Net
Exports reports the balance between goods produced domestically but consumed
abroad (X) and goods produced abroad but consumed domestically (M). There is no
distinction between consumption and investment or between the private and
public sectors; a consumer's imported television, a corporation's imported lab
equipment, and the government's use of imported food on military bases count
equally. When net exports are positive, the country has a trade surplus. When
Net Exports are negative, there is a trade deficit. Government Consumption
Expenditures and Gross Investment includes all government expenditures on
domestically produced goods and services. Like an individual or family, the
government consumes food, clothing, furniture, and other goods and services in
its administrative, military, correctional, and other programs. Governments
also invest in buildings for program use and in improvements to harbors,
rivers, roads, and airports. Transfer payments, like subsidies to the
unemployed or the retired, are "not" included in this item, since they are
simply a movement of money from government to citizens, rather than a purchase
of goods or services. The sum of the four production categories is gross
domestic product, the value of all domestic expenditures on goods and services.
GDP (income) must equal GDP (production) except for any rounding error that
accumulates when the data used to prepare a table includes rounding at prior
stages of analysis, as appears to have happened in this case.
