Nationalism Nationalism is a form of patriotism based upon the identification
of a group of individuals with a nation. There are two main perspectives on the
origins and basis of nationalism, one is the primordialist perspective that
describes nationalism as a reflection of the ancient and perceived evolutionary
tendency of humans to organize into distinct grouping based on an affinity of
birth; the other is the modernist perspective that describes nationalism as a
recent phenomenon that requires the structural conditions of modern society.
There are various definitions for what constitutes a nation, however, which
leads to several different strands of nationalism. It can be a belief that
citizenship in a state should be limited to one ethnic, cultural, religious, or
identity group, or that multinationality in a single state should necessarily
comprise the right to express and exercise national identity even by
minorities. The adoption of national identity in terms of historical
development, has commonly been the result of a response by an influential group
or groups that is unsatisfied with traditional identities due to inconsistency
between their defined social order and the experience of that social order by
its members, resulting in a situation of anomie that nationalists seek to
resolve. This anomie results in a society or societies reinterpreting identity,
retaining elements that are deemed acceptable and removing elements deemed
unacceptable, in order to create a unified community. This development may be
the result of internal structural issues or the result of resentment by an
existing group or groups towards other communities, especially foreign powers
that are deemed to be controlling them. Nationalism may involve several
recognized nations being involved in a single goal of self-determination
uniting the nations, such as binationalism or multinationalism, examples of
this occurred in Austria-Hungary, Belgium, and Czechoslovakia. National flags,
national anthems, and other symbols of national identity are commonly
considered highly important symbols of the national community. History. In
Europe before the development of Nationalism, people were generally loyal to a
city or to a particular leader rather than to their nation. Encyclop√¶dia
Britannica identifies the movement's genesis with the late-18th century
American Revolution and French Revolution; other historians point specifically
to the ultra-nationalist party in France during the French Revolution. The term
"nationalism" was coined by Johann Gottfried Herder ("nationalismus") during
the late 1770s. Precisely where and when nationalism emerged is difficult to
determine, but its development is closely related to that of the modern state
and the push for popular sovereignty that surfaced with the French Revolution
and the American Revolution in the late 18th century and culminated with the
ethnic/national revolutions of Europe, for instance the Greek War of
Independence. Since that time, nationalism has become one of the most
significant political and social forces in history, perhaps most notably as a
major influence or postulate of World War I and especially World War II.
Fascism is a form of authoritarian nationalism which stresses absolute loyalty
and obedience to the state, whose purpose is to serve the interests of its
nation alone.University of California. 1942. "Journal of Central European
Affairs". Volume 2. Benedict Anderson argued that, "Print language is what
invents nationalism, not a particular language per se". Causes. There are two
major bodies of thought on the causes of nationalism, one is the modernist
perspective that describes nationalism as a recent phenomenon that requires the
structural conditions of modern society, in order to exist; the other is the
primordialist perspective that describes nationalism as a reflection of the
ancient and perceived evolutionary tendency of humans to organize into distinct
grouping based on an affinity of birth. Roger Masters in "The Nature of
Politics" (Yale University Press, 1991) says that the primordialist and
modernist conceptions of nationalism both involve an acceptance of three levels
of common interest of individuals or groups in national identity. The first
level is that at an inter-group level, humans respond to competition or
conflict by organizing into groups to either attack other groups or defend
their group from hostile groups. The second level is the intragroup level,
individuals gain advantage through cooperation with others in securing
collective goods that are not accessible through individual effort alone. The
third level is the individual level, where self-interested concerns over
personal fitness by individuals either consciously or subconsciously motivate
the creation of group formation as a means of security. Leadership groups' or
elites' behaviour that involves efforts to advance their own fitness when they
are involved in the mobilization of an ethnic or national group is crucial in
the development of the culture of that group. Primordialist interpretation. The
primordialist perspective is based upon evolutionary theory. The evolutionary
theory of nationalism perceives nationalism to be the result of the evolution
of human beings into identifying with groups, such as ethnic groups, or other
groups that form the foundation of a nation. Roger Masters in "The Nature of
Politics" describes the primordial explanation of the origin of ethnic and
national groups as recognizing group attachments that are thought to be unique,
emotional, intense, and durable because they are based upon kinship and
promoted along lines of common ancestry. The primordialist evolutionary view of
nationalism has its origins in the evolutionary theories of Charles Darwin that
were later substantially elaborated by John Tooby and Leda Cosmides. Central to
evolutionary theory is that all biological organisms undergo changes in their
anatomical features and their characteristic behaviour patterns. Darwin's
theory of natural selection as a mechanism of evolutionary change of organisms
is utilized to describe the development of human societies and particularly the
development of mental and physical traits of members of such societies. In
addition to evolutionary development of mental and physical traits, Darwin and
other evolutionary theorists emphasize the influence of the types of
environment upon behaviour. First of all there are ancestral environments that
are typically long-term and stable forms of situations that influence mental
development of individuals or groups gained either biologically through birth
or learned from family or relatives, that cause the emphasis of certain mental
behaviours that are developed due to their necessity the ancestral environment
. In national group settings, these ancestral environments can result in
psychological triggers in the minds of individuals within a group, such as
responding positively to patriotic cues. There are immediate environments that
are those situations that confront an individual or group at a given point and
activate certain mental responses. In the case of a national group, the example
of seeing the mobilization of a foreign military force on the nation's borders
may provoke members of a national group to unify and mobilize themselves in
response. There are proximate environments where individuals identify
nonimmediate real or imagined situations in combination with immediate
situations that make individuals confront a common situation of both subjective
and objective components that affect their decisions. As such proximate
environments cause people make decisions based on existing situations and
anticipated situations. In the context of the politics of nations and
nationalism, a political leader may adopt an international treaty not out of a
benevolent stance but in the believe that such a treaty will either benefit
their nation or will increase the prestige of their nation. The proximate
environment plays a role in the politics of nations that are angry with their
circumstances, an individual or group that becomes angry in response to
feelings that they are being exploited usually results in efforts to
accommodate them, while being passive results in them being ignored. Nations
that are angry with circumstances imposed on them by others are affected by the
proximate environment that shapes the nationalism of such nations. Pierre van
der Berghe in "The Ethnic Phenomenon" (1981) emphasizes the role of ethnicity
and kinship involving family biological ties to members of an ethnic group as
being an important element of national identity. Van der Berghe states the
sense of family attachments among related people as creating durable, intense,
emotional, and cooperative attachments, that he claims are utilized within
ethnic groups. Van der Berghe identifies genetic-relatedness as being a basis
for the durable attachments of family groups, as genetic ties cannot be removed
and they are passed on from generation to generation. Van der Berge identifies
common descent as the basis for the establishment of boundaries of ethnic
groups, as most people to not join ethnic groups but are born into them. Berghe
notes that this kinship group affiliation and solidarity does not require
actual relatedness but can include imagined relatedness that may not be
biologically accurate. Berghe notes that feelings of ethnic solidarity usually
arise in small and compact groups whereas there is less solidarity in large and
dispersed groups. There are functionalist interpretations of the primordialist
evolutionary theory. The functionalists claim that ethnic and national groups
are founded upon individuals' concerns over distribution of resources acquired
through individual and collective action. This is resolved by the formation of
a clan group that defines who is accepted within the group and defines the
boundaries within which the resources will be distributed. This functionalist
interpretation does not require genetic-relatedness, and identifies a variety
of reasons for ethnic or national group formation. The first reason is that
such groups may extend group identity and cooperation beyond the limited of
family and kinship out of reciprocal altruism, in the belief that helping other
individuals will produce an advantageous situation for both the sender and
receiver of that help, this tendency has been noted in studies by Robert
Axelrod that are summarized in his book "The Evolution of Cooperation" (1984).
The second reason is that such groups may be formed as a means of defense to
insure survival, fears by one group of a hostile group threatening them can
increase solidarity amongst that group, R. Paul Shaw and Yuwa Wong in their
book "The Genetic Seeds of Warfare" (1989) identify this as the foundation of
xenophobia that they identify as originating in hunter gatherer societies.
Modernist interpretation. The modernist interpretation of nationalism and
nation-building perceives that nationalism arises and flourishes in modern
societies described as being associated with having: an industrial economy
capable of self-sustainability of the society, a central supreme authority
capable of maintaining authority and unity, and a centralized language or small
group of centralized languages understood by a community of people. Modernist
theorists note that this is only possible in modern societies, while
traditional societies typically: lack a modern industrial self-sustainable
economy, have divided authorities, have multiple languages resulting in many
people being unable to communicate with each other. Karl Marx wrote about the
creation of nations as requiring a bourgeois revolution and an industrial
economy. Marx applied the modern versus traditional parallel to British
colonial rule in India that Marx saw in positive terms as he claimed that
British colonial rule was developing India, bringing India out of its "rural
idiocy" of its "feudalism". However Marx's theories at the time of his writing
had little impact on academic thinking on the development of nation states.
Prominent theorists who developed the modernist interpretation of nations and
nationalism include: Henry James Sumner Maine, Ferdinand T√∂nnies, √âmile
Durkheim, Max Weber, and Talcott Parsons. Henry Maine in his analysis of the
historical changes and development of human societies noted the key distinction
between traditional societies defined as "status" societies based on the legal
position of the Individual in regards to the rest of society, family
association and functionally diffuse roles for individuals; and modern
"progressive" societies defined as "contract" societies where social relations
are determined by contracts pursued by individuals to advance their interests.
Maine saw the development of societies as moving away from traditional status
societies to modern contract societies. Ferdinand T√∂nnies in his book
"Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft" (1887) defined a gemeinschaft (community) as
being based on emotional attachments as attributed with traditional societies,
while defining a gessellschaft (society) as an impersonal societies that are
modern. While he recognized the advantages of modern societies he also
criticized them for their cold and impersonal nature that caused alienation
while praising the intimacy of traditional communities. Emile Durkheim expanded
upon T√∂nnies' recognition of alienation, and defined the differences between
traditional and modern societies as being between societies based upon
"mechanical solidarity" versus societies based on "organic solidarity".
Durkheim identified mechanical solidarity as involving custom, habit, and
repression that was necessary to maintain shared views. Durkheim identified
organic solidarity-based societies as modern societies where there exists a
division of labour based on social differentiation that causes alienation.
Durkheim claimed that social integration in traditional society required
authoritarian culture involving acceptance of a social order. Durkheim claimed
that modern society bases integration on the mutual benefits of the division of
labour, but noted that the impersonal character of modern urban life caused
alienation and feelings of anomie. Max Weber claimed the change that developed
modern society and nations is the result of the rise of a charismatic leader to
power in a society who creates a new tradition or a rational-legal system that
establishes the supreme authority of the state. Weber's conception of
charismatic authority has been noted as the basis of many nationalist
governments. Varieties. Civic nationalism. Civic nationalism (also known as
liberal nationalism) defines the nation as an association of people who
identify themselves as belonging to the nation, who have equal and shared
political rights, and allegiance to similar political procedures. According to
the principles of civic nationalism, the nation is not based on common ethnic
ancestry, but is a political entity whose core identity is not ethnicity. This
civic concept of nationalism is exemplified by Ernest Renan in his lecture in
1882 "What is a Nation?", where he defined the nation as a "daily referendum"
(frequently translated 'daily plebiscite") dependent on the will of its people
to continue living together". Civic Nationalism is a kind of non-xenophobic
nationalism compatible with liberal values of freedom, tolerance, equality, and
individual rights. Ernest Renan and John Stuart Mill are often thought to be
early liberal nationalists. Liberal nationalists often defend the value of
national identity by saying that individuals need a national identity in order
to lead meaningful, autonomous lives and that liberal democratic polities need
national identity in order to function properly. Civic nationalism lies within
the traditions of rationalism and liberalism, but as a form of nationalism it
is contrasted with ethnic nationalism. Membership of the civic nation is
considered voluntary, as in Ernest Renan's "daily referendum" formulation in
What is a Nation?. Civic-national ideals influenced the development of
representative democracy in countries such as the United States and France (see
the United States Declaration of Independence of 1776, and the "Declaration of
the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" of 1789). Ethnocentrism. Whereas
nationalism does not necessarily imply a belief in the superiority of one
ethnicity over others, some nationalists support ethnocentric protectionism or
ethnocentric supremacy. Studies have yielded evidence that such behaviour may
be derived from innate preferences in humans from infancy. The term
ethnocentrism is a more accurate and meaningful term. Fascism. Fascism is a
radical authoritarian nationalist political ideology. Fascists seek elevation
of their nation based on commitment to an organic national community where its
individuals are united together as one people in national identity by
suprapersonal connections of ancestry and culture through a totalitarian state
that seeks the mass mobilization of a nation through discipline, war,
indoctrination, physical training, and eugenics. Fascism seeks to eradicate
perceived foreign influences that are deemed to be causing degeneration of the
nation or of not fitting into the national culture. National purity. Some
nationalists exclude certain groups. Some nationalists, defining the national
community in ethnic, linguistic, cultural, historic, or religious terms (or a
combination of these), may then seek to deem certain minorities as not truly
being a part of the 'national community' as they define it. Sometimes a mythic
homeland is more important for the national identity than the actual territory
occupied by the nation. This could be seen in some single race countries such
as South Korea where the nation comprises people from one race, and where
mythical origins of the "race of the land" are pervasive amongst the populace.
Left-wing nationalism. Left-wing nationalism (occasionally known as socialist
nationalism, not to be confused with Right-wing national socialism) refers to
any political movement that combines left-wing politics with nationalism. Many
nationalist movements are dedicated to national liberation, in the view that
their nations are being persecuted by other nations and thus need to exercise
self-determination by liberating themselves from the accused persecutors. Anti-
revisionist Marxist-Leninism links itself closely with this ideology, although
many left-wing nationalists refute the assertion that Anti-Revisionists are
truly "left-wing nationalists." Practical examples of this anti-revisionist
nationalism include Stalin's early work "Marxism and the National Question" and
his Socialism in One Country edict, which declares that nationalism can be used
in an internationalist context, fighting for national liberation without racial
or religious divisions. Other examples of left-wing nationalism include Fidel
Castro's 26th of July Movement that launched the Cuban Revolution ousting the
American-backed Fulgencio Batista in 1959, Ireland's Sinn F√©in, Wales's Plaid
Cymru, Scotland's SNP, the Awami League in Bangladesh and the African National
Congress in South Africa. Truly left-wing nationalism (that which does not
involve authoritarianism and inequality between ethnic groups or citizens, and
that which includes public ownership of industries and services) is a type of
civic nationalism, although some nationalists who are ostensibly socialist,
such as Stalinists, are not civic nationalists. This can give rise to confusion
over the nature of left-wing nationalism, even though in its condition of being
left-wing is implicit respect for other nations and ethnic groups, and a non-
authoritarian state. Territorial nationalism. Territorial nationalists assume
that all inhabitants of a particular nation owe allegiance to their country of
birth or adoption. A sacred quality is sought in the nation and in the popular
memories it evokes. Citizenship is idealised by territorial nationalist A
criterion of a territorial nationalism is the establishment of a mass, public
culture based on common values and traditions of the population. Pan-
nationalism. Pan-nationalism is unique in that it covers a large area span.
Pan-nationalism focuses more on "clusters" of ethnic groups. Proto-nationalism.
Proto-nationalism refers to the nationalism that people feel for a connection
to a particular indigenous or ethnic identity which is unconnected from the
national identity. It also refers to a "nationalism" that existed before the
foundation of a nation-state. It thus describes a nation-less nationalism.
Ultranationalism. Ultranationalism is a zealous nationalism that expresses
extremist support for one's nationalist ideals. It is often characterized by
authoritarianism, efforts toward reduction or stoppage of immigration,
expulsion and or oppression of non-native populations or minorities within the
nation or its territories, demagoguery of leadership, emotionalism, fomenting
talk of presumed, real, or imagined enemies, predicating the existence of
threats to the survival of the native, dominant or otherwise idealized national
ethnicity or population group, instigation or extremist reaction to crack-down
policies in law enforcement, efforts to limit international trade through
tariffs, tight control over businesses and production, militarism, populism and
propaganda. Prevalent ultranationalism typically leads to or is the result of
conflict within a state, and or between states, and is identified as a
condition of pre-war in national politics. In its extremist forms
ultranationalism is characterized as a call to war against enemies of the
nation/state, secession or, in the case of ethnocentrist ultranationalism,
genocide. Fascism is a form of palingenetic ultranationalism that promotes
"class collaboration" (as opposed to class struggle), a totalitarian state, and
irredentism or expansionism to unify and allow the growth of a nation. Fascists
sometimes promote ethnic or cultural nationalism. Fascism stresses the
subservience of the individual to the state, and the need for absolute and
unquestioned loyalty to a strong ruler. Anti-colonial nationalism. This form of
nationalism came about during the decolonialisation of the post war period. It
was a reaction mainly in Africa and Asia against being subdued by foreign
powers. This form of nationalism took many guises, including the peaceful
passive resistance movement led by Gandhi in the Indian subcontinent Benedict
Anderson argued that anti-colonial nationalism is grounded in the experience of
literate and bilingual indigenous intellectuals fluent in the language of the
imperial power, schooled in its "national" history, and staffing the colonial
administrative cadres up to but not including its highest levels. Post-colonial
national governments have been essentially indigenous forms of the previous
imperial administration. Criticisms. Critics of nationalism have argued that it
is often unclear what constitutes a "nation", or why a nation should be the
only legitimate unit of political rule. A nation is a cultural entity, and not
necessarily a political association, nor is it necessarily linked to a
particular territorial area - although nationalists argue that the boundaries
of a nation and a state should, as far as possible, coincide. Philosopher A. C.
Grayling describes nations as artificial constructs, "their boundaries drawn in
the blood of past wars". He argues that "there is no country on earth which is
not home to more than one different but usually coexisting culture. Cultural
heritage is not the same thing as national identity". Much of the early
opposition to nationalism was related to its geopolitical ideal of a separate
state for every nation. The classic nationalist movements of the 19th century
rejected the very existence of the multi-ethnic empires in Europe. Even in that
early stage, however, there was an ideological critique of nationalism. That
has developed into several forms of anti-nationalism in the western world
naming it a 'theoretical and political challenge for the foreseeable future'.
The Islamic revival of the 20th century also produced an Islamic critique of
the nation-state. At the end of the 19th century, Marxists and other socialists
(such as Rosa Luxemburg) produced political analysis that were critical of the
nationalist movements then active in central and eastern Europe (though a
variety of other contemporary socialists and communists, from Vladimir Lenin (a
communist) to J√≥zef Pi≈Çsudski (a socialist), were more sympathetic to
national self-determination). In his classic essay on the topic George Orwell
distinguishes nationalism from patriotism, which he defines as devotion to a
particular place. Nationalism, more abstractly, is "power-hunger tempered by
self-deception." In the liberal political tradition there is widespread
criticism of ‚Äònationalism‚Äô as a dangerous force and a cause of conflict and
war between nation-states. Nationalism has often been exploited to encourage
citizens to partake in the nations' conflicts. Such examples include The Two
World Wars, where nationalism was a key component of propaganda material.
Liberals do not generally dispute the existence of the nation-states. The
liberal critique also emphasizes individual freedom as opposed to national
identity, which is by definition collective. The pacifist critique of
nationalism also concentrates on the violence of nationalist movements, the
associated militarism, and on conflicts between nations inspired by jingoism or
chauvinism. National symbols and patriotic assertiveness are in some countries
discredited by their historical link with past wars, especially in Germany.
Famous pacifist Bertrand Russell criticizes nationalism for diminishing the
individual's capacity to judge his or her fatherland's foreign policy. Albert
Einstein stated that "Nationalism is an infantile disease... It is the measles
of mankind." The anti-racist critique of nationalism concentrates on the
attitudes to other nations, and especially on the doctrine that the nation-
state exists for one national group to the exclusion of others. This view
emphasizes the chauvinism and xenophobia that have often resulted from
nationalist sentiment. Norman Naimark relates the rise of nationalism to ethnic
cleansing and genocide. Political movements of the left have often been
suspicious of nationalism, again without necessarily seeking the disappearance
of the existing nation-states. Marxism has been ambiguous towards the nation-
state, and in the late 19th century some Marxist theorists rejected it
completely. For some Marxists the world revolution implied a global state (or
global absence of state); for others it meant that each nation-state had its
own revolution. A significant event in this context was the failure of the
social-democratic and socialist movements in Europe to mobilize a cross-border
workers' opposition to World War I. At present most, but certainly not all,
left-wing groups accept the nation-state, and see it as the political arena for
their activities. In the Western world, the most comprehensive current
ideological alternative to nationalism is cosmopolitanism. Ethical
cosmopolitanism rejects one of the basic ethical principles of nationalism:
that humans owe more duties to a fellow member of the nation, than to a non-
member. It rejects such important nationalist values as national identity and
national loyalty. However, there is also a political cosmopolitanism, which has
a geopolitical program to match that of nationalism: it seeks some form of
world state, with a world government. Very few people openly and explicitly
support the establishment of a global state, but political cosmopolitanism has
influenced the development of international criminal law, and the erosion of
the status of national sovereignty. In turn, nationalists are deeply suspicious
of cosmopolitan attitudes, which they equate with eradication of diverse
national cultures. While internationalism in the cosmopolitan context by
definition implies cooperation among nations and states, and therefore the
existence of nations, proletarian internationalism is different, in that it
calls for the international working class to follow its brethren in other
countries irrespective of the activities or pressures of the national
government of a particular sector of that class. Meanwhile, anarchists reject
nation-states on the basis of self-determination of the majority social class,
and thus reject nationalism. Instead of nations, anarchists usually advocate
the creation of cooperative societies based on free association and mutual aid
without regard to ethnicity or race.
