National American Woman Suffrage Association The National American Woman
Suffrage Association (NAWSA) was an American women's rights organization formed
in May 1890 as a unification of the National Woman Suffrage Association (NWSA)
and the American Woman Suffrage Association (AWSA). The NAWSA continued the
work of both associations by becoming the parent organization of hundreds of
smaller local and state groups, and by helping to pass woman suffrage
legislation at the state and local level. The NAWSA was the largest and most
important suffrage organization in the United States, and was the primary
promoter of women's right to vote. Like AWSA and NWSA before it, the NAWSA
pushed for a constitutional amendment guaranteeing women's voting rights, and
was instrumental in winning the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment to the
United States Constitution in 1920. Susan B. Anthony was the dominant figure in
NAWSA from 1890 to 1900, at which time she stepped down in favor of Carrie
Chapman Catt. Catt was president of NAWSA from 1900 to 1904 and again from 1915
onward. Anna Howard Shaw was president of NAWSA from 1904 to 1915. After
success in 1920, the NAWSA was reformed as the League of Women Voters, which
continues the legacy. Background conflict. In 1866, Lucy Stone and Susan B.
Anthony proposed a new suffrage organization, the American Equal Rights
Association (AERA), to push for equal rights for both African Americans and
women, and especially to work for universal suffrage, the right to vote given
to all people. In 1869, tensions formed regarding the proposed Fifteenth
Amendment which would give black men the right to vote. Elizabeth Cady Stanton,
Anthony and an outspoken few were unwilling to yield to the political situation
which appeared to Stone and a majority of other activists to favor passage of
the amendment for black men's voting rights but not passage of women's voting
rights. Stone was willing to work for passage of the Fifteenth Amendment, the
success of which was to be followed directly by a renewed effort on behalf of
women. By May 1869, the split between Stone's political realist group and the
Stanton-Anthony group came to a head. Anthony and Stanton worked behind Stone's
back to create the splinter group NWSA, formed to put pressure on the federal
government to adopt a woman suffrage amendment, but which also pushed for a
wider scope of women's rights, including easier divorce laws. In reaction,
Stone formed the AWSA in November 1869 with Julia Ward Howe, Josephine Ruffin,
and Henry Browne Blackwell, Stone's husband. A more moderate organization that
attracted a majority of suffragists, the AWSA worked primarily at passing
legislation at the state and local level, with a secondary effort focused at
influencing federal elections and winning the opinion of federal legislators.
The AWSA fostered local suffrage groups with financial grants and by helping
draft proposed laws. The NWSA tended to take a more radical position than the
AWSA. It established itself as an organization that would only allow female
members, and it passed a resolution opposing the Fifteenth Amendment, angering
many Negro activists and white abolitionists. Later, the NWSA associated itself
with George Francis Train who actively opposed any expansion of rights for
African-Americans. The AWSA attracted more moderate members, and was less
militant than the NWSA. The AWSA did not campaign on other issues besides votes
for women. In 1870, the AWSA founded the "Woman's Journal", a magazine edited
by Lucy Stone and her daughter, Alice Stone Blackwell. The NWSA contained a
tension of its own. Susan B. Anthony wished to focus exclusively upon women's
suffrage. Stanton and other radical suffragists pushed for a broader scope, to
address the many concerns of women. The NWSA addressed many issues at the state
and local level, but particularly worked to put proposed legislation in front
of Congress. The AWSA worked primarily at the state and local level, but
applied some pressure at the federal level. Merger. In October 1887, at the
annual AWSA convention, Stone proposed the formation of a committee to meet
with a similar committee of NWSA delegates to discuss union. Stone stated that
the differences between the two organizations "have since been largely removed
by the adoption of common principles and methods." Anthony agreed to the
meeting, and on December 21, 1887 a foursome consisting of Stone, Anthony,
Alice Stone Blackwell and Rachel Foster joined in Boston to discuss a merger.
Stone insisted that, in the spirit of good will and as a demonstration of
neutrality between the previously antagonistic organizations, none of the three
principals, Stone, Stanton or Anthony, would seek to serve as president.
Anthony acceded to this condition. After the meeting, Stone wrote to Antoinette
Brown Blackwell, longtime friend to both Stone and Anthony, that Anthony "so
much wished to be President herself! To bring her to the top at last would be
such a vindication, she cannot bear to forego it." Stone and Anthony selected
prominent women's rights activists to form the two committees: representing the
NWSA would be May Wright Sewall, Rachel Foster, Clara Colby, Olympia Brown,
Laura Johns and Harriet Shattuck; the AWSA group was to be Alice Stone
Blackwell, William Dudley Foulke, Julia Ward Howe, Hannah Tracy Cutler, Mary
Thomas, Margaret Campbell, and Anna Howard Shaw. Over the next two years, Alice
Stone Blackwell shuttled between the AWSA and NWSA conventions to carry
proposals and counter proposals between the two committees. Negotiations were
necessarily drawn out over many months because each association was required to
approve the merger at its annual meeting. In early 1888, Rachel Foster, the
leader of the NWSA committee, helped Anthony and Stanton organize a 40-year
celebration of the Seneca Falls Convention, with delegates invited from a
number of countries. The arrival of women from around the globe gave Foster the
opportunity to form the International Council of Women. That fall, she married
to become Rachel Foster Avery. In 1889, Anthony began campaigning for Stanton
to become president of the merged group, though she had previously agreed
otherwise. Anthony wrote to each woman in the NWSA membership to "be on hand at
our next annual Washington convention to stand firm as a rock for perfect
freedom "in the union" and for Mrs. Stanton as President of it." Stanton,
however, was not pleased with the direction of the mergerâ€”she resisted the
elimination of other issues in favor of the concentration of energy solely upon
suffrage. Of Stone and Anthony, Stanton wrote: "Lucy and Susan alike see
suffrage only. They do not see woman's religious and social bondage." Finally,
in February, 1890 the newly-unified National American Woman Suffrage
Association held its first convention in Washington, D.C., combining the AWSA
and NWSA memberships. Stone, 72 years old, was too weak with heart problems and
respiratory illness to attend its first convention, but was unanimously elected
chair of the executive committee. After Anthony asked the assembled delegates
not to "vote for any human being but Mrs. Stanton", Stanton was elected
president, and Anthony vice president. Both women understood that Stanton's
presidency would be largely honorary; Stanton sailed for a two-year tour of
England shortly after being elected. The role of acting president settled upon
Anthony's shoulders. Matilda Joslyn Gage, Olympia Brown and Elizabeth Cady
Stanton were each alienated by the merger; together, their interests were too
radical for the new NAWSA. Stanton turned toward work on "The Woman's Bible"
with Gage, Brown and a Revising Committee of two dozen other women. With
Stanton, the committee wished to correct the historical bias that men had
introduced into the Bible. This effort led to conflict with the NAWSA; in 1896,
Rachel Foster Avery and a slim majority of younger NAWSA members voted to
distance the organization from "The Woman's Bible" and from Stanton. The NAWSA
membership wished to focus on one single issue: the drive to gain for women the
right to vote. Gaining the vote. In May 1893, the NAWSA sent some lecturers to
the World's Congress of Representative Women in Chicago. Lucy Stone and Susan
B. Anthony spoke during the week-long event which attracted 150,000 attendees.
At the NAWSA convention in 1900, Maud Wood Park discovered that, at the age of
29, she was the youngest delegate present. Park determined to attract a younger
group of women to the organization and, in concert with Inez Haynes Gillmore,
formed the College Equal Suffrage League. Pressure group action. NAWSA
restructured itself and became a major pressure group. It recruited
celebrities, both men and women, who could draw attention to the cause. It
raised money from members and wealthy donors, using the funds to train and send
paid and volunteer organizers into the field to canvass for votes and enlist
new members. It specialized in parades and street rallies, with its white
uniforms and banners designed to draw crowds as well as newspaper reporters. It
built alliances with local women's clubs, as well as state and national groups,
and even some labor unions. Operating under the tight control of Carrie Chapman
Catt and her allies, NAWSA by 1916 had enough strength in the states for the
final push toward a constitutional amendment. It set up a high-powered
publicity bureau and a Washington office, the "front door lobby," to exert
immediate, face-to-face pressure on Congressmen. While NAWSA's overall strategy
moved relentlessly toward its goal, some activists grew impatient. Alice Paul
joined the NAWSA in 1912 but found it to be insufficiently militant. Paul led a
splinter group that eventually became the National Woman's Party (NWP). With
its radical tactics, the NWP gained headlines while NAWSA was negotiating with
Congressmen who had the votes. 1916-20. In 1916 at the NAWSA annual convention,
President Woodrow Wilson unveiled his plan to gain suffrage. It required the
coordination of all suffrage workers across the country, in state and local
groups. In 1917, women in New York state won the right to vote, after a
petition drive amassed more than a million signatures. At the eleventh hour,
the powerful Tammany Hall Democratic machine in New York decided not to oppose
the measure, and it passed by a slim majority. During the involvement of the
United States in World War I, many women's rights activists, led by the NAWSA,
decided to table the measures that they had been promoting. This prudent move
was appreciated by male legislators who saw in it another reason why women
deserved the right to vote. In special sessions conducted during May and June,
1919, the Nineteenth Amendment passed both the House and the Senate. The
proposed amendment was sent to the states for ratification. The approval of 36
states was required for the constitution to be changed, and Tennessee became
the 36th to do so on August 18. On August 26, 1920, the amendment was certified
for adoption by the United States Secretary of State. From 1920 to 1921, the
NAWSA reformed into the League of Women Voters, with Maud Wood Park as
president.
