National Youth Rights Association The National Youth Rights Association (NYRA)
is the largest youth-led civil rights organization in the United States
promoting youth rights, with approximately ten thousand members. NYRA proposes
lessening and removing various legal restrictions that are imposed on young
people but not adults, for example, the voting age, drinking age, curfews and
mandatory school attendance; and other issues like emancipation of minors and
easier process of adoption to other families. NYRA also favors easier access to
legal emancipation for young people and greater respect for student rights.
History. Youth rights movement. The youth rights movement first utilized the
Internet in 1991, with the creation of the Y-Rights listserv mailing list. Two
members of that original Internet presence, Matthew Walcoff and Matt Herman,
began a non-profit organization out of that mailing list known as ASFAR. Not
too long after ASFAR was founded, a Rockville, Maryland high school student
began a youth rights group called YouthSpeak. At the same time, a third youth
from Canada, Joshua Gilbert, was starting a youth rights organization for his
country, the Canadian Youth Rights Association (CYRA). Walcoff, Hein and
Gilbert all met through ASFAR, and decided to start a non-profit corporation to
help unify the youth rights movement, which at that point consisted of almost a
dozen different groups around North America and the world. Forming NYRA. By
June 1998, NYRA was incorporated as a Maryland non-profit public benefit
corporation with intention to lead the Youth Rights political movement in the
United States. It was formed by the original founders of ASFAR because of the
desire to create a moderate, pragmatic organization in the Youth Rights
Movement. NYRA's Executive Director from 2000 to 2012 was Alex Koroknay-Palicz.
As its key spokesman, he was featured on CNN, Fox News, PBS, "The New York
Times", "Los Angeles Times", "The Christian Science Monitor", as well as many
others, on youth rights issues such as the voting and drinking ages. In 2012,
Koroknay-Palicz stepped down. 2005 was a significant year for NYRA. In late
March, several NYRA members traveled to Vermont in support of a bill lowering
the drinking age to 18. They visited numerous colleges and signed up over 2000
new supporters. They participated in a debate at the Vermont state house, and
the event was significantly covered by the media. Meanwhile in Washington
state, a new chapter in Olympia, Washington, testified in support of a state
constitutional amendment to lower the state's voting age to sixteen. From
February to August 2006, President Adam King led a local campaign to add a
nonvoting student adviser onto the Buncombe County (N.C.) Board of Education.
His project had the support of the "Asheville Citizen-Times" and over 60
faculty members and administrators at his high school. However, in August, the
Board of Education rejected his proposal citing that they already had
sufficient student input. During his campaign, King made several appearances in
the media. By 2006, NYRA's main area of focus was expanding its local chapters.
Chapters had increased fivefold between 2003 and 2006. In 2006, the Board of
Directors formally established that chapters are separate legal entities. The
chapter formation division saw a major restructure near the end of 2006.
Previously, the division was divided into five regions with one person assigned
to that region. However, the division's management decided to utilize a
national pool of representatives working with all intents throughout the
nation. In December 2006, NYRA received its first substantial grant from the
Babson Foundation. And in January 2007, it began renting an office from Common
Cause in downtown Washington, D.C. In 2008, the organizations changed its
slogan from "the last civil rights movement", in reference to the youth rights
movement, to "live free, start young." In 2009, NYRA began to take prominent
legal action and assert itself as a force for youth and students in
jurisprudence. The organization filed its first joint amicus curiae brief in
Safford v. Redding, a student rights case brought before the United States
Supreme Court, its President published an opinion opposing the Barr et al. v.
Lafon case in the award-winning University of Pittsburgh School of Law journal
"the Jurist", and a local chapter filed a lawsuit against the city of West Palm
Beach, Florida, in an effort to repeal its curfew, a case which is still
ongoing. NYRA co-sponsored the First Annual National Youth Rights Day which
occurred on April 14, 2010. Robert Epstein wrote The Young Person's Bill of
Rights for this event. Governance. NYRA is a 501(c)(3) organization registered
as a nonprofit corporation in Maryland. It is governed by a volunteer Board of
Directors, including Samantha Godwin, Eric Goldstein, Chris Hardy, Nigel Jones,
Usiel Phoenix, Keith Mandell, Katrina Moncure, Kathleen Nicole O'Neal, and
Jeffrey Nadel. Its officers include Usiel Phoenix as President, Jeffrey Nadel
as Vice President, and Katrina Moncure as Secretary. NYRA also maintains an
influential Advisory Board, including Scarlett Swerdlow of Students for
Sensible Drug Policy; Kevin Keenan of American Civil Liberties Union-San Diego;
Adam Fletcher of The Freechild Project; Dr. Robert Epstein, author of "The Case
Against Adolescence"; Dr. David J. Hanson of Potsdam University; activist
Bennett Haselton of Peacefire; Grace Llewellyn, author of the "Teenage
Liberation Handbook"; Dr. Mike A. Males, author of "Framing Youth" and of
University of California, Santa Cruz; Dr. Roderic B. Park of University of
Colorado; Nadine Strossen of the American Civil Liberties Union, and; Dr.
Elizabeth M. Whelan, Sc.D., M.P.H, of the American Council on Science.
