Neo-Zionism Neo-Zionism is a right-wing, nationalistic and religious movement
that appeared in Israel following the Six Days War and capture of the West Bank
and Gaza Strip, which they consider parts of Israel. It evolved parallel with,
and in opposition to Post-Zionism. Both developed during the "fundamental
shaking of the dominant national ethos, Zionism, that generate the historical
revision and debate in Israel". Ideology. Neo-Zionism emerged in the 1970s. It
is mainly constituted of settlers and members of the "national camp" in Israel.
It is politically represented by the National Religious Party and the Likud and
other small parties such as Tehiya, Tzomet and Moledet, as well as the non-
parliamentary Movement for Greater Israel. Neo-Zionists consider that "secular
Zionism", particularly the labor version, was too weak on nationalism and never
understood the impossibility of Arabs and Jews living together in peace. They
claim that the Arab attitude to Israel has its root in antisemitism and that it
is a Zionist illusion to think living in peace with them is possible. They
consider Arabs in Israel to be a fifth column and pose a demographic threat.
From their point of view, the only solution to achieve peace is "deterrence and
retaliation". For Neo-Zionism, "the weakness of Israeli Nationalism derives
from his alienation of Jewish sources and culture (...). Only a new national-
religious and orthodox coalition cure Zionism of this moral bankruptcy". Neo-
Zionists view the land of Israel as the natural and Biblically mandated home of
the Jewish people and assert that the goal of Jewish statehood is not only
about creating a safe refuge for Jews but also about the national-historic
destiny of the people of Israel in the land of Israel. For Chan & al., "Neo-
Zionism (...) is an exclusionary, nationalist, even racist, and antidemocratic
political-cultural trend, striving to heighten the fence encasing Israeli
identity."
