New Revolutionary Alternative New Revolutionary Alternative (Russian:
–ù–æ–≤–∞—è – –µ–≤–æ–ª—é—Ü–∏–æ–Ω–Ω–∞—è –ê–ª—å—Ç–µ—Ä–Ω–∞—Ç–∏–≤–∞) (NRA) is an
anarchist organization devoted to insurrectionary struggle in Russia.
Authorities consider the organization to be a terrorist group. Little is known
about the NRA. The media has speculated that it may have as many as 100 active
members while others believe that it may not exist at all. History. The NRA
first surfaced in 1996, carrying out a number of actions (including bombings
and arsons) in protest of the Chechen war. Targets included conscription
centers, government, military and police stations. After the April 2, 1998
bombing of a police bus, the NRA released a statement calling on "the people to
answer police terror with revolutionary terror and fascist provocations with
anti-fascist direct action." On April 4, 1999, a bomb detonated in Moscow,
seriously damaging the Federal Security Bureau. Several days later, the bombing
was claimed by the NRA, who stated that the attack was "a protest against the
bourgeois terror of the Russian state police system against the radical
opponents of the regime." Many journalists rejected the NRA's claim as
unlikely. Two women, Olga Nevskaya and Nadezhda Raks, were arrested on February
23, 2000 in conjunction with a criminal investigation into the attack. On April
14, 2003 three individuals were convicted of participation in various NRA
activities. Nadezhda Raks received 9 years in prison, Larisa Romanova received
5.5 years in prison, and Olga Nevskaya received 6 years in prison. Raks, a
member of the "Revolutionary Communist Union of Youth (Bolsheviks)" (cf.
Bolshevik), is not supported by Russian anarchists due to alleged right-wing
ties. In October, 2005 Larisa Romanova was freed from prison.
