New classical macroeconomics New classical macroeconomics, sometimes simply
called new classical economics, is a school of thought in macroeconomics that
builds its analysis entirely on a neoclassical framework. Specifically, it
emphasizes the importance of rigorous foundations based on microeconomics,
especially rational expectations. New classical macroeconomics strives to
provide neoclassical microeconomic foundations for macroeconomic analysis. This
is in contrast with its rival new Keynesian school that uses microfoundations
such as price stickiness and imperfect competition to generate macroeconomic
models similar to earlier, Keynesian ones. History. Classical economics is the
term used for the first modern school of economics. The publication of Adam
Smith's the Wealth of Nations in 1776 is considered to be the birth of the
school. Perhaps the central idea behind it is on the ability of the market to
be self-correcting as well as being the most superior institution in allocating
resources. The central assumption implied is: that all individuals maximize
their economic activity. The so-called marginal revolution that occurred in
Europe, led by Carl Menger, William Stanley Jevons, and LÃ©on Walras, gave rise
to what is known as neoclassical economics. This neoclassical formulation had
also been formalized by Alfred Marshall. However, it was the general
equilibrium of Walras that helped solidify the research in economic science as
a mathematical and deductive enterprise, the essence of which is still
neoclassical and makes up what is currently found in mainstream economics
textbooks to this day. The neoclassical school dominated the field up until the
Great Depression. Then, however, with the publication of The General Theory of
Employment, Interest and Money by John Maynard Keynes in 1936, certain
neoclassical assumptions were rejected. Keynes proposed an aggregated framework
to explain macroeconomic behavior, leading thus to the current distinction
between micro- and macroeconomics. Of particular importance in Keynes' theories
was his explanation of economic behavior as also being led by "animal spirits".
In this sense, it limited the role for the so-called rational (maximizing)
agent. The Post-World War II period saw the widespread implementation of
Keynesian economic policy in the United States and Western European countries.
Its dominance in the field by the 1970s was best reflected by the controversial
statement attributed to ex-President Richard Nixon and economist Milton
Friedman: "We are all Keynesians now". Problems arose in the 1970s and early
1980s when stagflation occurred. Stagflation occurs when unemployment and
inflation are both high at the same time. The decade of the 1970s saw rising
oil prices caused by an OPEC oil embargo on the United States. This oil embargo
caused both high inflation and steep economic downturn that in turned caused
high unemployment. Keynesians were puzzled by the outbreak of stagflation
because the original Phillips curve ruled out concurrent high inflation and
high unemployment. The New Classical school emerged in the 1970s as a response
to the failure of Keynesian economics to explain stagflation. New Classical and
monetarist criticisms led by Robert Lucas, Jr. and Milton Friedman respectively
forced the rethinking of Keynesian economics. In particular, Lucas made the
Lucas critique that cast doubt on Keynesian model. This strengthened the case
for macro models to be based on microeconomics. Meanwhile, Friedman before the
stagflation proposed that the Phillips curve did not exist and would fail. He
theorized of an existence of a natural rate of unemployment that contradicts
the then accepted relationship between inflation and unemployment rate. The
stagflation of the 1970s seemed to proved him right. After the 1970s and the
apparent failure of Keynesian economics, the New Classical school became the
dominant school in Macroeconomics. This was captured by the fact that the new
concepts and ideas which emerged from New Classical economics such as rational
expectations were accepted by the opposing new Keynesian school except for the
fact that the latter still maintained the effectiveness of fiscal and monetary
policy. Both the New Classical and the New Keynesian schools now form the basis
of mainstream macroeconomics. Foundation and assumptions. New classical
economics is based on Walrasian assumptions. All agents are assumed to maximize
utility on the basis of rational expectations. At any one time, the economy is
assumed to have a unique equilibrium at full employment or potential output
achieved through price and wage adjustment. In other words, the market clears
at all times. New classical economics has also pioneered the use of
representative agent models. Such models have recently received severe
neoclassical criticism, pointing to the clear disjuncture between microeconomic
behavior and macroeconomic results, as indicated by Kirman (1992), and the
fallacy of composition. In some ways, this critique is akin to the Cambridge
capital controversy. The concept of rational expectations was originally used
by John Muth, and was popularized by Lucas. One of the most famous new
classical models is the real business cycle model, developed by Edward C.
Prescott and Finn E. Kydland.
