Nolan Chart The Nolan Chart is a political view assessment diagram created by
the co-founder of the Libertarian Party of the United States David Nolan. He
reasoned that virtually all human political action can be divided into two
general categories: economic and personal. He developed the chart to illustrate
the claim that libertarianism represents both economic freedom and personal
freedom. This was done in a graphic contrast to left-wing "liberalism," which,
according to Nolan, advocates only "personal freedom", and right-wing
"conservatism," which, according to Nolan, advocates only "economic freedom".
Development. The chart and its concept are attributed commonly to David Nolan.
A similar bi-dimensional chart appeared during 1970 in the publication "The
Floodgates of Anarchy" by Stuart Christie and Albert Meltzer. Their version had
"anarchism" in the equivalent of the Nolan Chart's Left-Wing corner, "fascism"
in the equivalent of the Nolan's Right-Wing corner, "capitalist individualism"
in the equivalent of the Nolan's Libertarian corner and "state communism" in
the equivalent of the Nolan's Populist (Totalitarian) corner. In "Radicals for
Capitalism" (p.Â 321), Brian Doherty traces the idea for the chart to an
article by Maurice Bryson and William McDill in "The Rampart Journal of
Individualist Thought" (Summer 1968) entitled "The Political Spectrum: A Bi-
Dimensional Approach". David Nolan first published the current version of the
chart in an article named "Classifying and Analyzing Politico-Economic Systems"
in the January 1971 issue of "The Individualist", the monthly magazine of the
Society for Individual Liberty (SIL). In December 1971, he helped to start the
group that would become the Libertarian Party. Frustrated by the "left-right"
line analysis that leaves no room for other ideologies, Nolan devised a chart
with two axes in 1969 which would come to be known as the Nolan Chart. The
Nolan Chart is the centerpiece of the World's Smallest Political Quiz. Nolan's
insight was that the major difference between various political philosophies,
the real defining element in what a person believes politically, is the amount
of government control over human action that is advocated. Nolan further
reasoned that virtually all human political action can be divided into two
broad categories: economic and personal. The "economic" category includes what
people do as producers and consumers â€“ what they can buy, sell, produce.
Where they work, who they hire, what they do with their money. Examples of
economic activity: starting a business; buying a home; constructing a building;
working in an office. The "personal" category includes what people do in
relationships, in self-expression, and in general what they do with their own
bodies and minds. Examples of personal activities: marriage; choosing what
books they read and movies they watch; what foods, medicines, and drugs they
choose to consume; sports; their religious choices; organizations they join;
with whom they choose to associate. Since, Nolan realized, most government
activity (or government control) occurs in these two major areas, political
positions can be defined by how much government control a person favors in
these two areas. The extremes are no government at all in either area
(anarchism) or total or near-total government control of everything (various
forms of totalitarianism). Of course, liberals, conservatives, and others may
disagree among themselves on particular issues, and hold different positions.
Examples: a liberal might be opposed to censorship and draft, but want to
continue the Drug War and end the minimum wage. Or a conservative may oppose
censorship and the draft, but favor restricting free trade. But the broad
division generally holds true. Another way of expressing this (a sort of
"libertarian-centric" view): conservatives tend to be more libertarian on
economic issues; liberals tend to be more libertarian on issues of personal
freedom. In order to visually express this insight, Nolan came up with a two-
axis graph. One axis was for economic freedom, and the other was for personal
freedom. Once both areas were on a graph, it was possible to put a scale on
each of the two axes of that graph. Nolan's scale started at zero (total state
control) to 100% (no state control). 100% in economics would mean a free
market; 100% in personal issues would mean no government control in private,
personal life. By using the scale on each of the two axes, it was possible to
measure the amount of personal liberty and economic liberty a person, political
organization, or political philosophy advocates, and then plot that on the
graph. Thus, while the old "left-right" line attempted to measure politics
along a one-dimensional line, Nolan's graph divided political issues into two
dimensions: economic and social. So, instead of classifying all political
opinion as being some variant of liberal or conservative, Nolan's chart allowed
a far more accurate measurement: how much (or little) government control a
person favored in personal and economic matters. Nolan introduced his chart in
an article entitled "Classifying and Analyzing Politico-Economic Systems"
published in the January 1971 issue of The Individualist, a libertarian
newsletter. In 1999, Nolan was named one of the "2,000 Outstanding
Intellectuals of the 20th Century" by the Cambridgeshire, England-based
International Biographical Centre (IBC), and he was included in their reference
work of the same title, published in late 2000. Nolan speculated his inclusion
in the book is due to his creation of the Nolan Chart, which has gained
international fame as the core of the World's Smallest Political Quiz. In 1987,
Marshall Fritz, founder of the Advocates for Self-Government, tweaked the chart
and added ten questions â€“ which he called the Worldâ€™s Smallest Political
Quiz â€“ which enabled people to plot themselves on the chart and discover
where they fit on the political map. Polling data. In August 2011, the
libertarian "Reason Magazine" worked with the Rupe organization to survey 1,200
Americans by telephone and place their views within Nolan chart based
categories. The Reason-Rupe poll found that "Americans cannot easily be bundled
into either the 'liberal' or 'conservative' groups". Specifically, 28%
expressed conservative views, 24% expressed libertarian views, 20% expressed
communitarian views, and 28% expressed liberal views. The margin of error was
Â±3. A similar Gallup survey in 2011 included possible centrist/moderate
responses. That poll reported that 17% expressed conservative views, 22%
expressed libertarian views, 20% expressed communitarian views, 17% expressed
centrist views, and 24% expressed liberal views.
