Non-partisan democracy Nonpartisan democracy (also no-party democracy) is a
system of representative government or organization such that universal and
periodic elections take place without reference to political parties. Overview.
Sometimes electioneering and even speaking about candidates may be discouraged,
so as not to prejudice others' decisions or create a contentious atmosphere.
Nonpartisan democracies may possess indirect elections whereby an electorate
are chosen who in turn vote for the representative(s). (This is sometimes known
as a 2-tier election, such as an electoral college.) The system can work with a
first past the post electoral system but is incompatible with (partisan)
proportional representation systems other than Single Transferable Vote. A
nonpartisan system differs from a single-party system in that the governing
faction in a single-party system identifies itself as a party, where membership
might provide benefits not available to non-members. A single-party government
often requires government officials to be members of the party, features a
complex party hierarchy as a key institution of government, forces citizens to
agree to a partisan ideology, and may enforce its control over the government
by making all other parties illegal. Members of a nonpartisan government may
not share any ideologies (though in voluntary organizations, they of course
may). Various communist nations such as China or Cuba are single-party nations
although the Members of Parliament are not elected as Party candidates. A
direct democracy can be considered nonpartisan since citizens vote on laws
themselves rather than electing representatives. Direct democracy can be
partisan, however, if factions are given rights or prerogatives that non-
members do not have. In many nations, the head of state is nonpartisan, even if
the prime minister and parliament are chosen in partisan elections. The heads
of state are expected to remain neutral with regards to partisan politics.
There are two basic types of nonpartisan governments - de facto and de jure. De
facto nonpartisan governments are ones where no laws prevent the formation of
political parties, but no parties exist. Most of the de facto nonpartisan
governments represent very small populations, such as in Niue, Tuvalu, and
Palau. On the other hand, governments that outlaw political parties but do have
elections are de jure nonpartisan systems. Several de jure nonpartisan national
governments are Persian Gulf states, such as Oman and Kuwait. The legislatures
in these Gulf state nonpartisan governments typically have advisory capacity
only (i.e. - They may comment on laws proposed by the executive branch, but are
unable to create real laws themselves.), but are partially or entirely elected
by citizens. Unless there are legal restrictions on political parties, factions
within nonpartisan governments may evolve into political parties. The United
States of America initially did not have enfranchised political parties, but
these evolved soon after independence. History. The democracy of ancient Athens
was a nonpartisan, direct democracy where eligible citizens voted on laws
themselves rather than electing representatives. Historians have frequently
interpreted Federalist No. 10 to imply that the Founding Fathers of the United
States intended the government to be nonpartisan. James Madison defined a
faction as "a number of citizens, whether amounting to a minority or majority
of the whole, who are united and actuated by some common impulse of passion, or
of interest, adverse to the rights of other citizens, or to the permanent and
aggregate interests of the community." As political parties had interests which
were adverse to the rights of citizens and to the general welfare of the
nation, several Founding Fathers preferred a nonpartisan form of government.
The administration of George Washington and the first few sessions of the US
Congress were nonpartisan. Factions within the early US government coalesced
into the Federalist and Democratic-Republican parties. The Era of Good Feeling,
when the Federalist party collapsed, leaving the Democratic-Republican party as
the sole political faction, was the United States' only experience with a
single-party system. The Non-Partisan League was an influential socialist
political movement in the United States, especially in the Upper Midwest,
particularly during the 1910s and 1920s. It also contributed much to the
ideology of the former Progressive Party of Canada. It went into decline and
merged with the Democratic Party of North Dakota in 1956. The Progressive Party
of Canada and the United Farmers movement (which formed governments in the
provinces of Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario) also acted on a similar philosophy.
In the case of the United Farmers of Ontario while in power (1919â€“1923) the
administration of Ernest Drury suffered lots of infighting as the result of
conflicting views. Because of their nonpartisan ideology the Progressive Party
of Canada refused to take the position of the official opposition after the
election of 1921 when they came in second place. Four years later they lost
that position and their rural supporters began to move to the Liberal Party and
CCF. Eventually the Progressive Party of Canada and the United Farmers movement
faded into obscurity with most of their members joining the Liberal Party of
Canada and the democratic socialist, Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF,
or present day New Democratic Party). Structures. Elections. In nonpartisan
elections, each candidate for office is eligible based on her or his own merits
rather than as a member of a political party. No political affiliation (if one
exists) is shown on the ballot next to a candidate. Generally, the winner is
chosen from a runoff election where the candidates are the top two vote-getters
from a primary election. In some elections, the candidates might be members of
a national party, but do not run as party members for local office. Louisiana
uses a nonpartisan blanket primary, also called a "jungle primary", for state
and local offices. In this system, all candidates run against each other
regardless of party affiliation during the primary, and then the two most
popular candidates run against each other even if they are members of the same
party. This form of runoff election weakens political parties and transforms a
partisan election into a partly nonpartisan election. Once a candidate gets
elected, the person maintains party affiliation and generally votes along party
lines. Louisiana is the only place that uses a nonpartisan blanket primary.
Nebraska uses a single nonpartisan primary for the State Legislature but not
for other state and local races. Nonpartisan elections are generally held for
municipal and county offices, especially school board, and are also common in
the election of judges. In some nonpartisan elections, it is common knowledge
which candidates are members of and backed by which parties; in others, parties
are almost wholly uninvolved and voters make choices with little or no regard
to partisan considerations. While nonpartisan democracies can allow for a wide
selection of candidates (especially within a no-nomination system whereby
voters can choose any non-restricted person in their area), such systems are
not incompatible with indirect elections (such as for large geographical
areas), whereby delegates may be chosen who in turn elect the representatives.
Appointments. Even if a government's executive officer or legislature is
partisan, appointments of cabinet members, judges, or directors of government
agencies, may be nonpartisan. The intent of appointing government officials in
a nonpartisan manner is to insure the officers can perform their duties free
from partisan politics, and are chosen in a fair manner that does not adversely
affect a political party. Twelve US states use the Missouri Plan, and two use a
variation of it, to choose judges in a nonpartisan manner. Several countries
with partisan parliaments use nonpartisan appointments to choose presidents.
Legislatures. In nonpartisan legislatures, there are no typically formal party
alignments within the legislature; even if there are caucuses for specific
issues. Alliances and causes with a nonpartisan body are often temporary and
fluid since legislators who oppose each other on some issues may agree on other
issues. Despite being nonpartisan, legislators typically have consistent and
identifiable voting patterns. Decisions to investigate and enforce ethics
violations by government officials are generally done on the basis of evidence
instead of party affiliation. Committee chairs and other leaders within the
legislature are often chosen for seniority and expertise, unlike the leaders in
a partisan legislature who are often chosen because of loyalty to a party.
Examples. National governments. Very few national governments are completely
nonpartisan, but nonpartisan political systems at the national level are not
unheard of. Many national governments have nonpartisan offices even if their
legislative branches are partisan. Constitutional monarchies have nonpartisan
monarchs as their head of state. Parliamentary republics generally have
nonpartisan, figurehead presidents. Nonpartisan governments are much more
likely in countries with small populations. Nauru, for example, has no
political parties; its Parliament consists entirely in independent members of
parliament or MPs, who form governing coalitions and opposition blocs through
alliances of individuals. The same is true in Tuvalu. No political parties
exist; "MPs have very close links with their island constituencies and effort
is directed towards balancing island representation in Cabinet" Other
nonpartisan island nations are Pitcairn, Micronesia, Saint Helena, and Palau.
Some are de facto nonpartisan because no law forbids the formation of political
parties, and the populations are small enough that factions are considered
unnecessary. Political allegiances depend mainly on family and island-related
factors. In Niue, political parties have never played an important role. There
is, at present, no political party, and candidates to elections therefore run
as independents. The only party ever to have existed, the Niue People's Party,
disbanded in 2003. The United Arab Emirates is a de jure nonpartisan semi-
democratic state since all political parties were outlawed. The Federal
National Council (al-Majlis al-Watani al-Ittihadi) is the UAEâ€™s parliamentary
body and consists of 40 members, representing the Emirates, half appointed by
the rulers of the constituent states and the other half elected to serve two-
year terms, with only advisory tasks. Political parties are illegal in the Gulf
state of Kuwait. They have not been legalized since independence in 1961.
Nonetheless, the constitution itself does not explicitly prohibit parties.
Candidates for election to the National Assembly of Kuwait stand in a personal
capacity. In practice, however, several political groups act as de facto
parties. Oman does not allow political parties and only holds elections with
expanding suffrage for a consultative assembly. Though Oman is developing into
a constitutional monarchy, political parties are not yet allowed in Oman. The
previously influential opposition movement, the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Oman, is dormant today. A nonpartisan democracy might take root
in other sovereign nations, such as occurred in Uganda in 1986, whereby
political parties were restricted by a constitutional referendum endorsed by
the people of the country (this system did not have all of the features
described above). During a subsequent referendum in 2005, over 92% of Ugandan
citizens voted for the return of a multiple party system. Until the mid-20th
century, a Canadian politician's political affiliation was not shown on ballots
at any level of government. The expectation was that citizens would vote
according to the merit of the candidate, but in practice, party allegiance
played an important role. Beginning in 1974, the name of the candidate's
political party was shown on the ballot. Territorial governments. The
territorial government of American Samoa is completely nonpartisan. It has 21
nonpartisan members elected by consensus to its Territorial House and 18
nonpartisan members elected to the Territorial Senate. The Governor and
Lieutenant Governor are both nonpartisan offices. However, its nonvoting member
of the U.S. House is a Democrat. The British territory of Falkland Islands has
a completely nonpartisan government in that no political parties operate on the
islands. All eight members of the Legislative Assembly are nonpartisan, as is
the Chief Executive and the Governor. Guernsey has a nonpartisan legislature.
The States of Guernsey, officially called the States of Deliberation, consists
of 45 People's Deputies, elected from multi- or single-member districts every
four years. Political parties played no official role in the Isle of Man before
the 2006 elections and played a minor role in the 2006 elections. At the 2001
election for the House of Keys, the Manx Labour Party polled 17.3% of the vote
and only 2 seats. The vast majority of seats at every election are won by
independent candidates with no allegiance to any parties. The head of the
territory and head of government of Hong Kong, the Chief Executive, is required
by law not to be member of any political party. There are political parties,
but there is no legislation for political parties. State or provincial
governments. There are several examples of nonpartisan state or provincial
governments. The nonpartisan system is also used in many US states for the
election of judges, district attorneys and other officials. The Swiss Cantons
of Glarus and Appenzell Innerrhoden are also nonpartisan, direct democracies;
while they have a partisan parliament, all laws have to be passed by
"Landsgemeinde", an assembly of all citizens eligible to vote. Twelve US states
use the Missouri Plan, and two use a variation of it, to choose judges in a
nonpartisan manner. The Canadian territories of the Northwest Territories and
Nunavut have nonpartisan democracies. The populace votes for individuals to
represent it in the territorial assembly without reference to political
parties. After the election, the assembly selects one of its number to form a
government and act as premier. This system is in deference to the system of
consensus government that predominates among the indigenous Inuit and other
peoples of northern Canada. The state of Nebraska in the United States has
nonpartisan elections for its legislature because candidates are neither
endorsed nor supported by political parties. However, its executive branch is
elected on a partisan basis. It is the only state in the United States with a
nonpartisan legislature. Governors of Japanese prefectures are required by law
not to be members of any political party. Municipal governments. The municipal
government of the City of Toronto, Ontario (Canada) is the fifth largest
government in the country, governing a population of more than 2.7 million. It
consists of a nonpartisan, directly elected council. The public may have a
general idea of the candidates' political affiliations, but their parties have
no official recognition or privilege in the functioning of City Council.
Councilors are free to vote on each motion individually, freeing them from
party discipline.
