Normative Normative has specialized contextual meanings in several academic
disciplines. Generically, it means "relating to an ideal standard or model." In
practice, it has strong connotations of relating to a "typical" standard or
model (see also normality). Philosophy. In philosophy, "normative" statements
affirm how things should or ought to be, how to value them, which things are
good or bad, which actions are right or wrong. Normative is usually contrasted
with Positivist (i.e. descriptive, explanatory, or constative) claims when
describing types of theories, beliefs, or propositions. Positivist statements
are factual statements that attempt to describe reality. For example, "children
should eat vegetables", and "those who would sacrifice liberty for security
deserve neither" are normative claims. On the other hand, "vegetables contain a
relatively high proportion of vitamins", "smoking causes cancer", and "a common
consequence of sacrificing liberty for security is a loss of both" are positive
claims. Whether or not a statement is normative is logically independent of
whether it is verified, verifiable, or popularly held. It is only with David
Hume in the 18th century that philosophers began to take cognizance of the
logical difference between normative and descriptive statements and thinking.
There are several schools of thought regarding the status of normative
statements and whether they can be rationally discussed or defended. Among
these schools are the tradition of practical reason extending from Aristotle
through Kant to Habermas, which asserts that they can, and the tradition of
emotivism, which maintains that they are merely expressions of emotions and
have no rational content. Normative statements and norms, as well as their
meanings, are an integral part of human life. They are fundamental for
prioritizing goals and organizing and planning thought, belief, emotion and
action and are the basis of much ethical and political discourse. Modern
philosophy generally holds that the way in which individuals or societies
define that which they consider to be appropriate - that is: to be in
accordance with their (normative) standards - varies greatly between peoples
and cultures. Others see a remarkable unity of human moral sentiment. Many
philosophers have searched for a source of normative values which is
independent of the individual's subjective morality and consequently objective
and 'true' in nature. Social sciences and economics. In the social sciences,
the term "normative" has broadly the same meaning as its usage in philosophy,
but may also relate, in a sociological context, to the role of cultural
'norms'; the shared values or institutions that structural functionalists
regard as constitutive of the social structure and social cohesion. These
values and units of socialization thus act to encourage or enforce social
activity and outcomes that "ought" to (with respect to the norms implicit in
those structures) occur, while discouraging or preventing social activity that
"ought not" occur. That is, they promote social activity that is socially
"valued" (see philosophy above). While there are always anomalies in social
activity (typically described as "crime" or anti-social behaviour, see also
normality) the normative effects of popularly-endorsed beliefs (such as "family
values" or "common sense") push most social activity towards a generally
homogeneous set. From such reasoning, however, functionalism shares an affinity
with ideological conservatism. Normative economics deals with questions of what
sort of economic policies should be pursued, in order to achieve desired (that
is, "valued, ibid.") economic outcomes. See economics aspect in normative
economics. Law. In law, as an academic discipline, the term "normative" is used
to describe the way something ought to be done according to a value position.
As such, normative arguments can be conflicting, insofar as different values
can be inconsistent with one another. For example, from one normative value
position the purpose of the criminal process may be to repress crime. From
another value position, the purpose of the criminal justice system could be to
protect individuals from the moral harm of wrongful conviction. Standards
documents. Normative elements are defined in International Organization for
Standardization Directives Part 2 as "elements that describe the scope of the
document, and which set out provisions". Provisions include "requirements",
"recommendations" and "statements". "Statements" include permissions,
possibilities and capabilities. A "requirement" is an "expression in the
content of a document conveying criteria to be fulfilled if compliance with the
document is to be claimed and from which no deviation is permitted." It is not
necessary to comply with recommendations and statements in order to comply with
the standard, it is necessary to comply only with the requirements (that are
denoted by the verbal form "shall"). There is much confusion between
"normative" and "requirement", however the ISO terminology is supported by
national standards bodies worldwide and is the legitimate description of these
terms in the context of standards documents. In standards terminology still
used by some organisations, "normative" means "considered to be a prescriptive
part of the standard". It characterises that part of the standard which
describes what "ought" (see philosophy above) to be done within the application
of that standard. It is implicit that application of that standard will result
in a "valuable" outcome ("ibid."). For example, many standards have an
introduction, preface, or summary that is considered non-normative, as well as
a main body that is considered normative. "Compliance" is defined as "complies
with the normative sections of the standard"; an object that complies with the
normative sections but not the non-normative sections of a standard is still
considered to be in compliance. Typically, "normative" is contrasted with
"informative" (referring to the standard's descriptive, explanatory or positive
content). Informative data is supplemental information such as additional
guidance, supplemental recommendations, tutorials, commentary as well as
background, history, development, and relationship with other elements.
Informative data is not a requirement and doesnâ€™t compel compliance.
