Northern Arizona University Northern Arizona University (NAU) is a public
university located in Flagstaff, Arizona, United States. It is accredited by
the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, and has 36 satellite
campuses in the state of Arizona. The university offers both undergraduate and
graduate degrees. As of fall 2012, 21,652 students were enrolled, 18,292 at the
Flagstaff campus. The average cost of tuition for an full-time, Arizona
resident undergraduate student for two semesters is $6,964. The Carnegie
Classification of Institutions of Higher Education classifies NAU as a Research
University with High research activity. NAU is governed by the Arizona Board of
Regents. History. Old Main, site of Northern Arizona Normal School; currently
houses an art gallery, museum, and offices Initially named the Northern Arizona
Normal School, the institution was formed on September 11, 1899. The first
graduating class, in 1901, consisted of four women who received credentials to
teach in the Arizona Territory. In 1925, the Arizona State Legislature allowed
the school, which was now called the Northern Arizona State Teacher's College,
to grant the Bachelor of Education degree. The school became Northern Arizona
State Teacher's College. Enrollment dropped sharply, however, as World War II
dawned. ASTC became a Navy V-12 program training site. Campuses. Flagstaff
campus. Perched at above sea level, the main campus is surrounded by the
largest contiguous ponderosa pine forest on the North American continent and
enjoys a four-season climate. Snow is common in winter, with accumulations most
prevalent in December and January. Winter skiing is accessible at Arizona
Snowbowl, an alpine ski resort located on the San Francisco Peaks, northwest of
Flagstaff. Extended Campuses. Northern Arizona University maintains campuses
throughout Arizona offering alternatives to the traditional learning experience
including evening, weekend and accelerated classes. The university offers more
than 123 degree, certificate, and endorsement programs in person and/or on the
web. Extended Campus students are learning in-person in classrooms across the
state at 36 different locations throughout Arizona. One-third of Northern
Arizona University students are served through the Extended Campuses program.
Academics. NAU is ranked 78th on "Forbes Magazine"'s "America's Best Public
Colleges" list and is ranked 460th overall on Forbes "America's Best Colleges
2010" list. It has 93 academic programs; and consists of six colleges. In fall
2010, the top undergraduate degrees by enrollment were elementary education,
biology, hotel and restaurant management, nursing, and criminology and criminal
justice. College of Arts and Letters. The College of Arts and Letters (CAL)
houses the Asian Studies Program, Cinema Studies, Comparative Cultural Studies
(formerly Humanities, Arts, and Religion), English, History, Latin American
Studies, Modern Languages, Museum Studies, Philosophy, School of Art, School of
Music, and Theatre. The college also oversees the NAU Art Museum, Martin-
Springer Institute (promoting lessons of the Holocaust), Northern Arizona
Writing Project, Ardrey Memorial Auditorium, and Ashurst Hall. The College of
Arts and Letters Film Series has been providing quality classic films to the
NAU and Flagstaff community for more than 9 years, and the NAU International
Film Series has recently been established. Department faculty and students
share their scholarly work and artistic achievement through more than 300
performances, lectures, films, and exhibitions a year. College of Education.
The College of Education prepares educators, counselors, school psychologists,
and school administrators. Fields of study include teaching and learning (e.g.,
early childhood, elementary, and secondary), educational leadership,
educational psychology, and educational specialties (e.g., bilingual and
multicultural education, career and technical education, educational
technology, and special education). College of Engineering, Forestry, and
Natural Sciences. The College of Engineering, Forestry, and Natural Sciences
has 11 departments and a Quaternary Program; 13 centers and two institutes. It
continues to expand its degree programs. Programs include Biological Sciences,
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Civil and Environmental Engineering, Computer
Science, Construction Management, Electrical Engineering, Environmental
Sciences and Education, Geology, Mathematics and Statistics, Mechanical
Engineering, Physics and Astronomy, Quaternary Studies, Master of Engineering,
and Master of Science in Engineering. NAUTeach is the secondary school teacher
preparation program for mathematics and the sciences. College of Health and
Human Services. NAU's College of Health and Human Services consists of the
School of Nursing, Health Sciences, Dental Hygiene, Communication Sciences and
Disorders, Physical Therapy, and a newly formed (fall 2012) Physician Assistant
school based out of Phoenix, Arizona. [http://www.nau.edu/hhs] College of
Social and Behavioral Sciences. The College of Social and Behavioral Sciences
undergraduate programs include anthropology, applied indigenous studies,
criminology and criminal justice, ethnic studies, geography, planning and
recreation, political science, psychology, communication, sociology/social
work, and women's and gender studies. The W.A. Franke College of Business. The
W.A. Franke College of Business' primary focus is undergraduate education, but
it also offers a masterâ€™s level education and research opportunities.
Businessman Bill Franke's commitment of $25 million resulted in the renaming of
the college in his honor. The W.A. Franke College of Business was fully re-
accredited in fall 2008 by the national accrediting body AACSB International -
The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business. The NAU program is
one of about 400 accredited programs among the more than 1,000 throughout the
nation. In 2006, the college moved into a new , LEED-certified building.
Residence halls. Northern Arizona University has 21 dorms on its Flagstaff
campus. Freshman residence halls. Family housing. These apartment-styled halls
are for married couples and students with children. Residents of both family
units are within the Flagstaff Unified School District. Residents are zoned to
Kinsey Elementary School, Mount Elden Middle School, and Flagstaff High School.
Athletics. Student athletes go on to compete at national, international, and
professional levels in football, basketball, baseball, ice hockey, track and
field, tennis, swimming and diving. The university participates in 15
intercollegiate sports programs. NAU teams compete at the Walkup Skydome, which
is a multipurpose building which provides facilities for football, basketball,
indoor track and field, soccer, weight lifting, lacrosse, student recreation,
major concert events, commencements, intramurals, and a variety of other
university and community activities. The Lumberjacks compete at the NCAA
Division I level in all sports. In football, the Lumberjacks compete at the
Football Championship Subdivision (formerly known as Division I-AA) level. NAU
competes in the Big Sky Conference in all sports except swimming and diving,
which is part of the Western Athletic Conference. On Campus Activities. NAU has
more than 200 recognized professional, academic, service and social
organizations; an intramural sports program; "The Lumberjack" student
newspaper; and active residence hall organization. "The Lumberjack". The
university's award-winning, weekly newspaper is an independent, student-run
publication called "The Lumberjack". In May 2007, the newspaper won a Society
of Professional Journalists national award in the editorial writing category
for articles printed during 2006. KJACK, NAZ Today, and UTV62. "KJACK" is
available in Flagstaff on 1680 AM or online. KJACK reports to the College Music
Journal and specializes in new and local music. NAU's televised news program,
"NAZ Today" airs Monday through Thursday in Flagstaff on NPG cable channels 4,
59 and UTV 62 on campus at 6pm MST; formerly, it also aired on UniversityHouse
(Dish Network channel 9411) until it folded. Since the shutdown of Channel 2
news in August 2008, "NAZ Today" is now the only TV news source for the
Flagstaff area. UTV62 is NAU's student run and produced television station.
"UTV62" runs 24 hours a day 7 days a week on channel 62 on campus. Choirs. The
Northern Arizona University Choral Union consists of eight ensembles contained
within the School of Music: Men's Chorale, Women's Chorale, University Singers,
two Vocal Jazz Ensembles: Northern Voices and High Altitude, Vocal Chamber
Ensemble, the Harold M. Harter Memorial Handbell Choir, and the Shrine of the
Ages Choir, the premier choral ensemble that tours internationally. Recreation
services. The NAU Recreation Center provides facilities for all students,
including a fully equipped weight room, two two-court basketball/volleyball/
soccer gymnasium, six glass-back racquetball courts,and three aerobic/dance
studio. In Fall 2011, the remodel of the NAU Recreation Center was completed,
creating the NAU Health and Learning Center in its place. Features include an
indoor jogging track, 38 foot climbing wall, larger weight room, multipurpose
gym, and a cardio theatre. The Health and Learning Center also includes all of
the on-campus medical services that were previously housed in the Fronske
Health Center, a pharmacy, and the offices for Disability Resources on campus.
Intramural sports. Intramural sports are organized for teams and individuals
and include flag football, soccer, volleyball, softball, racquetball, and
backgammon. Sports clubs include sports such as baseball, rugby, soccer,
hockey, lacrosse, kendo (martial arts), water polo, and judo. Movies and other
events. Unions and Student Activities offers many services and events for the
campus community, such as movies and the popular Friday night AfterHours
program produced by SUN Entertainment. SUN also presents several concerts and
special events each year and coordinates Welcome Week concerts. The College of
Arts and Letters Film Series presents classic films every Tuesday night during
the school year, and the College of Arts and Letters presents more than 300
music and theatrical performances, lectures, films and art exhibitions yearly.
Alumni. The NAU Alumni Association represents more than 115,000 alumni from the
U.S. Other information. The Arizona Cardinals of the NFL conduct their summer
training camp at Northern Arizona University's Flagstaff campus.
