Nothing But Nets Nothing But Nets is a global, grassroots campaign of the
United Nations Foundation to raise awareness and funding to fight malaria, a
leading cause of death among children in Africa. The campaign aims to prevent
malaria deaths by purchasing, distributing and teaching the proper use of
mosquito bed nets and end malaria deaths by 2015, in order to meet the
Millennium Development Goals. As of 2012, the campaign has distributed nets in
twenty countries throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, with current plans to expand
into Kenya and Ethiopia. Background. The UN Foundation and its partners use the
money raised by donations to Nothing But Nets to fight malaria. In conjunction
with the Measles Initiative, a global vaccination effort to fight the measles,
Nothing but Nets purchases bed nets and distributes them in countries and
communities in greatest need. Rick Reilly's 2006 column about malaria in Sports
Illustrated, wherein he challenged of his readers to donate at least $10 for
the purchase of an anti-malaria bed nets brought the issue to national
attention. Thousands of Americans across the country donated, which led to the
creation of the Nothing But Nets campaign. Partnerships. The UN Foundation has
partnered with groups as diverse as National Basketball Associationâ€™s NBA
Cares, The People of the United Methodist Church and Sports Illustrated to
bring Nothing But Nets to the American public. These Founding Partners are
joined by corporate, multi-media and financial partners to make a significant
impact by raising awareness and funds to purchase and distribute bed nets and
save lives. Recent significant partners have included the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation and the Boy Scouts of America.
