Nuclear weapons testing Nuclear weapons tests are experiments carried out to
determine the effectiveness, yield and explosive capability of nuclear weapons.
Throughout the 20th century, most nations that have developed nuclear weapons
have tested them. Testing nuclear weapons can yield information about how the
weapons work, as well as how the weapons behave under various conditions and
how structures behave when subjected to nuclear explosions. Additionally,
nuclear testing has often been used as an indicator of scientific and military
strength, and many tests have been overtly political in their intention; most
nuclear weapons states publicly declared their nuclear status by means of a
nuclear test. The first nuclear weapon was detonated as a test by the United
States at the Trinity site on July 16, 1945, with a yield approximately
equivalent to 20 kilotons. The first hydrogen bomb, codenamed "Mike", was
tested at the Enewetak atoll in the Marshall Islands on November 1 (local date)
in 1952, also by the United States. The largest nuclear weapon ever tested was
the "Tsar Bomba" of the Soviet Union at Novaya Zemlya on October 30, 1961, with
an estimated yield of around 50 megatons. In 1963, many (but not all) nuclear
and many non-nuclear states signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty, pledging to
refrain from testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, underwater, or in outer
space. The treaty permitted underground nuclear testing. France continued
atmospheric testing until 1974, China continued up until 1980. Neither has ever
signed the treaty. Underground tests in the United States continued until 1992
(its last nuclear testing), the Soviet Union in 1990, the United Kingdom in
1991, and both China and France in 1996. After signing the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty in 1996 (which has as of 2012 not yet entered into force), all of
these states have pledged to discontinue all nuclear testing. Non-signatories
India and Pakistan last tested nuclear weapons in 1998. The most recent nuclear
test was announced by North Korea on May 25, 2009. Types. Nuclear weapons tests
have historically been broken into four categories reflecting the medium or
location of the test. Purpose. Separately from these designations, nuclear
tests are also often categorized by the purpose of the test itself. Aside from
these technical considerations, tests have been conducted for political and
training purposes. Tests also often serve multiple purposes. Hydronuclear tests
study nuclear materials under the conditions of explosive shock compression.
They can create sub-critical conditions, or supercritical conditions with
yields ranging from negligible all the way up to a substantial fraction of full
weapon yield. Critical mass experiments determine the quantity of fissile
material required for criticality with a variety of fissile material
compositions, densities, shapes, and reflectors. They can be sub-critical or
super-critical, in which case significant radiation fluxes can be produced.
This type of test resulted in several criticality accidents. Sub-critical (or
cold) tests are any type of tests involving nuclear materials and possibly
high-explosives (like those mentioned above) that purposely result in "no"
yield. The name refer to the lack of creation of a critical mass of fissile
material. They are the only type of tests allowed under the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Additionally, there have been simulations of the
effects of nuclear detonations using conventional explosives (such as the Minor
Scale U.S. test in 1985). The explosives might be spiked with radioactive
materials to simulate fallout dispersal. History. The first atomic weapons test
was conducted near Alamogordo, New Mexico, on July 16, 1945, during the
Manhattan Project, and given the codename "Trinity". The test was originally to
confirm that the implosion-type Nuclear weapon design was feasible, and to give
an idea of what the actual size and effects of an atomic explosion would be
before they were used in combat against Japan. While the test gave a good
approximation of many of the explosion's effects, it did not give an
appreciable understanding of Nuclear fallout, which was not well understood by
the project scientists until well after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. The United States conducted six atomic tests before the Soviet Union
developed their first atomic bomb (RDS-1) and tested it on August 29, 1949.
Neither country had very many atomic weapons to spare at first, and so testing
was relatively infrequent (when the U.S. used two weapons for "Operation
Crossroads" in 1946, they were detonating over 20% of their current arsenal).
However, by the 1950s the United States had established a dedicated test site
on its own territory (Nevada Test Site) and was also using a site in the
Marshall Islands (Pacific Proving Grounds) for extensive atomic and nuclear
testing. The early tests were used primarily to discern the military effects of
atomic weapons ("Crossroads" had involved the effect of atomic weapons on a
navy, and how they functioned underwater) and to test new weapon designs.
During the 1950s these included new hydrogen bomb designs, which were tested in
the Pacific, and also new and improved fission weapon designs. The Soviet Union
also began testing on a limited scale, primarily in Kazakhstan. During the
later phases of the Cold War, though, both countries developed accelerated
testing programs, testing many hundreds of bombs over the last half of the 20th
century. Atomic and nuclear tests can involve many hazards. A number of these
were illustrated in the U.S. Castle Bravo test in 1954. The weapon design
tested was a new form of hydrogen bomb, and the scientists underestimated how
vigorously some of the weapon materials would react. As a result, the
explosion—with a yield of 15 Mt—was over twice what was predicted. Aside
from this problem, the weapon also generated a large amount of radioactive
nuclear fallout, more than had been anticipated, and a change in the weather
pattern caused the fallout to be spread in a direction which had not been
cleared in advance. The fallout plume spread high levels of radiation for over
a hundred miles, contaminating a number of populated islands in nearby atoll
formations (though they were soon evacuated, many of the islands' inhabitants
suffered from radiation burns and later from other effects such as increased
cancer rate and birth defects), as well as a Japanese fishing boat ("Daigo
Fukuryū Maru"). One member of the boat's crew died from radiation sickness
after returning to port, and it was feared that the radioactive fish they had
been carrying had made it into the Japanese food supply. Bravo was the worst
U.S. nuclear accident, but many of its component problems—unpredictably large
yields, changing weather patterns, unexpected fallout contamination of
populations and the food supply—occurred during other atmospheric nuclear
weapons tests by other countries as well. Concerns over worldwide fallout rates
eventually led to the Partial Test Ban Treaty in 1963, which limited
signatories to underground testing. Not all countries stopped atmospheric
testing, but because the United States and the Soviet Union were responsible
for roughly 86% of all nuclear tests their compliance cut the overall level
substantially. France continued atmospheric testing until 1974, and People's
Republic of China until 1980. Almost all new nuclear powers have announced
their possession of nuclear weapons with a nuclear test. The only acknowledged
nuclear power which claims never to have conducted a test was South Africa (see
Vela Incident), which has since dismantled all of its weapons. Israel is widely
thought to possess a sizable nuclear arsenal, though it has never tested,
unless they were involved in Vela. Experts disagree on whether states can have
reliable nuclear arsenals—especially ones using advanced warhead designs,
such as hydrogen bombs and miniaturized weapons—without testing, though all
agree that it is very unlikely to develop significant nuclear innovations
without testing. One other approach is to use supercomputers to conduct
"virtual" testing, but codes need to be validated against test data. Some
nuclear tests have been for peaceful purposes. These peaceful nuclear
explosions were used to evaluate whether nuclear explosions could be used for
non-military purposes such as digging canals and artificial harbors, or to
stimulate oil and gas fields. The tests were eventually abandoned for economic,
political, and environmental reasons. Nuclear testing has also been used for
clearly political purposes. The most explicit example of this was the
detonation of the largest nuclear bomb ever created, the 50 megaton Tsar Bomba,
by the Soviet Union in 1961. This weapon was too large to be practically used
against an enemy target, and it is not thought that any were manufactured
except the one detonated in the test. There have been many attempts to limit
the number and size of nuclear tests; the most far-reaching is the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty of 1996, which has not yet been ratified by the
United States. Nuclear testing has since become a controversial issue in the
United States, with a number of politicians saying that future testing might be
necessary to maintain the aging warheads from the Cold War. Because nuclear
testing is seen as furthering nuclear arms development, many are also opposed
to future testing as an acceleration of the arms race. Nuclear testing by
country. Additionally, there may have been at least three alleged but
unacknowledged nuclear explosions (see list of alleged nuclear tests). Of
these, the only one taken seriously as a possible nuclear test is the Vela
Incident, a possible detection of a nuclear explosion in the Indian Ocean in
1979. From the first nuclear test in 1945 until tests by Pakistan in 1998,
there was never a period of more than 22 months with no nuclear testing. June
1998 to October 2006 was the longest period since 1945 with no acknowledged
nuclear tests. Treaties Against Testing. The Partial Nuclear Test Ban treaty
makes it illegal to detonate any nuclear explosion anywhere except underground,
in order to reduce atmospheric fallout. Most countries have signed and ratified
the Partial Nuclear Test Ban which went into effect in October 1963. Of the
nuclear states, France, China, and North Korea have never signed the Partial
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. The 1996 Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
bans all nuclear explosions everywhere, including underground. For that
purpose, the Preparatory Commission of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization is building an international monitoring system with 337
facilities located all over the globe. 85% of these facilities are already
operational. As of May 2012, the CTBT has been signed by 183 States, of which
157 have also ratified. However, for the Treaty to enter into force it needs to
be ratified by 44 specific nuclear technology-holder countries. These "Annex 2
States" participated in the negotiations on the CTBT between 1994 and 1996 and
possessed nuclear power or research reactors at that time. The ratification of
eight Annex 2 states is still missing: China, Egypt, Iran, Israel and the
United States have signed but not ratified the Treaty; India, North Korea and
Pakistan have not signed it. Compensation for victims. Over 500 atmospheric
nuclear weapons tests were conducted at various sites around the world from
1945 to 1980. As public awareness and concern mounted over the possible health
hazards associated with exposure to the nuclear fallout, various studies were
done to assess the extent of the hazard. A Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention/ National Cancer Institute study claims that nuclear fallout might
have led to approximately 11,000 excess deaths, most caused by thyroid cancer
linked to exposure to iodine-131.
