NY Salon NY Salon is an organization based in New York City composed of
intellectuals, academics, artists and public personalities. They collaborate
with foundations, universities and notable individuals to host discussions of
today's issues; design lectures and debates; and hold forums to review
controversies. Programs. September 2005 the Salon collaborated with WNYC, Brian
Lehrer and the CUNY Graduate Center to stage, Reflections on the Future:
Politics in the 21st Century featuring authors Russell Jacoby, Richard Sennett,
and Frank Furedi. In June 2006, they worked with the New York Society for
Ethical Culture to present: "Is There a Culture of Corruption in Politics and
Business?". In September 2006 they began a series of four public forums with
The New School and The Rose & Erwin Wolfson Center for National Affairs about
the culture of fear in America. "At a time when people are safer and live
longer than ever before, every day new media driven fears fuel our sense that
the sky is falling in. Underlying all of this is a concern that human
civilization has perhaps gone too far and we should be more cautious –
particularly of other people. Few put forward a positive view of what the
future holds in store. Crossing the boundaries between literature, philosophy
and sociology, this series of four international panel discussions promises to
be relevant, stimulating and perhaps a little controversial. The speakers will
be asked to address the wider consequences of reorganizing our lives around the
“better safe than sorry” motto." Founding. NY Salon was founded by Alan
Miller and Jean Smith. Notable speakers. Notable Speakers include:
Sociologists, Russell Jacoby, Richard Sennett, and Frank Furedi; economist,
journalist and author Daniel Ben-Ami; physician, and author, Michael
Fitzpatrick; writer and blogger Alex Gourevitch; Wall Street Journal editorial
board member Robert Pollock; 'et al."
