Occupation (protest) An as an act of protest, occupation is the entry into and
holding of a building, space or symbolic site. As such, occupations often
combine some of the following elements: a challenge to ownership of the space
involved, an effort to gain public attention, the practical use of the
facilities occupied, and a redefinition of the occupied space. Occupations may
be conducted with varying degrees of physical force to obtain and defend the
place occupied. Occupations may be brief or they may extend for weeks, months
or years. In some cases of long-term occupation, the term protest camp may be
applied, although occupation often connotes the use of space without permission
or in defiance of governmental authority. Occupation, as a means of achieving
change, emerged out of worker struggles that sought everything from higher
wages to the abolition of capitalism. Often called a sit-down strike, it is a
form of civil disobedience in which an organized group of workers, usually
employed at a factory or other centralized location, take possession of the
workplace by "sitting down" at their stations, effectively preventing their
employers from replacing them with strikebreakers or, in some cases, moving
production to other locations. The recovered factories in Argentina is an
example of workplace occupations moving beyond addressing workplace grievances,
to demanding a change in ownership of the means of production. The Industrial
Workers of the World were the first American union to use it, while the United
Auto Workers staged successful sit-down strikes in the 1930s, most famously in
the Flint Sit-Down Strike of 1936-1937. Sit-down strikes were declared illegal
by the US supreme court, but are still used by unions such as the UMWA in the
Pittston strike, and the workers at the Republic Windows and Doors factory in
Chicago.
