Official language An official language is a language that is given a special
legal status in a particular country, state, or other jurisdiction. Typically a
country's official language refers to the language used within its government -
its courts, parliament, administration, etc. - to run its operations and
conduct its business. Status. Official status can also be used to give a
language (often indigenous) a legal status even if that language is not widely
spoken. For example, in New Zealand the Māori language has official status
under the Māori Language Act 1987 even though it is spoken by less than five
percent of the New Zealand population. Non-national or supra-national
organizations such as the United Nations and the European Union may also have
official languages. Politics. Official language status is often connected with
wider political issues of sovereignty, cultural nationalism, and the rights of
indigenous peoples and ethnic minorities, including immigrant communities. For
example, the campaign to make English the de jure official language of various
states in the United States of America is often seen as a way of marginalizing
non English-speaking minorities, particularly Hispanic and Latino Americans,
while others see it as a unifying force among numerous immigrant groups. In the
Republic of Ireland the decision to make the Irish language an official
language was part of a wider program of cultural revitalization, de-
anglicisation and Gaelic nationalism following centuries of English rule in
Ireland. Despite its status as an official language, Irish has been reduced to
a minority language in Ireland as a result of English rule, as is the case in
North and South America where various indigenous languages have been replaced
by that of the colonists. Various indigenous rights movements have sought
greater recognition of their languages, often through official language status.
