Open campaign An open campaign can encompass several definitions. An open
campaign may be a set of public protest actions against a person (e.g. a
politician), an organization (e.g. a private education association), or a
corporation with a clear goal and transparent methods. In most cases, people
who organise an open campaign are people willing to act by themselves, rather
than strictly relying on politicians or other leaders. They often are willing
to take control of their struggle and define their priorities, and work as a
team, with little or no hierarchy, but rather favor people to participate with
their own skills. Typical open campaigns rely on organizing talks, video
displays, mailings, protest letters, leaflets distributions, articles in
newspapers, petitions. The location and time of a campaign is usually heavily
dependent upon the focus chosen. Examples. The expression is also often used by
politicians officially starting to campaign as a candidate for a specific
election. A similar meaning is given in sports, with the official start of a
sport season (e.g. in France, Roland Garros Tournament). The expression is
sometimes used in games, in particular role gaming. Example of an open
campaign. Greenpeace is using "open campaign" as part of its activism effort,
with the willingness to be transparent down to the merest tactical details,
although there may be some situations where some of these are hidden to provide
some element of surprise. It assumed that propaganda techniques (even via
cultural bias), are ineffective, counter-productive or simply will not be
believed. Thus one does not have report every uncomfortable detail, merely be a
more reliable reporter than the opposition and be heard out to ultimately be
more trusted than the opposing agents. See the act.Greenpeace.org service for
an example of open campaigning, mostly using email campaigns. In this context,
