Opportunity cost Opportunity cost is the cost of any activity measured in terms
of the value of the next best alternative forgone (that is not chosen). It is
the sacrifice related to the second best choice available to someone, or group,
who has picked among several mutually exclusive choices. The opportunity cost
is also the "cost" (as a lost benefit) of the forgone products after making a
choice. Opportunity cost is a key concept in economics, and has been described
as expressing "the basic relationship between scarcity and choice". The notion
of opportunity cost plays a crucial part in ensuring that scarce resources are
used efficiently. Thus, opportunity costs are not restricted to monetary or
financial costs: the real cost of output forgone, lost time, pleasure or any
other benefit that provides utility should also be considered opportunity
costs. Opportunity costs in consumption. Opportunity cost is assessed in not
only monetary or material terms, but also in terms of anything which is of
value. For example, a person who desires to watch each of two television
programs being broadcast simultaneously, and does not have the means to make a
recording of one, can watch only one of the desired programs. Therefore, the
opportunity cost of watching "Dallas" could be not enjoying the other program
(such as "Dynasty"). If an individual records one program while watching the
other, the opportunity cost will be the time that the individual spends
watching one program versus the other. In a restaurant situation, the
opportunity cost of eating steak could be trying the salmon. The opportunity
cost of ordering both meals could be twofold: the extra $20 to buy the second
meal, and his reputation with his peers, as he may be thought of as greedy or
extravagant for ordering two meals. A family might decide to use a short period
of vacation time to visit Disneyland rather than doing household improvements.
The opportunity cost of having happier children could therefore be a remodeled
bathroom. In environmental protection, opportunity cost is also applicable.
This has been demonstrated in the legislation that required the carcinogenic
aromatics (mainly reformate) to be largely eliminated from gasoline.
Unfortunately, this required refineries to install equipment at a cost of
hundreds of millions of dollarsÂ â€“ and pass the cost to the consumer. The
absolute number of cancer cases attributed to exposure to gasoline, however, is
low, estimated a few cases per year in the U.S. Thus, the decision to require
fewer aromatics has been criticized on the grounds of opportunity cost: the
hundreds of millions of dollars spent on process redesign could have been spent
on other, more fruitful ways of reducing deaths caused by cancer or
automobiles. These actions (or strictly, the best one of them) are the
opportunity cost of reduction of aromatics in gasoline. The Opportunity Cost of
consuming good y, relative to good x (y:x), can be calculated by the price of
good y, relative to good x (Py/Px). For example, a movie (good x) costs $10
(Px) and bowling (good y) costs $20 (Py), the opportunity cost of going bowling
is 2 movies (Py/Px = 20/10). That is the $20 spent on bowling could have been
used to see two movies priced at $10. Conversely the opportunity cost of going
to watch a movie is 0.5 (10/20) games of bowling. Units should be specified in
the opportunity cost, for example if forgoing 3 party invitations to go out on
a date you would not say "I passed on 3 for this date", your date would need to
know the units of the good forgone for the statement to make sense. Opportunity
costs in production. Opportunity costs may be assessed in the decision-making
process of production. If the workers on a farm can produce either one million
pounds of wheat or two million pounds of barley, then the opportunity cost of
producing one pound of wheat is the two pounds of barley forgone (assuming the
production possibilities frontier is linear). Firms would make rational
decisions by weighing the sacrifices involved. Explicit costs. Explicit costs
are opportunity costs that involve direct monetary payment by producers. The
opportunity cost of the factors of production not already owned by a producer
is the price that the producer has to pay for them. For instance, a firm spends
$100 on electrical power consumed, their opportunity cost is $100. The firm has
sacrificed $100, which could have been spent on other factors of production.
Implicit costs. Implicit costs are the opportunity costs that in factors of
production that a producer already owns. They are equivalent to what the
factors could earn for the firm in alternative uses, either operated within the
firm or rent out to other firms. For example, a firm pays $300 a month all year
for rent on a warehouse that only holds product for six months each year. The
firm could rent the warehouse out for the unused six months, at any price
(assuming a year-long lease requirement), and that would be the cost that could
be spent on other factors of production. Non-monetary opportunity costs.
Opportunity costs are not always monetary units or being able to produce one
good over another. The opportunity cost can also be unknown, or spawn a series
of infinite sub opportunity costs. For instance, an individual could choose not
to ask a girl out on a date, in an attempt to make her more interested by
playing hard to get, but the opportunity cost could be that they get completely
ignored, which could lead to other opportunity costs. Evaluation. Note that
opportunity cost is not the "sum" of the available alternatives when those
alternatives are, in turn, mutually exclusive to each other â€“ it is the value
of the "next best" use. The opportunity cost of a city's decision to build the
hospital on its vacant land is the loss of the land for a sporting center, or
the inability to use the land for a parking lot, or the money which could have
been made from selling the land. Use for any one of those purposes would
preclude the possibility to implement any of the other. However, most
opportunities are difficult to compare. Opportunity cost has been seen as the
foundation of the marginal theory of value as well as the theory of time and
money. In some cases, it may be possible to have more of everything by making
different choices; for instance, when an economy is within its production
possibility frontier. In microeconomic models this is unusual, because
individuals are assumed to maximize utility, but it is a feature of Keynesian
macroeconomics. In these circumstances, opportunity cost is a less useful
concept. History. The term was coined in 1914 by Friedrich von Wieser in his
book "".â€¢  It was also described in 1848 by FrÃ©dÃ©ric Bastiat in his essay
"What Is Seen and What Is Not Seen".
