Output (economics) Output in economics is the "quantity of goods or services
produced in a given time period, by a firm, industry, or country," whether
consumed or used for further production. The concept of national output is
absolutely essential in the field of macroeconomics. It is national output that
makes a country rich, not large amounts of money. Definition. The result of an
economic process that has used inputs to produce a product or service that is
available for sale or use somewhere else. "Net output", sometimes called
"netput" is a quantity, in the context of production, that is positive if the
quantity is output by the production process and negative if it is an input to
the production process. Several different methods of measuring output are
utilized. Measuring National Output. Calculating GDP(Gross Domestic Product) is
the most popular measure of national output. The main challenge in using this
method is how to avoid counting the same product more that once. Logically, the
total output should be equal to the value of all goods and services produced in
a country, but in counting every good and service, one actually ends up
counting the same output again and again, at multiple stages of production. One
way of tackling the problem of over counting is to, consider only value
addition i.e. the new output created at each stage of production. To
illustrate, we can take a dressmaker who purchases a dress material for say 500
rupees and then she stitched and put final touches on the dress. She then sold
the dress for 800 rupees( her costs of finishing the dress were say 150 rupees)
We can then say that she added 150 rupees worth of output to the dress as
contrary to that she produced 800 rupees worth of output. So value addition is
equal to the sales price of a good or service minus all the non labour costs
used to produce it. To avoid the issue of over counting, one can also focus
entirely on final sales. Where though not directly but implicitly all prior
stage of output creation are accounted for. Even though both methods are widely
acknowledged to be accurate, the second method is known as the expenditure
method is used more widely, and is the standard method of calculation of GDP in
most countries. The logic behind using the expenditure method is that if all
the expenditures on final goods are added up, the sum should total the total
production because the every produced good is eventually produced in some form
or the other. In both these methods, one has to be wary of the fact that
consumption includes all spending by households, business investment does not
include all spending by firms, because if it did this would result in massive
double counting because many of the things firms buy are processed and resold
to consumers. as a result investment only includes expenditures on output that
is not expected to be used up in the short run. Another possible way in which
one may over count is if imports are involved. If a foreign individual or firm
bought a product of some other country, i.e. if say an American firm bought a
Cambodian maufactured good, then this expenditure cannot be counted in the
consumer expenditures in American GDP since the output being purchased is
foreign. To correct this issue, imports are eliminated from GDP. Taking all
this into Account, we see that National Output(GDP)=C+I+G+X-M
A third way to calculate national output is to focus on income. In this method,
we look at income which is paid to factors of production and labour for their
services in producing the output. This is usually paid in the form of wages and
salaries, it can also be paid in the form of royalties, rent, dividends etc.
Because income is a payment for output, it is assumed that total income should
eventually be equal to total output. Output Condition. The output condition for
producers is the level of set so that the price of each good equals the
marginal cost of that good. i.e. MC1\MC2=P1\P2 From the equation we can see
that the ratio of the marginal costs of the final goods is equal to their price
ratio. one may also deduce the ratio of marginal costs as the slope of the
Productionâ€“possibility frontier which would give the rate at which society
can transform one good into another. Exchange of Output among Nations. Exchange
of output between two countries is a very common occurrence, there is always
trade taking place between different nations of the world. For example, a
country like Japan may trade its electronics with Germany for German made cars.
If the value of the trades being made by both the countries is equal at that
point of time, then their trade accounts would be balanced. i.e. the exports
would be exactly equal to imports in both the countries. Fluctuations in
Output. In macroeconomics, the question of why national output fluctuates is a
very critical one. And though no one answer has been come up with, there are
some factors which economists agree on which makes output go up and down. If we
take growth into consideration, then most economists will agree that there are
three basic sources for economic growth i.e. increases in labour, increase in
capital and increase in efficiency of the factors of production. Just like
increases in inputs of factors of production can cause output to go up, just
like that, anything that causes labour, capital or efficiency to go down will
cause a decline in output or at least a decline in its rate of growth.
