Pacific Environment Pacific Environment is an environmental organization based
in San Francisco, California, USA founded in 1987. Its objective is to protect
the living environment of the Pacific Rim. Mission statement. 1. Support Local
Environmental Struggles: Over one-third of Pacific Environmentâ€™s budget is
dedicated to funding grassroots organizations on the front-lines of the
environmental movement. 2. Hold Banks and Corporations Accountable: Pacific
Environment confronts tax-payer funded banks that back oil, gas, mining and
timber extraction and the companies that profit from these often
environmentally devastating projects. 3. Promote Best Practices: Pacific
Environment supports and encourages sustainable fishing, renewable energy and
other initiatives that put environmental protection and communities first. 4.
Build a Global Movement: By forging coalitions and partnerships with
environmentalists and other community members around the Pacific Rim, Pacific
Environment is building a united movement to deal with the global threats we
face. History. The organization was founded 1987 as Pacific Energy and
Resources Center. In 1991, Pacific Environment became the first international
organization to bring widespread attention to the threats facing the Siberian
taiga, beginning a long history of work in Russia. In 1993, a Pacific
Environment campaign with Russian partners led to the creation of the Botchi
Nature Reserve, protecting valuable forests in the Russian Far East that were
to be logged by Weyerhaeuser Corporation. That same year, Pacific Environment
worked with the Udege people in the Russian Far East to protect the 3-million-
acre (12,000Â kmÂ²) upper Bikin Watershed against logging by the Hyundai
Corporation. This area is now a wildlife refuge. By the mid-1990s, they began
to focus on the linchpin financial role international institutions were playing
in resource extraction in Russia and initiated a long-term effort to link
grassroots environmentalists around the Pacific Rim to international policy
decisions, particularly those of government-supported Export Credit Agencies.
Pacific Environment pioneered efforts to block the financing of destructive
projects and improve others as one of the founding members of an international
campaign to reform the social and environmental policies of Export Credit
Agencies, known as ECA Watch. While Pacific Environment's biggest successes in
the 1990s were in Russia, they also began to focus more broadly on the Pacific
Rim. In China, Pacific Environment took advantage of the growing opportunities
to partner with that country's emerging environmental movement by helping
dozens of local groups become more effective watchdogs of local government,
especially through the media. They also assisted these groups in encouraging
the Chinese government to review environmental impacts. Pacific Environment's
partners at Greener Beijing utilized the internet to organize a campaign
against consumption of turtle and tortoise species in Hainan Province. After a
government investigation prompted in part by the campaign, the Hainan Yang
Sheng Tan Company halted its import of turtle and tortoise species after
financial losses and public pressure. And in 2004, Chinese Premiere Wen Jiabao
ordered officials to reconsider plans for a dam along the Nu River after
journalists and environmentalists teamed up to spotlight the issue.
Organisation. Pacific Environment employs 16 employees located throughout the
Pacific Rim with offices in San Francisco, California; Anchorage, Alaska;
Washington DC; Vladivostok, Russia; and Beijing, China. The reported operating
budget from the 2005-2006 fiscal year was $1.2 Million, with the majority of
that coming from foundations. Pacific Environment splits its activities between
five main programs the Russia Program, China Program, Alaska Program,
California Energy Program and Responsible Finance Program Programs. Pacific
Environment takes on specific challenges in key geographic areas throughout the
Pacific Rim, and employs key international leverage points to bolster local
campaigns. They engage in five major areas of focus outlined below. Russia. For
the past 20 years, Pacific Environment has partnered with Russian
environmentalists to ensure the peoples in these regions have a voice in
decisions that impact their environment, health and livelihoods. Pacific
Environment works alongside Russian and international nonprofits to protect
wild lands and wildlife, promote responsible fisheries management, and advocate
environmental controls on oil, gas and minerals development. Responsible
Finance. Pacific Environmentâ€™s Responsible Finance Campaign promotes
environmentally and socially sustainable policies and practices among public
and private finance institutions with interests and projects in less wealthy
countries. With a principal focus on the extractive sector (oil, gas, mining,
and forestry) operating on the Pacific Rim, Pacific Environment persuades these
lending institutions to be more open, accountable, and responsive to
citizensâ€™ concerns, particularly in project-affected communities. The
international campaign to reform the policies and practices of public and
private banks has expanded its focus to include multilateral development banks,
export credit agencies, and large private international banks. After a decade
of campaigning, a basic environmental policy framework is now in place for each
of the three classes of institutions. However, proper implementation of these
policies has become a vexing challenge especially in countries like Japan,
where banks are playing an increasingly proactive role in fulfilling national
security goals to obtain extractive and energy resources.
