Paleoliberalism Paleoliberalism is a term that has at least a few distinct
meanings, all relating to liberalism. Generally, it is used as a somewhat
obscure term for extreme liberalism. The adjectival form, "paleoliberal" is
defined by "The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language", Fourth
Edition, as "Extremely or stubbornly liberal in political matters." but because
the term "liberalism" itself has several different meanings, this definition
carries some ambiguity. A paleoliberal believes in moderate government
intervention on personal matters and economic matters. They tend to be opposed
to war, police powers and victimless crimes. They believe in a social safety
net, but to a lesser extent than more left wing politics. They generally
believe in protecting personal liberty, both through individualism and state
protection. They support self-ownership and privacy. Some Paleo-liberals may
lean towards embracing capitalism as an economic system. The term is often used
to refer to an extreme or "unreconstructed" exponent of modern American
liberalism. For example, Brian Doherty writing in "Reason" in 1997 used the
term to refer to Richard Gephardt in his opposition to Clinton's free trade
policies. It can also be used to describe liberals who are more socialist or
social libertarian in political outlook, and liberals who are opposed to
neoliberalism. paleoliberals and neoliberals are opposed to each other on many
economic, social and political issues. According to Michael Lind, in the late
1960s and early 1970s many "anti-Soviet and social democrats in the tradition
of Truman, Kennedy, Johnson, Humphrey and Henry ("Scoop") Jackson… preferred
to call themselves 'paleoliberals'"; according to Lind, roughly this group of
people later became known as the neoconservatives. The term was used by
Alexander Rüstow, to describe ardent laissez-faire liberals like Ludwig von
Mises and Friedrich Hayek. Rüstow himself was a German ordoliberal.
