Parable of the broken window The parable of the broken window was introduced by
FrÃ©dÃ©ric Bastiat in his 1850 essay ' (') to illustrate why destruction, and
the money spent to recover from destruction, is actually not a net-benefit to
society. The parable, also known as the broken window fallacy or glazier's
fallacy, demonstrates how opportunity costs, as well as the law of unintended
consequences, affect economic activity in ways that are "unseen" or ignored.
Differing interpretations. The implications of the fallacy can also be extended
to the glazier. The onlookers assume that this needed window will have a
positive effect for the glazier, but in order for this to be true, the glazier
must currently have time and supplies available for use. If the glazier has
other jobs which demand his time and supplies, this additional job now
represents a negative constraint for the glazier in that he may not be able to
complete his other jobs on time. In this case, the broken window (and the boy
who broke it) did not provide any net benefit to the town, but rather made the
town poorer in future benefits by (at least) the value of one window. Bastiat's
argument. Austrian theorists, and Bastiat himself, apply the parable of the
broken window in a different way. Suppose it was discovered that the little boy
was actually hired by the glazier, and paid a franc for every window he broke.
Suddenly the same act would be regarded as theft: the glazier was breaking
windows in order to force people to hire his services. Yet the facts observed
by the onlookers remain true: the glazier benefits from the business at the
expense of the baker, the tailor, and so on. Bastiat is not addressing
productionÂ â€” he is addressing the stock of wealth. In other words, Bastiat
does not merely look at the immediate but at the longer effects of breaking the
window. Moreover, Bastiat does not only take into account the consequences of
breaking the window for one group but for all groups, for society as a whole.
Theorists of the Austrian School frequently cite this fallacy and claim that it
is a common element of popular thinking (e.g., the "Cash for Clunkers" program,
etc.). The 20th century American economist Henry Hazlitt devoted a chapter to
it in his book "Economics in One Lesson". The opportunity cost of war. The
argument can be made that war is a benefactor, since historically it often has
focused the use of resources and triggered advances in technology and other
areas while reducing unemployment. The increased production and employment
associated with war often leads some to claim that "war is good for the
economy." However, this belief is often given as an example of the broken
window fallacy. The money spent on the war effort, for example, is money that
cannot be spent on food, clothing, health care, consumer electronics or other
areas. The stimulus felt in one sector of the economy comes at a directâ€”but
hiddenâ€”cost to other sectors. In addition, war destroys property and lives.
The economic stimulus to one nation's defense sector is offset not only by
immediate opportunity costs, but also by the costs of the damage and
devastation of war to the country it attacks. This forms the basis of a second
application of the broken window fallacy: rebuilding what war destroys
stimulates the economy, particularly the construction sector. However, immense
resources are spent merely to restore pre-war conditions. After a war, there is
only a rebuilt city. Without a war, there are opportunities for the same
resources to be applied to more fruitful purposes. Instead of rebuilding a
destroyed city, the resources could have been used to improve and enlarge the
city or build a second one. One example of the costs of war sometimes given is
the many projects postponed or not started until after the end of World War II
in the United States. The pent-up demand for roads, bridges, houses, cars, and
even radios led to massive inflation in the late 1940s. The war delayed the
commercial introduction of television, among other things, and the resources
sent overseas to rebuild the rest of the world after the war were not available
to the American people for their direct benefit; neither did the war enrich any
of these other nations. According to Hazlitt: The cost of special interests and
government. Bastiat, Hazlitt, and others equated the glazier with special
interests, and the little boy with government. Special interests request money
from the government (in the form of subsidies, grants, etc.), and the
government then forces the taxpayer to provide the funds. The recipients
certainly do benefit, so the government action is often regarded by the people
as benefiting everyone. But the people are failing to consider the hidden
costs: the taxpayers are now poorer by exactly that much money. The food,
clothing or other items they might have purchased with that money will now not
be purchasedâ€”but since there is no way to count "non-purchases," this is a
hidden cost, sometimes called opportunity cost. Bastiat referred to this in his
essay as "what is not seen". Because the costs are hidden, there is an illusion
that the benefits cost nothing. Hazlitt summarized the principle by saying,
"Everything we get, outside the free gifts of nature, must in some way be paid
for." Robert A. Heinlein popularized a summarization/acronym of the concept
called "TANSTAAFL" ("There Ain't No Such Thing As A Free Lunch"). With all of
these examples, care must be taken that every factor is taken into account,
just as happened in the parable of the broken window: does one know all the
costs and benefits? E.g. hiring people to do nothing or to break things and
repair them is probably a bad idea. This is the case in the military spending
and government employment examples. But if the hired people or the spent money
actually result in useful work (however, the term "useful work" is a fallacy in
itselfÂ â€” it is not the work that is useful but only the product or result
produced by the work), things are less clear. It depends on the amount of
useful work delivered compared to the amount of money spent if the spending was
a good idea. This is the case in the cash for clunkers, the public works, and
the renewable energy examples. This analysis is only necessary, however, when
the accomplished result has a future benefit beyond the simple fact of
delivering work. As Bastiat shows, the simple accomplishment of useful work can
never make such projects a net positive; the glazier also performed useful
work. But if a project improves the efficiency of future work, there can be a
net benefit. For example, a public works program to build roads creates no
wealth simply by virtue of building the road. But in the future, that road may
increase trade by improving the efficiency of moving goods and reducing future
costs. In such a case, the road may be a net benefitÂ â€” it is an investment,
rather than destruction followed by redistribution. The point of the broken
window parable is to show that one cannot ignore the hidden costs of taking
wealth to build the road when totalling up any such "net benefit." Criticisms.
The interpretations assume that the "window" has positive value and . In the
broader scope, offsetting factors can reduce or even negate the cost of
destruction. For example, new technologies developed during a war and forced
modernization during postwar reconstruction can cause old technologies to
become valueless. Also, if two shopkeepers keep their "window" beyond the point
where it would maximize their profit, the shopkeeper whose window is broken is
forced to make a good investment - increasing his comparative profit, or
rather, reducing his comparative loss. Regardless, while wanton destruction of
real value may not be a net loss, it is of course still a misfortune, not a
blessing. Others argue that the broken window may not lead to reduction in
spending by the victim, but rather, a reduction in excessive savings. "The
logic of limited resources only applies when the economy is using most of those
limited resources. If there are slack resources, we need merely mobilize some
of the slack resources." The "reductio ad absurdum" of breaking 100 windows,
then, only applies once underutilised resources have run out, and the tailor is
forced to divert resources from more productive means. Another problem with
this being a "fallacy" is that the positive and negative results depend on the
financial condition and disposition of the victim. At the low end, the victim
simply can't afford to replace the window, or refuses to do so, resulting in
almost no economic effect. In the medium range, it is a fallacy and the
standard argument above applies. However, , especially if too much capital is
trapped in high end savings and investment, because the funds used to replace
the window will not change the victim's spending habits, but will simply be a
minor reduction of his long term savings or investments, or that of his
insurer. It has been argued that the 'parable', while intuitive, does not
correspond to actual evidence. For instance, researchers have found that
natural disasters can often lead to improved growth in both the short and long
term. Defenses. Bastiat and Austrian theorists hold to a subjective theory of
value, which holds that the value of a product is determined by its consumer or
owner. Therefore, if the window had a negative value, it is because the owner
already wishes it broken. If the proverbial window were old, and the newer
proverbial window had a greater value (determined by the shopkeeper's own
valuation), then the net increase in value in the economy is the difference
between the value of the old and new window. Bastiat and Austrian economists
also believe that depreciation and other losses in the value of goods reduces
the net value in the economy by the amount of the reduction in value of the
goods. The very concept of excess savings is meaningless without the
presumption of an authority which can define the proper amount of savings.
Money saved represents demand for money which is a commodity like windows or
suits. The result of spending saved money is to lower the demand for money
relative to suits or glass and therefore contributes to general price inflation
(or loss of purchasing power). Such an authority would suggest that by
controlling prices (forcing the exchange of savings for consumer goods), that
the economy could be better off. This concept when enforced by governments is
known as price controls and results in shortages when prices are artificially
reduced below market value. A shortage of savings results in a reduction of
capital investment as more resources are diverted from future needs to present
needs. The shop owner was saving so that he could grow his business, but an
outside authority has determined that his savings were 'excess' and that by
breaking his window the economy will be better off. Without free exchange there
would be no prices, and without prices there can be no economic calculation,
and without proper economic calculation there is no means to determine whether
or not a particular action will be 'profitable'. Therefore any authority that
suggests that there might be an 'excess of savings' presumes the ability to
make economic calculations without prices established by free exchange. This
was shown to be impossible in Economic Calculation In The Socialist
Commonwealth by Ludwig von Mises. If there was more profit to be made by
destroying buildings, windows or leveling an entire community due to a natural
disaster then pursuing other courses of action then participants in the market
would pro-actively and voluntarially destroy property. It is quite clear that
far more profit can be earned by recycling, selling, or repurposing an old
window pane than could be achieved via random destruction by vandal or nature.
Therefore, arguments that propose that destruction 'might' be good for the
economy have to presume that actors in the economy were missing an opportunity
to profit in excess of the value of the goods destroyed. The probability of
random destruction being good for the economy is equal to the probability of
random destruction being bad for the economy as both are equal to the
probability that free exchange has not achieved the best allocation of
resources.
