Parochialism Parochialism means being provincial, being narrow in scope, or
considering only small sections of an issue. It may, particularly when used
pejoratively, be contrasted to universalism. The term originates from the idea
of a parish ( Latin: parochia), one of the smaller divisions within many
Christian churches such as the Roman Catholic and Anglican churches. Parish
organization. Events, groups and decisions within a parish are based "locally"
â€” sometimes taking little heed of what is going on in the wider Church. A
parish can sometimes be excessively focused on the local scale (thus within a
particular point of view), by having (too) little contact with the broader
outside, showing meager interest for and possibly knowledge about the universal
scale. Subsidiarity. Subsidiarity is an organizing principle that matters ought
to be handled by the smallest, lowest or least centralized competent authority.
The Oxford English Dictionary defines subsidiarity as the idea that a central
authority should have a subsidiary function, performing only those tasks which
cannot be performed effectively at a more immediate or local level.
Terminology. The term "parochial" can be applied in both culture and economics
if a local culture or geographic area's government makes decisions based on
solely local interests that do not take into account the effect of the decision
on the broader community. The term may also be applied to decisions and events
that are considered to be trivial in the grand scheme of things but that may be
over-emphasized in a smaller community, such as disputes between neighbors.
Parochialism in politics. Parochialism can be found around the world and has
sometimes been acknowledged by local institutions. For example in a change of
curriculum on February 7, 2007, Harvard University said that one of the main
purposes of the major curriculum overhaul (the first in three decades) was to
overcome American "parochialisms", referring in this case to a national point
of view rather than one concerned with any particular small community. The
political principle of localism is that which supports local production and
consumption of goods, local control of government, and local culture and
identity. Localist politics have been approached from many directions by
different groups. Nevertheless, localism can generally be described as related
to regionalism, and in opposition to centralism. In pejorative use, the term
Parish pump politics is used to describe political activity that is more
evidently concerned with addressing the immediate needs of the local electorate
than with strategy that might affect their long-term well-being.
