Passive obedience Passive obedience is a religious and political doctrine
advocating the absolute supremacy of the Crown and the treatment of any dissent
(or more precisely, disobedience) as sinful and unlawful. It was usually
associated with the seventeenth-century Church of England and the Scottish
Episcopal Church of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and was central
to the ideology of the Tory Party and the Jacobites. It is most generally seen
in reference to Tory opposition to the Glorious Revolution, which saw
Parliamentary determination of the succession of the English crown against
primogeniture and the wishes of James II. The most notable publication was
Bishop George Berkeley's "A Discourse on Passive Obedience" on Christian
Doctrine of not resisting the Supreme Power. The Scottish theologian John
Cameron's support for passive obedience at the start of the 17th century meant
that he was principal of the University of Glasgow for less than a year. In
Calvinism, salvation depends on Christ's active obedience, obeying the laws and
commands of God the Father, and passive obedience, enduring the punishment of
the crucifixion suffering all the just penalties due to men for their sins. The
two are seen as distinct but inseparable; passive obedience on its own only
takes men back to the state of Adam before the Fall. Passive obedience appears
twice in Victor Hugo's "Les Miserables", first as a scene heading "The Heroism
of Passive Obedience" when the bishop entertains Valjean, and later in the text
on the impact of armies when describing French intervention in Spain in 1823.
It is not to be confused with passive resistance, a doctrine advocating the
refusal to follow a law combined with the willing acceptance of punishment for
that refusal.
