Risk compensation Risk compensation (also Peltzman effect, risk homeostasis) is
an observed effect in ethology whereby people tend to adjust their behavior in
response to perceived level of risk, behaving less cautiously where they feel
more protected and more cautiously where they feel a higher level of risk. The
theory emerged out of road safety research after it was observed that many
interventions failed to achieve the expected level of benefits but has since
found application in many other fields. Notable examples include observations
of increased levels of risky behaviour by road users following the introduction
of compulsory seatbelts and bicycle helmet and motorists driving faster and
following more closely behind the vehicle in front following the introduction
of antilock brakes. It has also been suggested that free condom distribution
programs often fails to reduce HIV prevalence as predicted due to an increase
in risky sexual behavior and that "the safer skydiving gear becomes, the more
chances skydivers will take, in order to keep the fatality rate constant". This
balancing behaviour does not mean an intervention does not work and the effect
may be less than, equal to, or greater than the true efficacy of the
intervention. It is likely to be least when an intervention is imperceptible
and greatest when an intervention is intrusive or conspicuous. Shared space is
a relatively new approach to the design of roads where the level of uncertainty
for drivers and other road users is deliberately increased by removing
traditional demarcations between vehicle traffic such as railings and traffic
signals, and has been observed to result in lower vehicle speeds and fewer road
casualties. In Sweden, following the change from driving on the left to driving
on the right there was a 40% drop in crashes, which was linked to the increased
apparent risk. The crash rate returned to its former level after people became
familiar with the new arrangement. Moral hazard is a related effect where a
decision-maker benefits from the positive effects of a decision, with others
suffering the related negative effects. Examples. Road transport. Anti-lock
brakes. There are at least three studies which show that drivers' response to
antilock brakes is to drive faster, follow closer and brake later, accounting
for the failure of ABS to result in any measurable improvement in road safety.
The studies were performed in Canada, Denmark and Germany. A study led by Fred
Mannering, a professor of civil engineering at Purdue University supports risk
compensation, terming it the "offset hypothesis". Bicycle helmets. The issue of
risk compensation has been a central topic in the heated debate concerning the
effectiveness of Bicycle helmet legislation. A study from March 2007, first
published in "Accident Analysis & Prevention" as reported in Scientific
American reported that drivers drove an average of 8.5 cm closer, and came
within 1 meter 23% more often, when a cyclist was wearing a helmet. Statements
made in the report included: "The closer a driver is to the cyclist, the
greater chance of a collision", "Drivers passed closer to the rider the further
out into the road he was", and "The bicyclistâ€™s apparel affects the amount of
clearance the overtaking motorist gives the bicyclist". This research thus
implies risk compensation, not among cyclists but among fellow road users. Seat
belts. A 2007 study based on data from the Fatality Analysis Reporting System
(FARS) of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration concluded that
between 1985 and 2002 there were "significant reductions in fatality rates for
occupants and motorcyclists after the implementation of belt use laws", and
that "seatbelt use rate is significantly related to lower fatality rates for
the total, pedestrian, and all non-occupant models even when controlling for
the presence of other state traffic safety policies and a variety of
demographic factors." In 1994 research of people both wore and habitually
didn't wear seatbelts had concluded that drivers were found to drive faster and
less carefully when belted. Earlier research carried out by John Adams in 1981
had suggested that there was no correlation between the passing of seat belt
legislation and the total reductions in injuries or fatalities based on
comparisons between states with and without seat belt laws. He also suggested
that some injuries were being displaced from car drivers to pedestrians and
other road users. This paper was published at a time when Britain was
considering a seat belt law, so the Department of Transport commissioned a
report into the issue in which the author, Isles, agreed with Adams'
conclusions. The Isles Report was never published officially but a copy was
leaked to the Press some years later. The law was duly passed and subsequent
investigation showed some reduction in fatalities, the cause of which could not
be conclusively stated, due to the simultaneous introduction of evidential
breath testing. Shared space. Shared space is an urban design approach which
seeks to minimise demarcations between vehicle traffic and pedestrians, often
by removing features such as curbs, road surface markings, traffic signs and
regulations. Typically used on narrower streets within the urban core and as
part of living streets within residential areas, the approach has also be
applied to busier roads, including Exhibition Road in Kensington, London.
Schemes are often motivated by a desire to reduce the dominance of vehicles,
vehicle speeds and road casualty rates. First proposed in 1991, the term is now
strongly associated to the work of Hans Monderman who suggested that by
creating a greater sense of uncertainty and making it unclear who had right of
way, drivers reduce their speed, and everyone reduces their level of risk
compensation. The approach is frequently opposed by organisations representing
the interests of blind, partially sighted and deaf who often express a strong
preference for the clear separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Speed
limits. There is strong evidence that reducing speed limits normally reduces
crash, injury and fatality rates, for example, a 2003 review of changes to
speed limits in a number of jurisdictions showed that in most cases where speed
limits had been decreased that the number of crashes and fatalities had
decreased and that where speed limits had been increased the number of crashes
and fatalities had increased. A 1994 study by Jeremy Jackson and Roger Blackman
using a driving simulator, reported that increased speed limits and a reduction
of speeding fines had significantly increased driving speed but resulted in no
change in the accident frequency. It also showed that increased accident cost
caused large and significant reductions in accident frequency but no change in
speed choice. The abstract states that the results suggest that regulation of
specific risky behaviors such as speed choice may have little influence on
accident rates. Sport. Ski helmets. In relation to the use of Ski helmets, Dr.
Jasper Shealy, a professor from Rochester Institute of Technology who has been
studying skiing and snowboarding injuries for more than 30 years said "There is
no evidence they reduce fatalities,", and that "We are up to 40 percent usage
but there has been no change in fatalities in a 10-year period." There is
evidence that helmeted skiers tend to go faster. Skydiving. Booth's rule #2,
coined by skydiving pioneer Bill Booth, states that "The safer skydiving gear
becomes, the more chances skydivers will take, in order to keep the fatality
rate constant". Even though skydiving equipment has made huge leaps forward in
terms of reliability in the past two decades, and safety devices such as AADs
have been introduced, the fatality rate has stayed roughly constant since the
early 1980s. This can largely be attributed to an increase in the popularity of
high performance canopies, which fly much faster than traditional parachutes.
High speed manoeuvres close to the ground have increased the number of landing
fatalities in recent years, even though these jumpers have perfectly
functioning parachutes over their heads. Safety equipment in children.
Experimental studies have suggested that children who wear protective equipment
are likely to take more risks. Health. Risky sexual behavior and HIV/AIDS.
Evidence on risk compensation associated with HIV prevention interventions is
mixed. Harvard researcher Edward C. Green argued that the risk compensation
phenomenon could explain the failure of condom distribution programs to reverse
HIV prevalence, providing a detailed explanations of his views in an op-ed
article for "The Washington Post" and an extended interview with the BBC. A
2007 article in the Lancet suggested that "condoms seem to foster
disinhibition, in which people engage in risky sex either with condoms or with
the intention of using condoms". Another report compared risk behaviour of men
based on whether they were circumcised. Peltzman effect. The Peltzman effect is
the hypothesized tendency of people to react to a safety regulation by
increasing other risky behavior, offsetting some or all of the benefit of the
regulation. It is named after Sam Peltzman, a professor of Economics at the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business. When the offsetting risky
behavior encouraged by the safety regulation has negative externalities, the
Peltzman effect can result in redistributing risk to innocent bystanders who
would behave in a risk-averse manner even without the regulation. For example,
if some risk-tolerant drivers who would not otherwise wear a seat belt respond
to a seat belt law by driving less safely, there would be more total
collisions. Overall injuries and fatalities may still decrease due to greater
seat belt use, but drivers who would wear seat belts regardless would see their
overall risk increase. Similarly, safety regulations for automobiles may put
pedestrians or bicyclists in more danger by encouraging risky behavior in
drivers without offering additional protection for pedestrians and cyclists.
The Peltzman effect has been used to explain Smeed's Law, an empirical claim
that traffic fatality rates increase with the number of vehicle registrations
per capita, and differing safety standards have no effect. Recent empirical
studies have rejected Smeed's Law, which is inconsistent with the observation
of declining fatality rates in many countries, along with the associated theory
of risk homeostasis. [http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1539-
6924.1986.tb00196.x/abstract]. Roy Baumeister has suggested that the use of
helmets in football and gloves in boxing lead to examples of the Peltzman
effect. This effect is referenced in the 9th season episode, "Woulda, Coulda,
Shoulda": "The safer they make the cars, the more risks the driver is willing
to take. It's called the Peltzman effect." Risk homeostasis. Professor Gerald
J. S. Wilde, a professor emeritus of psychology at Queen's University,
Kingston, Ontario, Canada noted that when Sweden changed from driving on the
left to driving on the right in 1967, this was followed by a marked reduction
in the traffic fatality rate for 18 months after which the trend returned to
its previous values. It was suggested that drivers had responded to increased
perceived danger by taking more care, only to revert to previous habits as they
became accustomed to the new regime. This hypothesis is elucidated in Wilde's
book. The hypothesis of risk homeostasis holds that everyone has his or her own
fixed level of acceptable risk. When the level of risk in one part of the
individual's life changes, there will be a corresponding rise or fall in risk
elsewhere to bring the overall risk back to that individual's equilibrium.
Wilde argues that the same is true of larger human systems, e.g. a population
of drivers. For example, in a Munich study, part of a fleet of taxicabs were
equipped with anti-lock brakes (ABS), while the remainder had conventional
brake systems. In other respects, the two types of cars were identical. The
crash rates, studied over 3 years, were a little higher for the cabs with ABS,
and Wilde concluded that drivers of ABS-equipped cabs took more risks, assuming
that ABS would take care of them; non-ABS drivers were said to drive more
carefully since the could not rely on ABS in a dangerous situation. There is
much more to this study as shown in following reference: Likewise, it has been
found that drivers behave less carefully around bicyclists wearing helmets than
around unhelmeted riders. The idea of risk homeostasis has garnered criticism.
Some critics say that risk homeostasis theory is contradicted by car crash
fatality rates. These rates have fallen after the introduction of seat belt
laws.
