Peninsula Peace and Justice Center The Peninsula Peace and Justice Center is an
activist organization in the San Francisco region. History. The center was
originally known as the Palo Alto Peace Center, and was founded in the mid-
1960s by Barbara Jo Wenger, Connie Yu and Helen Keating. The center was located
on Hamilton Avenue and Cowper Street. It was the headquarters of The Grapevine,
an underground newsletter that was critical of the Vietnam War and President
Richard Nixon. Members of the Peace Union were actively involved with
demonstrating against the war. The Peace Union was raided by the Federal Bureau
of Investigation twice in 1971. In 1982, the center was renamed the Mid-
Peninsula Peace Center, and a final name change to Peninsula Peace and Justice
Center in the early 1990s reflected the organization's commitment to a broad
program that addresses the interconnectedness of the many issues and problems
facing our world. Current Mission. The Peninsula Peace and Justice Center
(PPJC) is dedicated to building coalitions among progressive organizations to
make all of its work more effective. The organization's efforts have led to the
formation of broad-based coalitions fighting against U.S. military
intervention, corporate globalization, the death penalty and many other issues.
PPJC is also committed to involving individuals in the struggle for a just and
humane world, using the power of democracy and taking to heart the premise that
in a democracy, the people should lead. Recent Activities. When it comes to
Iraq anti-war efforts, no organization has been more active than Peninsula
Peace and Justice Center. PPJC has held teach-ins and forums, met with
Congress, organized vigils and protest rallies, and sent speakers to numerous
organizations, churches and schoolsâ€”beginning before the war and continuing
through the disastrous occupation. PPJC's work to change the tragic U.S. policy
on Iraq goes back over 12 years. We played a central role in the protests
against Gulf War I and were early and consistent leaders in the national
struggle to end the brutal sanctions. As well as opposing the war in Iraq, we
are continually working to end U.S. military support for oppressive regimes in
Israel, Haiti, and all over the world. PPJC has made repeal of the so-called
PATRIOT Act a top priority, and helped pass a City Council resolution against
this assault on our civil liberties. We also helped pass a resolution by the
county Board of Supervisors endorsing a moratorium on the death penalty, as
part of a statewide effort. PPJC was part of a coalition whose demonstrations,
community outreach and meetings with our local Representative helped convince
her to vote against the potentially disastrous Central America Free Trade
Agreement. PPJC has sponsored numerous speakers and films educating the local
community about the true impacts of economic globalization. References. Heyser,
Holly A. "Peace center runs out of gas because of financial and membership
problems, the Palo Alto office will close December 15." San Jose Mercury News,
December 1, 1995.
