Petticoat affair The Petticoat affair (also known as the Eaton affair or the
Eaton malaria) was an 1830â€“1831 U.S. scandal involving members of President
Andrew Jackson's Cabinet and their wives. Although it started over a private
matter, it affected the political careers of several men and resulted in the
informal "Kitchen Cabinet". The 1936 film "The Gorgeous Hussy" is based on the
affair. Background. Margaret "Peggy" O'Neale (or O'Neill) was the daughter of
William O'Neale, who owned a Washington, D.C. boarding-house called the
Franklin House, a social center for many politicians. Margaret was well-
educated; she studied French, among other subjects, and was known for her
ability to play the piano. She was also renowned for having a "vivacious"
temperament. In 1816, Margaret married her first husband John B. Timberlake, a
purser in the United States Navy. She was 17, and he was 39. Timberlake had
been heavily in debt for years. They had three children together, with one
dying in infancy. The Timberlake couple had been friends with Senator John
Henry Eaton since 1818, when Eaton was a 28-year-old widower and newly-elected
U.S. Senator. After Timberlake told Eaton about their financial problems, Eaton
unsuccessfully attempted to get the Senate to pass a petition to pay
Timberlake's debts accrued while in the Navy. While away on a four-year sea
voyage on the USS "Constitution", Timberlake died of pulmonary disease in 1828,
although there were allegations he committed suicide. Scandal. With the
encouragement of President Andrew Jackson, who liked them both, Peggy
Timberlake and Eaton married shortly after her husband's death, although
according to the social morals of the day, it would have been more proper for
them to wait for a longer mourning period. Their actions scandalized
respectable people of the capital, especially many women. Second Lady Floride
Calhoun, the wife of Vice President John C. Calhoun, led a phalanx of other
Cabinet wives in an "anti-Peggy" coalition. Martin Van Buren, a widower and the
only unmarried member of the Cabinet, allied himself with the Eatons. Jackson
was sympathetic to the Eatons, in part, perhaps, because his own beloved late
wife, Rachel Donelson Robards, had been the subject of innuendo, as it was
revealed that her first marriage had not yet been legally ended at the time of
her wedding to Jackson. Jackson believed such rumors were the cause of Rachel's
heart attack and death on December 22, 1828, several weeks after his election.
Even Rachel's niece Emily Donelson, whom Jackson called on as his surrogate
"First Lady", sided with the Calhoun faction. Jackson appointed Eaton as his
Secretary of War, hoping to limit the rumors, but the scandal intensified.
Jackson felt political opponents, especially those around Calhoun, were feeding
the controversy. The controversy finally resulted in the resignation of almost
all members of the Cabinet over a period of weeks in the spring of 1831.
Postmaster General William T. Barry would be the lone member to stay.
Aftermath. Although Emily Donelson had supported Floride Calhoun, Jackson kept
his niece as his official hostess. John Calhoun and his wife returned to South
Carolina. In 1832, he won a seat in the U.S. Senate. He advocated states'
rights, slavery, and economic issues affecting the South, eventually including
secession from the Union.
