Pieing Pieing is the act of throwing a pie at a person or persons. This can be
a political action when the target is an authority figure, politician, or
celebrity and can be used as a means of protesting against the target's
political beliefs, or against perceived arrogance or vanity. Perpetrators
generally regard the act as a form of ridicule to embarrass and humiliate the
victim. In some U.S. states pieing may conform to definitions of the crime of
battery, but not assault. Pieing and pie fights are a staple of slapstick
comedy, and pie "tosses" are also common charity fundraising events, especially
in schools. Slapstick. Pieing has its origins in the "pie in the face" gag from
slapstick comedy, first seen in the 1909 Essanay Studios silent film "Mr. Flip"
starring Ben Turpin. In the story, Turpin has a pie pushed into his face for
taking liberties with a woman. Beginning in 1913 with "That Ragtime Band" and
"A Noise from the Deep", filmmaker Mack Sennett became known for using one or
two thrown pies in many of his comedy shorts. Sennett had a personal rule about
who received the pies: "A mother never gets hit with a custard pie¬ ...
Mothers-in-law, yes. But mothers? Never." At least a half dozen films have been
made incorporating extended pie-throwing battles. The first was Charlie
Chaplin's "Behind the Screen" released in 1916. The definitive pie fight film
is "The Battle of the Century" (1927) starring Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy,
using 3,000 pies. Our Gang's "Shivering Shakespeare" (1930) winds up with an
auditorium full of people throwing pies. The 1935 short subject called
"Keystone Hotel" featured a large pie fight ending with the camera taking a
pie. In 1941, another major pie fight film appeared: The Three Stooges' "In the
Sweet Pie and Pie". A Technicolor film involving pies was the 1965 comedy, "The
Great Race"; known for having the largest pie fight in cinematic history. Its
$200,000 pie fight scene used one large cake and 4,000 pies, and took five days
to shoot. There are many instances in the Looney Tunes series of cartoons where
characters "pie" each other in the face. Bugs Bunny repeatedly hits Elmer Fudd
with cream pies during a scene in "Slick Hare". In "Shishkabugs", Bugs Bunny
releases a spring-loaded pie into the face of the king, causing the royal cook
Yosemite Sam to be led away to a dungeon. The episode "Daffy Dilly" has Daffy
Duck trying to cure a dying millionaire by getting him to laugh. After he
achieves this inadvertently, by landing in a cake, Daffy is hired as a sort of
household jester and ends the cartoon by getting repeatedly pelted with cakes
and pies. In one of the Batman comic books, The Joker once concocted an
elaborate scheme whose sole purpose was to hit Batman in the face with a pie.
Many comedy routines have used a pie as a gag, including ones performed by
Soupy Sales and Monty Python. Celebrities who have been pied. Alison Sweeney
was pied on the show "Days of Our Lives". Brett Favre was pied at the 1999 Fox
Kids Bowl along with Jerome Bettis. Jeremy Clarkson was pied in 2005 shortly
before he was due to receive an honorary degree from Oxford Brookes University.
Chip Ganassi Racing driver Dan Wheldon threw a pie at teammate Scott Dixon in
celebrating the 2008 Izod IndyCar Series Championship. Political acts. The
probable originator of pieing as a political act was Thomas King Forcade, the
founder of "High Times" magazine. In 1970, Forcade pied Otto N. Larsen, the
Chairman of the President's Commission on Obscenity and Pornography; his action
was called the first Yippie pieing. Aron Kay, also a Yippie, went on to take up
Forcade's pieing tactics. Kay pied, among many others, William F. Buckley,
Phyllis Schlafly, G. Gordon Liddy, E. Howard Hunt, and Andy Warhol. A disciple
of Aron Kay, Thom Higgins, pied singer and anti-gay rights activist Anita
Bryant in Des Moines, Iowa, in 1977 (audio footage of the incident is included
in the Chumbawamba song "Just Desserts", a homage to the concept of pieing).
Kay retired in 1992 after pieing right-wing activist Randall Terry. Kay appears
in cartoon form in a 2003 animated music video, "Death penalty for pot" by
Benedict Arnold and The Traitors, where he and Dana Beal pie George W. Bush and
former U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft (at 2 minutes and 33 seconds into
the video). Concerning Kay, an article in the "San Francisco Examiner" says:
"He considers the Three Stooges, whom he began watching on TV as a kid, as the
true fathers of pie-throwing." Recently, the Belgian anarchist and surrealist
No√´l Godin has gained a following for pieing figures whom he believes take
themselves too seriously, such as filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard during the Cannes
Film Festival. His favorite target was Bernard-Henri L√©vy. Godin stated that
the men he most desired to pie were Bill Clinton, Tony Blair, John Travolta,
Tom Cruise and Pope John Paul¬ II. Godin's popularity has inspired many
copycats. A noted victim of pieing was Microsoft founder Bill Gates who was
pied in Belgium in 1998. A computer game was later released in which Gates'
head pops up around the screen and the object is to "pie" as many of his heads
as possible in the allocated time. The anonymous Biotic Baking Brigade has pied
or attempted to pie, among others, conservative pundits Ann Coulter and David
Horowitz; and Fred Phelps, the controversial leader of the Westboro Baptist
Church. Coulter has also been attacked by the "terrorist" group Al Pieda. The
Canadian group the Entartistes, founded by Rhinoceros Party of Canada founder
Fran√ßois Gourd, has also pied many, including then-Prime Minister of Canada
Jean Chr√©tien. In 2003 in the city of Calgary they pied Ralph Klein, the
premier of the Canadian province of Alberta, saying in their press release: "Is
it surprising to see Ralph Klein opposing the Kyoto Accord for the right of big
corporations to pollute, the same corporations that finance his campaigns?"
"The pie gives power back to the people because so many feel powerless in the
face of big politicians and industrialists", explained Pope-Tart (a pseudonym),
a member of the Entartistes. "Newsweek" columnist Gersh Kuntzman wrote that
pieing "deserves to be one of the most celebrated traditions in our so-called
culture." Sometimes pieing targets suffer the prank with good humor. Godard was
very pleased at being pied and said "this is what happens when silent movies
meet talking pictures"; he intervened with the Cannes authorities on behalf of
No√´l Godin to prevent him from being arrested. Anti-gay campaigner Anita
Bryant, upon being pied by a gay activist on television, joked that "at least
it's a "fruit" pie", apparently making a pun on the derogatory term for a gay
man ("fruit"). However, moments later she was in tears. By contrast, Bernard-
Henri L√©vy has on multiple occasions attacked Godin and his followers, and Ann
Coulter pressed charges in 2005 when she narrowly evaded a pie at the
University of Arizona. Activist David Horowitz said of his pieing, "These
attacks are sinister. The person who throws a pie is saying, ‚ÄòI hate you. I
don't want you to speak.' I never saw it coming. And it took away my dignity.
When you're lecturing, you're supposed to have an authority. But a pie turns it
into a food fight." On January 25, 2010, Canada's Fisheries and Oceans Minister
Gail Shea was hit with a pie in her face while touring the Canada Centre for
Inland Waters in Burlington, Ontario, in an act of protest against the seal
hunt in Canada by animal rights group PETA. PETA said in a release that it was
part of its campaign ‚Äúto stop the government‚Äôs ill-advised sanction of the
slaughter of seals.‚Äù On July 19, 2011, Rupert Murdoch was pied in London
during a Parliamentary hearing on the News International phone hacking scandal.
Convicted. Canada. Former Canadian prime minister Jean Chr√©tien was hit in the
face with a pie by a protester in Prince Edward Island in 2000. His attacker
initially was given jail time but eventually received a conditional sentence. A
woman who missed Alberta Premier Ed Stelmach with a pie at the annual Calgary
Stampede breakfast in 2007, and hit a security official instead, was sentenced
to 30 days in jail. So was a woman who threw a pie at Calgary Mayor Dave
Bronconnier in the summer of 2007. In 2003, a protester who hit then-Alberta
premier Ralph Klein in the face with a pie at the Stampede breakfast was
convicted of assault and ordered to serve a 30-day intermittent jail sentence.
U.K. Jonathan May-Bowles pied Rupert Murdoch in July 2011 during a highly
publicized testimony before a British parliamentary committee in connection
with the News International phone hacking scandal. May-Bowles was sentenced to
serve a six-week prison sentence at Wandsworth Prison in London; this sentence
has subsequently been reduced to four weeks. United States. In August 2010, a
Michigan State University student named Ahlam Mohsen, 23, threw a Dutch apple
pie into Michigan Senator Carl Levin's face and was arrested on assault and
battery charges. The police also charged a man who allegedly distracted the
senator before the pie was thrown. Mohsem said she threw the pie to protest the
Senator's support for war crimes by Israel. Sweden. In September 2001, the
Swedish king Carl XVI Gustaf was visiting Varberg when he suddenly got pied by
a 16-year-old boy. Such an attack could possibly have counted as high treason
under Swedish law, which would have warranted a long prison sentence. However,
the perpetrator was merely convicted for assault, as it could not be proven
that his motive was of political character. He was therefore sentenced to no
more than hefty day-fines. Two other boys, who had helped to prepare the attack
by making the cake, were also fined. Charity. At charity fund raisers, a pie-
toss event usually involves some well-known figure, generally a person either
in a position of authority or fame, who is intended as the "victim". People
attending the event pay for or bid on the opportunity to smoosh the volunteer
victim in the face with a custard pie; throwing is generally not allowed
anymore as the impact can cause injury, and the smoosh is usually in slow-
motion and applied without great pressure. Although this takes the element of
chance out of the event, it allows the opportunity to smear pie more thoroughly
in the victim's face and potentially through their hair. This is a popular
fund-raising event with schools and social or charitable organizations.
Students can pie teachers, professors, or other administrators to ease the
tension while still raising money and/or awareness about a cause. The pie in
question can include a variety of messy substances, usually whipped cream,
custard, non-dairy dessert topping or simply shaving foam, placed in a pie tin
or sometimes simply piled onto a paper plate. One additional option is allowing
the person who has purchased or won the opportunity to use the pie to also fill
it, usually with a variety of extremely messy dessert toppings: chocolate,
cherries, caramel sauce, strawberry sauce, etc. Plastic bags for the victim to
protect their clothing and hair are optional. Witnesses standing too close to
the victim(s) may be splattered. Sports. In Major League Baseball, Pittsburgh
Pirates pitcher A. J. Burnett (formerly of the New York Yankees) pies teammates
who drive in or score the winning run in a walk-off win (a game won on a hit by
the last batter). Burnett's "pies" are filled with either shaving cream or
whipped cream. Burnett has pied Alex Rodriguez, Johnny Damon, Melky Cabrera,
Jorge Posada, Hideki Matsui, Nick Swisher, (twice) Robinson Can√≥ (twice),
Francisco Cervelli, Juan Miranda, Mark Teixeira, Jerry Hairston, Jr., Marcus
Thames, and most recently Brett Gardner. Burnett usually pies the player while
he is being interviewed on the field by a TV reporter. The pieing tradition in
baseball has extended beyond game-winning hits to any outstanding performance.
Rookie Stephen Strasburg was pied by teammate John Lannan after his historic
debut when he struck out 14 Pittsburgh batters. Matt Garza of the Tampa Bay
Rays was pied by Evan Longoria after Garza pitched the first no-hitter in Rays
history July 26, 2010. Most recently, Baltimore Orioles rookie Manny Machado
was pied by teammates Robert Andino and Adam Jones after hitting two home runs
(the youngest Oriole ever to do so) in only his second major league game. On
July 26, 2010, the Florida Marlins left fielder Chris Coghlan injured himself
while pieing teammate Wes Helms after Helms's single won the game in the bottom
of the 11th inning. In response, manager Edwin Rodriguez said that there will
be no more such celebratory antics. J.P. Arencibia was pied in the face after
hitting two home runs in his MLB debut against the Rays.
