Pochvennichestvo Pochvennichestvo (roughly "Return to the Soil" from
почва, pochva, the Russian word for soil) was a late 19th century Russian
nativist movement tied in closely with its contemporary ideology, the
Slavophile movement. Both were for the complete emancipation of serfdom, and
both campaigns stressed a strong desire to return to the idealized past of
Russia's history, and both were driven towards anti-Europeanization. In
addition, they also chose a complete rejection of the Nihilist, Classical
Liberal, and Marxist movements of the time. The primary focus was instead to
change Russian society through the humbling of the self, and social reform
through the Russian Orthodox Church, rather than the radical implementations of
the intelligentsia. The major differences between the Slavophiles and the
"Pochvennichestvo" were that the prior detested the reforms of Peter the Great
while the latter recognized the benefits of the notorious ruler, while still
maintaining a strong patriotic mentality for the Russian people. Another major
difference was that some of the movement's supporters adopted a strong anti-
semitic stance. The concept had its roots in the works of the German
philosopher Johann Gottfried Herder which focused primarily on emphasizing the
differences amongst people and regional cultures. In addition it rejected the
universalism of the enlightenment period. The most prominent Russian
intellectuals who founded this ideology were Nikolay Strakhov, Nikolay
Danilevsky and Konstantin Leontyev. Fyodor Dostoyevsky also adhered to it, and
expresses these views in his novel "Demons". The ideology was later adopted by
Alexander III and Nicholas II. References. 1. "Loose and Baggy Spirits: Reading
Dostoevsky and Mendeleev." - Michael Gordin May-June 1999. Stanford University.
