Policy-ineffectiveness proposition The policy-ineffectiveness proposition (PIP)
is a new classical theory proposed in 1976 by Thomas J. Sargent and Neil
Wallace based upon the theory of rational expectations. It posited that
monetary policy could not systematically manage the levels of output and
employment in the economy. Theory. Prior to the work of Sargent and Wallace,
macroeconomic models were largely based on the adaptive expectations
assumption. Many economists found this unsatisfactory since it assumes that
agents may repeatedly make systematic errors and can only revise their
expectations in a backward-looking way. Under adaptive expectations, agents do
not revise their expectations even if the government announces a policy that
involves increasing money supply beyond its expected growth level. Revisions
would only be made after the increase in money supply has occurred, and even
then agents would react only gradually. In each period that agents found their
expectations of inflation to be wrong, a certain proportion of agents'
forecasting error would be incorporated into their initial expectations.
Therefore equilibrium in the economy would only be converged upon and never
reached. The government would be able to maintain employment above its natural
level and easily manipulate the economy. This behaviour by agents is contrary
to that which is assumed by much of economics. Economics has firm foundations
in assumption of rationality, so the systematic errors made by agents in
macroeconomic theory were considered unsatisfactory by Sargent and Wallace.
More importantly, this behaviour seemed inconsistent with the stagflation of
the 1970s, when high inflation coincided with high unemployment, and attempts
by policymakers to actively manage the economy in a Keynesian manner were
largely counterproductive. When applying rational expectations within a
macroeconomic framework, Sargent and Wallace produced the policy-
ineffectiveness proposition, according to which the government could not
successfully intervene in the economy if attempting to manipulate output. If
the government employed monetary expansion in order to increase output, agents
would foresee the effects, and wage and price expectations would be revised
upwards accordingly. Real wages remain constant and therefore so does output,
no money illusion occurs. Only stochastic shocks to the economy can cause
deviations in employment from its natural level. Taken at face value, the
theory appeared to be a major blow to a substantial proportion of
macroeconomics, particularly Keynesian economics. However, criticisms of the
theory were quick to follow its publication. Criticisms. The Sargent and
Wallace model has been criticised by a wide range of economists. Some, like
Milton Friedman, have questioned the validity of the rational expectations
assumption. Sanford Grossman and Joseph Stiglitz argued that even if agents had
the cognitive ability to form rational expectations, they would be unable to
profit from the resultant information since their actions would then reveal
their information to others. Therefore, agents would not expend the effort or
money required to become informed and government policy would remain effective.
The New Keynesian economists Stanley Fischer (1977) and Edmund Phelps and John
B. Taylor (1977) assumed that workers sign nominal wage contracts that last for
more than one period, making wages "sticky". With this assumption the model
shows government policy is fully effective since, although workers rationally
expect the outcome of a change in policy, they are unable to respond to it as
they are locked into expectations formed when they signed their wage contract.
Not only is it possible for government policy to be used effectively, but its
use is also desirable. The government is able respond to stochastic shocks in
the economy which agents are unable to react to, and so stabilise output and
employment. The Barroâ€“Gordon model showed how the ability of government to
manipulate output would lead to inflationary bias. The government would be able
to cheat agents and force unemployment below its natural level but would not
wish to do so. The role of government would therefore be limited to output
stabilisation. Despite the criticisms, Anatole Kaletsky has described Sargent
and Wallace's proposition as a significant contributor to the displacement of
Keynesianism from its role as the leading economic theory guiding the
governments of advanced nations.
