Political Film Society The Political Film Society, a nonprofit corporation, was
formed to recognize the ability of films to raise consciousness of political
concerns throughout the world. The Political Film Society gives awards to film
directors in order to encourage the industry to make the public more aware of
political issues facing the world today. The Political Film Society was founded
in 1986 in Honolulu, Hawaii. It was originally a project of the Hawaii
Political Studies Association, but became an independent organization a few
years later. The headquarters of the society moved from Honolulu to Hollywood
in 1998. That same year the Society became a nonprofit organization, and began
publishing film reviews on its website (see external link below). Leaders. Each
year, at an annual meeting of members, three persons are elected to serve on
the board of directors. The board, in turn, chooses the Chief Executive
Officer. Michael Haas, who also serves on the board, has been the CEO of the
Political Film Society since its inception. Other board members elected in 1998
were Stanley M. Castillo and Eric Dacumos. Currently, boardmember Vorathep
Sitthitham is Vice President. Members. Members are selected by the board of
directors. Those interested to become members must contact the society through
mail or email to join. Members in good standing are allowed to vote each year
on the films up for the awards that the society hands out for the winners.
There are around 200 members all over the world as of February 2008. Awards.
The Political Film Society awards movies each year with the Political Film
Society Awards. These awards are given out to movies in five categories:
Political Film Society Award for Democracy, Political Film Society Award for
Expos√©, Political Film Society Award for Human Rights, Political Film Society
Award for Peace, and the occasional Special Award. The awards are nicknamed The
Stanley Awards after Stanley M. Castillo, an original member of the Political
Film Society's board of directors who died in 1998 due to cancer.
