Polish American Congress The Polish American Congress (PAC) is a U.S. umbrella
organization of Polish-Americans and Polish-American organizations. Its
membership is composed of fraternal, educational, veterans, religious,
cultural, social, business, and political organizations, as well as
individuals. As of January 2009, it lists 20 national organizations as members.
It is sub-divided into 41 divisions and chapters. Traditionally, the PAC
National President has also been the president of the largest Polish American
fraternal organization, the Polish National Alliance (PNA). Formation during
World War II. In response to the threat to Poland's freedom caused by Soviet
and German aggression, a large Congress of Polonia met in Buffalo, New York,
from May 28 to June 1, 1944. Composed of roughly 2,600 delegates representing
Polish and Polish-American organizations, the Congress created the PAC,
defining its goal of a free Poland and underscoring its support for the US war
effort against the Axis powers. The PAC incorporated the two former Polish
umbrella organizations in the United States, the moderate Polish American
Council founded in 1939 and the right-wing National Committee of Americans of
Polish Descent founded in 1941. The other umbrella organization, the left-
leaning American Slav Congress, remained independent. Leadership. The Congress
elected Karol Rozmarek as the first president of the PAC. He was succeeded in
1968 by Aloysius Mazewski, who served until his death in 1988. Under Mazewski,
Leonard F. Walentynowicz served as executive director of the PAC for a number
of years. Edward Moskal was elected president in 1988, and he, too, served as
president for the remainder of his life. Its present president is Frank J.
Spula.
