Politician A politician, political leader, or political figure (from Greek
"polis") is a person who is involved in influencing public policy and decision
making. This includes people who hold decision-making positions in government,
and people who seek those positions, whether by means of election, inheritance,
coup d'Ã©tat, appointment, electoral fraud, conquest, divine right, or other
means. Politics is not limited to governance through public office. Political
offices may also be held in corporations, and other entities that are governed
by self-defined political processes or can be known as freedom fighters. Public
choice theory. Public choice theory involves the use of modern economic tools
to study problems that are traditionally in the province of political science.
(A more general term is "political economy", an earlier name for "economics"
that evokes its practical and theoretical origins but should not be mistaken
for the Marxian use of the same term.) In particular, it studies the behavior
of voters, politicians, and government officials as (mostly) self-interested
agents and their interactions in the social system either as such or under
alternative constitutional rules. These can be represented a number of ways,
including standard constrained utility maximization, game theory, or decision
theory. Public choice analysis has roots in positive analysis ("what is") but
is often used for normative purposes ("what ought to be"), to identify a
problem or suggest how a system could be improved by changes in constitutional
rules. A key formulation of public choice theory is in terms of rational
choice, the agent-based proportioning of scarce means to given ends. An
overlapping formulation with a different focus is positive political theory.
Another related field is social choice theory. There are also Austrian variants
of public choice theory (suggested by Mises, Hayek, Kirzner, Lopez, and
Boettke) in which it is assumed that bureaucrats and politicians are benevolent
but have access to limited information.
