Politico Politico is an American political journalism organization based in
Arlington, Virginia, that distributes its content via television, the Internet,
newspaper, and radio. Its coverage of Washington, D.C., includes the U.S.
Congress, lobbying, media and the Presidency. It was a sponsor of the 2008
Republican Presidential candidates debate at the Ronald Reagan Presidential
Library on May 3, 2007, the at the Kodak Theater on January 31, 2008, and the
2012 Republican Presidential candidates debate at the Ronald Reagan
Presidential Library on September 7, 2011. John F. Harris and Jim VandeHei left
"The Washington Post" to become "Politico"'s editor-in-chief and executive
editor, respectively, launching the newspaper on January 23, 2007. Frederick J.
Ryan Jr., former assistant to President Ronald Reagan, is president and chief
executive officer. Ownership, distribution and content. "Politico" is owned by
Allbritton Communications, which owns television stations in Washington, D.C.,
and elsewhere, all affiliated with the Disney-owned ABC network. The newspaper
has a circulation of approximately 32,000, distributed for free on Capitol Hill
and elsewhere in Washington, D.C. The newspaper prints up to five issues a week
while Congress is in session, and sometimes publishes one issue a week when
Congress is in recess. It carries advertising, including full-page ads from
trade associations and a large help-wanted section listing Washington political
jobs. "Politico" is a partner with several news outlets that co-report and
distribute its video, print, and audio content. Partners include CBS News,
Allbritton Communications's ABC station WJLA and cable channel NewsChannel 8,
radio station WTOP-FM, and Yahoo! News election coverage. Journalists covering
political campaigns for "Politico" carry a video camera to each assignment, and
journalists are encouraged to promote their work elsewhere. Though "Politico"
seeks to break the traditional journalism mold, it expects to initially make
much of its money from Washington D.C.â€“focused newspaper advertising. Among
the reporters who have worked for "Politico" have been Mike Allen, Ben Smith,
Jonathan Martin, Josh Gerstein, Glenn Thrush, John Bresnehan, Darren Goode,
Carrie Budoff Brown, Manu Raju, Maggie Haberman, Dylan Byers, Dave Levinthal,
Kenneth P. Vogel, Anna Palmer, Jonathan Allen, Scott Wong, Reid Epstein, Alex
Burns, Ben White, James Hohmann and Keach Hagey. In 2010, Politico added its
first two opinion columnists, Michael Kinsley and Joe Scarborough. After the
progressive watchdog group Media Matters for America accused "Politico" of
having a "Republican tilt", "Politico"'s Ben Smith answered: "Media Matters has
a point: ...that Bush's public endorsement made us seem too close to the White
House. That was clearly a favor from the president to us (albeit a small one),
and felt to me like one of those clubby Beltway moments that make the insiders
feel important and the outsiders feel (accurately) like outsiders." The other
primary editors disagreed with the general accusation for a variety of reasons,
and some pointed to accusations of a liberal bias from the other side of the
political spectrum. In September 2008, "The New York Times" reported that
"Politico" would expand its operations following the 2008 presidential
election: "after Election Day, ["Politico"] will add reporters, editors, Web
engineers and other employees; expand circulation of its newspaper edition in
Washington; and print more often." A 2009 profile of the organization in
"Vanity Fair" said "Politico" had an editorial staff of 75 and a total staff of
100. Its newspaper circulation is around 32,000; and as of summer 2009, its web
traffic was around 6.7 million unique visitors per month. This is fewer than
the 11 million it had during the high point of the campaign, but most political
news outlets have lower traffic outside election years. As of July 2009, it was
expected to have annual revenue of around $15 million, primarily from the
printed product, enough for the publication to remain financially solvent.
Politico recently hired Washington bureau chief David Chalian, previously let
go from Yahoo for saying GOP 'Happy to have a party with black people drowning'
at the 2012 RNC convention in Tampa Florida. In the last days of the United
States elections, 2012, writer Donovan Slack reported that in nine of the 50
states, European electoral observer activities were blocked from polls, and
that observers had to take precautions in the face of security threats.
