Political system A political system is a system of politics and government. It
is usually compared to the legal system, economic system, cultural system, and
other social systems. However, this is a very simplified view of a much more
complex system of categories involving the views: who should have authority,
how religious questions should be handled, and what the government's influence
on its people and economy should be. Anthropological forms of political
systems. Anthropologists generally recognize four kinds of political systems,
two of which are uncentralized and two of which are centralized. Political
Parties in Political Systems. Political systems do not inherently require the
institution of political parties to advance the politics of the political
system. Political parties are formed after political systems are put in place.
American Political Parties (Democracy/Republic). In the case of American
politics, Article Two of the United States Constitution, specifically Section
I, gives no mention to political parties when describing the presidential
election process. It was only after the establishment of the government did the
first political parties form. George Washington, the first U.S. president was
against the establishment of political parties in most circumstances and
therefore belonged to no party. In his Farewell Address Washington gives reason
for his distrust in political parties, specifically in the newly formed United
States. Washington does endorse political parties in some political systems
however, specifically monarchies. Washington is the only President not to be
elected through a party oriented election process. Because of this, it is
difficult to comment on an America without political party institutions.
Washingtonâ€™s case does point to the original path of the American political
system however, one lacking political parties. Both the U.S. Constitution and
Washington provide support for the American political system, a Democracy and
Republic, to be founded without political parties. The past has shown this type
of system to work well with parties, but nonetheless, these two systems do not
require political parties in their institutions. References. June 25, 2011.
