Political theology Political theology or public theology is a branch of both
political philosophy and practical theology that investigates the ways in which
theological concepts or ways of thinking underlie political, social, economic
and cultural discourses. The same term has been used in a wide variety of ways
by writers exploring different aspects of the subject, with tension developing
between those advocating a traditional concern with individual "moral reform",
such as Clyde Wilcox's "God's Warriors" (1992) and Ted Jelen's "The Political
World of the Clergy" (1993), and those on the left who focus on collective
"social justice", e.g. Jeffrey K. Hadden's "The Gathering Storm in the
Churches" (1969) and Harold Quinley's "The Prophetic Clergy" (1974). Writing
amidst the turbulence of the German Weimar Republic, Carl Schmitt argued in
"Political Theology" that the central concepts of modern politics were
secularized versions of older theological concepts. Drawing on Thomas Hobbes in
"Leviathan" he argued that the state exists to maintain its own integrity in
order to ensure order in society in times of crisis. With the exception of
Schmitt, much of political theologyâ€™s roots can be traced to discussions of
the relationship of ethics and religion. The influence of Hegel is also evident
throughout much of political theology including the theology developed by the
Catholic theologian Johann Baptist Metz. Metz explored the concept of
"political theology" throughout his work. He argued for the concept of a
'suffering God' who shared the pain of his creation, writing, "Yet, faced with
conditions in God's creation that cry out to heaven, how can the theology of
the creator God avoid the suspicion of apathy unless it takes up the language
of a suffering God?" This leads Metz to develop a theology that is tied to
Marxism. He levels a fierce critique of what he calls bourgeois Christianity
and believes that the Christian Gospel has become less credible because it has
become entangled with bourgeois religion. His work "Faith in History and
Society" develops apologetics, or fundamental theology, from this perspective.
Another who was developing a theology that was similar to Metz in the practical
application of theology is Reinhold Niebuhr. During the 1930s, Niebuhr was a
leader of the Socialist Party of America, and although he broke with the party
later in life socialist thought is a prominent component of his development of
Christian Realism. The work by Niebuhr that best exemplifies his relationship
with political theology is "Moral Man and Immoral Society: A Study of Ethics
and Politics" (1932). The journal "Political Theology" currently examines this
interface of religious faith and politics.
