Political science Political Science is a social science discipline concerned
with the study of the state, government, and politics. Aristotle defined it as
the study of the state. It deals extensively with the theory and practice of
politics, and the analysis of political systems and political behavior.
Political scientists "see themselves engaged in revealing the relationships
underlying political events and conditions, and from these revelations they
attempt to construct general principles about the way the world of politics
works." Political science intersects with other fields; including economics,
law, sociology, history, anthropology, public administration, public policy,
national politics, international relations, comparative politics, psychology,
political organization, and political theory. Although it was codified in the
19thÂ century, when all the social sciences were established, political science
has ancient roots; indeed, it originated almost 2,500Â years ago with the works
of Plato and Aristotle. Political science is commonly divided into three
distinct sub-disciplines which together constitute the field:
www.allacademic.com/meta/p245585_index.html>. Thus, in some American colleges
where there is no separate School or College of Arts and Sciences per se,
political science may be a separate department housed as part of a division or
school of Humanities or Liberal Arts. Whereas classical political philosophy is
primarily defined by a concern for Hellenic and Enlightenment thought,
political scientists are also marked by a great concern for "modernity" and the
contemporary nation state, along with the study of classical thought, and as
such share a greater deal of terminology with sociologists (e.g. structure and
agency). Overview. Political scientists study matters concerning the allocation
and transfer of power in decision making, the roles and systems of governance
including governments and international organizations, political behavior and
public policies. They measure the success of governance and specific policies
by examining many factors, including stability, justice, material wealth, and
peace. Some political scientists seek to advance positive (attempt to describe
how things are, as opposed to how they should be) theses by analyzing politics.
Others advance normative theses, by making specific policy recommendations.
Political scientists provide the frameworks from which journalists, special
interest groups, politicians, and the electorate analyze issues. According to
Chaturvedy, "...Political scientists may serve as advisers to specific
politicians, or even run for office as politicians themselves. Political
scientists can be found working in governments, in political parties or as
civil servants. They may be involved with non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
or political movements. In a variety of capacities, people educated and trained
in political science can add value and expertise to corporations. Private
enterprises such as think tanks, research institutes, polling and public
relations firms often employ political scientists." In the United States,
political scientists known as "Americanists" look at a variety of data
including constitutional development, elections, public opinion and public
policy such as Social Security reform... foreign policy, US Congressional
committees, and the US Supreme Court â€” to name only a few issues. Most United
States colleges and universities offer B.A. programs in political science. M.A.
or M.A.T. and Ph.D. or Ed.D. programs are common at larger universities. The
term "political science" is more popular in North America than elsewhere; other
institutions, especially those outside the United States, see political science
as part of a broader discipline of "political studies," "politics," or
"government." While "political science" implies use of the scientific method,
"political studies" implies a broader approach, although the naming of degree
courses does not necessarily reflect their content. Separate degree granting
programs in international relations and public policy are not uncommon at both
the undergraduate and graduate levels. Master's level programs in political
science are common when political scientists engage in public administration.
The national honor society for college and university students of government
and politics in the United States is Pi Sigma Alpha. History. Political science
as a separate field is a relatively late arrival in terms of social sciences.
However, the term "political science" was not always distinguished from
political philosophy, and the modern discipline has a clear set of antecedents
including also moral philosophy, political economy, political theology,
history, and other fields concerned with normative determinations of what ought
to be and with deducing the characteristics and functions of the ideal state.
The antecedents of Western politics can be traced back to the Socratic
political philosophers, Plato (427â€“347 BC), Xenophon (c. 430â€“354 BC), and
Aristotle ("The Father of Political Science") (384â€“322 BC). These authors, in
such works as "The Republic" and "Laws" by Plato, and "The Politics" and
"Nicomachean Ethics" by Aristotle, analyzed political systems philosophically,
going beyond earlier Greek poetic and historical reflections which can be found
in the works of epic poets like Homer and Hesiod, historians like Herodotus and
Thucydides, and dramatists such as Sophocles, Aristophanes, and Euripides. The
rise and fall of the Roman Empire. During the height of the Roman Empire,
famous historians such as Polybius, Livy and Plutarch documented the rise of
the Roman Republic, and the organization and histories of other nations, while
statesmen like Julius Caesar, Cicero and others provided us with examples of
the politics of the republic and Rome's empire and wars. The study of politics
during this age was oriented toward understanding history, understanding
methods of governing, and describing the operation of governments. Nearly a
thousand years elapsed, from the foundation of the city of Rome in 753 BC to
the fall of the Roman Empire or the beginning of the Middle Ages. In the
interim, there is a manifest translation of Hellenic culture into the Roman
sphere. The Greek gods become Romans and Greek philosophy in one way or another
turns into Roman law e.g. Stoicism. The Stoic was committed to preserving
proper hierarchical roles and duties in the state so that the state as a whole
would remain stable. Among the best known Roman Stoics were philosopher Seneca
and the emperor Marcus Aurelius. Seneca, a wealthy Roman patrician, is often
criticized by some modern commentators for failing to adequately live by his
own precepts. The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, on the other hand, can be
best thought of as the philosophical reflections of an emperor divided between
his philosophical aspirations and the duty he felt to defend the Roman Empire
from its external enemies through his various military campaigns. According to
Polybius, Roman institutions were the backbone of the empire but Roman law is
the . Middle Ages. With the fall of the Western Roman Empire, there arose a
more diffuse arena for political studies. The rise of monotheism and,
particularly for the Western tradition, Christianity, brought to light a new
space for politics and political action. Works such as Augustine of Hippo's
"The City of God" synthesized current philosophies and political traditions
with those of Christianity, redefining the borders between what was religious
and what was political. During the Middle Ages, the study of politics was
widespread in the churches and courts. Most of the political questions
surrounding the relationship between church and state were clarified and
contested in this period. The Arabs lost sight of Aristotle's political science
but continued to study Plato's "Republic" which became the basic text of Judeo-
Islamic political philosophy as in the works of Alfarabi and Averroes; this did
not happen in the Christian world, where Aristotle's "Politics" was translated
in the 13th century and became the basic text as in the works of Saint Thomas
Aquinas. Indian subcontinent. In ancient India, the antecedents of politics can
be traced back to the "Rig-Veda", "Samhitas", "Brahmanas", the Mahabharata and
Buddhist "Pali Canon". Chanakya (c. 350â€“275 BC) was a political thinker in
Takshashila. Chanakya wrote the "Arthashastra", a treatise on political
thought, economics and social order. It discusses monetary and fiscal policies,
welfare, international relations, and war strategies in detail, among other
topics. The Manusmriti, dated to about two centuries after the time of Chanakya
is another important Indian political treatise. East Asia. Ancient China was
home to several competing schools of political thought, most of which arose in
the Spring and Autumn Period. These included Mohism (a utilitarian philosophy),
Taoism, Legalism (a school of thought based on the supremacy of the state), and
Confucianism. Eventually, a modified form of Confucianism (heavily infused with
elements of Legalism) became the dominant political philosophy in China during
the Imperial Period. This form of Confucianism also deeply influenced and were
expounded upon by scholars in Korea and Japan. West Asia. In Persia, works such
as the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam and Epic of Kings by Ferdowsi provided evidence
of political analysis, while the Middle Eastern Aristotelians such as Avicenna
and later Maimonides and Averroes, continued Aristotle's tradition of analysis
and empiricism, writing commentaries on Aristotle's works. Averroe did not have
at hand a text of Aristotle's "Politics", so he wrote a commentary on Plato's
"Republic" instead. Renaissance. During the Italian Renaissance, NiccolÃ²
Machiavelli established the emphasis of modern political science on direct
empirical observation of political institutions and actors. Machiavelli was
also a realist, arguing that even evil means should be considered if they help
to create and preserve a glorious regime. Machiavelli therefore also argues
against the use of idealistic models in politics, and has been described as the
father of the "politics model" of political science. Later, the expansion of
the scientific paradigm during the Enlightenment further pushed the study of
politics beyond normative determinations. Enlightenment. The works of the
French philosophers Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot to name a few are paragon for
political analysis, social science, social and political critic. Their
influence leading to the French revolution has been enormous in the development
of modern democracy throughout the world. Like Machiavelli, Thomas Hobbes, well
known for his theory of the social contract, believed that a strong central
power, such as a monarchy, was necessary to rule the innate selfishness of the
individual but neither of them believed in the divine right of kings. John
Locke, on the other hand, who gave us Two Treatises of Government and who did
not believe in the divine right of kings either, sided with Aquinas and stood
against both Machiavelli and Hobbes by accepting Aristotle's dictum that man
seeks to be happy in a state of social harmony as a social animal. Unlike
Aquinas' preponderant view on the salvation of the soul from original sin,
Locke believed man comes into this world with a mind that is basically a tabula
rasa. According to Locke, an absolute ruler as proposed by Hobbes is
unnecessary, for natural law is based on reason and equality, seeking peace and
survival for man. Religion would no longer play a dominant role in politics.
There would be separation of church and state. Principles similar to those that
dominated the material sciences could be applied to society as a whole,
originating the social sciences. Politics could be studied in a laboratory as
it were, the social milieu. In 1787, Alexander Hamilton wrote: "...The science
of politics like most other sciences has received great improvement." ("The
Federalist Papers" Number 9 and 51). Both the marquis d'Argenson and the abbÃ©
de Saint-Pierre described politics as a science; d'Argenson was a philosopher
and de Saint-Pierre an allied reformer of the enlightenment. Other important
figures in American politics who participated in the Enlightenment were
Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson. Modern political science. Because
political science is essentially a study of human behavior, in all aspects of
politics, observations in controlled environments are often challenging to
reproduce or duplicate, though experimental methods are increasingly common
(see experimental political science). Citing this difficulty, former American
Political Science Association President Lawrence Lowell once said "We are
limited by the impossibility of experiment. Politics is an observational, not
an experimental science." Because of this, political scientists have
historically observed political elites, institutions, and individual or group
behavior in order to identify patterns, draw generalizations, and build
theories of politics. Like all social sciences, political science faces the
difficulty of observing human actors that can only be partially observed and
who have the capacity for making conscious choices unlike other subjects such
as non-human organisms in biology or inanimate objects as in physics. Despite
the complexities, contemporary political science has progressed by adopting a
variety of methods and theoretical approaches to understanding politics and
methodological pluralism is a defining feature of contemporary political
science. Often in contrast with national media, political science scholars seek
to compile long-term data and research on the impact of political issues,
producing in-depth articles breaking down the issues The advent of political
science as a university discipline was marked by the creation of university
departments and chairs with the title of political science arising in the late
19th century. In fact, the designation "political scientist" is typically for
those with a doctorate in the field. Integrating political studies of the past
into a unified discipline is ongoing, and the history of political science has
provided a rich field for the growth of both normative and positive political
science, with each part of the discipline sharing some historical predecessors.
The American Political Science Association was founded in 1903 and the American
Political Science Review was founded in 1906 in an effort to distinguish the
study of politics from economics and other social phenomena. Behavioral
revolution and new institutionalism. In the 1950s and the 1960s, a behavioral
revolution stressing the systematic and rigorously scientific study of
individual and group behavior swept the discipline. A focus on studying
political behavior, rather than institutions or interpretation of legal texts,
characterized early behavioral political science, including work by Robert
Dahl, Philip Converse, and in the collaboration between sociologist Paul
Lazarsfeld and public opinion scholar Bernard Berelson. The late 1960s and
early 1970s witnessed a take off in the use of deductive, game theoretic formal
modeling techniques aimed at generating a more analytical corpus of knowledge
in the discipline. This period saw a surge of research that borrowed theory and
methods from economics to study political institutions, such as the United
States Congress, as well as political behavior, such as voting. William H.
Riker and his colleagues and students at the University of Rochester were the
main proponents of this shift. Recent developments. In 2000, the Perestroika
Movement in political science was introduced as a reaction against what
supporters of the movement called the mathematicization of political science.
Those who identified with the movement argued for a plurality of methodologies
and approaches in political science and for more relevance of the discipline to
those outside of it. Evolutionary psychology theories argue that humans have
evolved a highly developed set of psychological mechanisms for dealing with
politics. However, these mechanisms evolved for dealing with the small group
politics that characterized the ancestral environment and not the much larger
political structures in today's world. This is argued to explain many important
features and systematic cognitive biases of current politics. Around the world.
Russia. â€˜de facto political scienceâ€™ existed in the Soviet Union as early
as in 1960s before it became â€˜de jure political scienceâ€™ in 1989. In the
USSR, political studies were carried out under the guise of some other
disciplines like theory of state and law, area studies, international
relations, studies of labor movement, "critique of bourgeois theories" etc.
Soviet scholars were represented at the International Political Science
Association since 1955 (since 1960 by the Soviet Association of Political and
State Studies). In 1979 11th World Congress of IPSA took place in Moscow. Until
the late years of the Soviet Union, political science as a field was subjected
to tight control of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The development of
political science was marked by two major tendencies in the scientific
community and in society in general. One was a general distrust of political
scientists and institutions that were engaged in political science. Anti-
communists accused political scientists of being "false" scientists and of
having served the old regime. This atmosphere of animosity created heavy moral
and professional strains on those who had worked for the introduction of
political science under the old regime. They had to face a certain ignorance
and ideological animosity from those pretending to be the "true" bearers of
democratic ideals. Two of the major institutions dealing with political science
- the Institute of Contemporary Social Theories and the Institute of
International Affairs - were disbanded, and most of their members were actually
left without jobs and had to look for new professional careers. These
institutes were victims of the first wave of anti-communist euphoria and of in
many ways unfounded ideological attacks. Many of the people working in these
institutes were competent scientists with a proficient knowledge of political
science, and some of them, through their works, had played an important role in
reforming the Communist Party and had helped to bring about the radical changes
in 1989. Today the Russian Political Science Association unites professionals-
political scientists from in Russia. Difficulties. The main difficulties that
haunted its development during the first two decades are still there:
deficiency of means for research and development of university centers, need
for funds for empirical research,a shortage of academic literature,
disproportion in allocation of resources between center and periphery,
deteriorating status of political science in university curriculums (at non-
political-scientist departments) etc. At the beginning of 1990s, one of the
major problems was absence of professionals with special education. Later in
2000s (decade) with the first graduations at political-science departments, the
keenest problem turned out to be low inclusive capacities of the academic labor
market. There are a lot of problems with connections between political science
and political practice. Subfields. Some political science departments also
classify methodology as well as scholarship on the domestic politics of a
particular country as distinct sub fields. In contrast to this traditional
classification, some academic departments organize scholarship into thematic
categories, including political philosophy, political behavior (including
public opinion, collective action, and identity), and political institutions
(including legislatures and international organizations). Political science
conferences and journals often emphasize scholarship in more specific
categories. The American Political Science Association, for example, has 42
organized sections that address various methods and topics of political
inquiry.
