Civil and political rights Civil and political rights are a class of rights
based upon birthright into a polity or designation otherwise of human rights.
They ensure a citizen's ability to fully participate in the civil and political
life of the state without discrimination or political repression, and protect
the freedom of classes of persons and individuals from unwarranted infringement
into those rights by governments, private organizations, and other entities.
Civil rights include the ensuring of peoples' physical and mental integrity,
life and safety; protection from discrimination on grounds such as physical or
mental disability, gender, religion, race, national origin, age, status as a
member of the uniformed services, sexual orientation, or gender identity; and
individual rights such as privacy, the freedoms of thought and conscience,
speech and expression, religion, the press, and movement. Political rights
include natural justice (procedural fairness) in law, such as the rights of the
accused, including the right to a fair trial; due process; the right to seek
redress or a legal remedy; and rights of participation in civil society and
politics such as freedom of association, the right to assemble, the right to
petition, the right of self-defense, and the right to vote. Civil and political
rights form the original and main part of international human rights. They
comprise the first portion of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(with economic, social and cultural rights comprising the second portion). The
theory of three generations of human rights considers this group of rights to
be "first-generation rights", and the theory of negative and positive rights
considers them to be generally negative rights. The phrase "civil rights" is a
translation of Latin "ius civis" (rights of citizens). Roman citizens could be
either free ("libertas") or servile ("servitus"), but they all had rights in
law. After the Edict of the Milan in 313, these rights included the freedom of
religion. Roman legal doctrine was lost during the Middle Ages, but claims of
universal rights could still be made based on religious doctrine. According to
the leaders of Kett's Rebellion (1549), "all bond men may be made free, for God
made all free with his precious blood-shedding." In the 17th century, English
common law judge Sir Edward Coke revived the idea of rights based on
citizenship by arguing that Englishmen had historically enjoyed such rights.
The English Bill of Rights was adopted in 1689. The Virginia Declaration of
Rights, by George Mason and James Madison, was adopted in 1776. The Virginia
declaration is the direct ancestor and model for the U.S. Bill of Rights
(1789). In early 19th century Britain, the phrase "civil rights" most commonly
referred to the problem of legal discrimination against Catholics. In the House
of Commons support for the British civil rights movement was divided, many more
largely known politicians supported the discrimination towards Catholics.
Independent MPs (such as Lewis Eves and Matthew Mountford) applied pressure on
the larger parties to pass the civil rights act of the 1920s. In the 1860s,
Americans adapted this usage to newly freed blacks. Congress enacted civil
rights acts in 1866, 1871, 1875, 1957, 1960, 1964, 1968, and 1991. Protection
of rights. T.H. Marshall Notes that civil rights were among the first to be
recognized and codified, followed later by political rights and still later by
social rights. In many countries, they are constitutional rights and are
included in a bill of rights or similar document. They are also defined in
international human rights instruments, such as the 1948 Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and the 1967 International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. Civil and political rights need not be codified to be protected,
although most democracies worldwide do have formal written guarantees of civil
and political rights. Civil rights are considered to be natural rights. Thomas
Jefferson wrote in his 2008 "A Summary View of the Rights of British America"
that "a free people their rights as derived from the laws of nature, and not as
the gift of their chief magistrate." The question of to whom civil and
political rights apply is a subject of controversy. In many countries, citizens
have greater protections against infringement of rights than non-citizens; at
the same time, civil and political rights are considered to be universal rights
that apply to all persons. Other rights. Custom also plays a role. Implied or
unenumerated rights are rights that courts may find to exist even though not
expressly guaranteed by written law or custom; one example is the right to
privacy in the United States, and the Ninth Amendment explicitly shows that
there are other rights that are also protected. The United States Declaration
of Independence says that people have unalienable rights including "Life,
Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness". It is considered by some that the sole
purpose of government is the protection of life, liberty and property. The
right to self-defense is used as a defense of the 2nd Amendment right to bear
arms. Civil rights movement. Civil rights guarantee equal protection under the
law. When civil and political rights are not guaranteed to all as part of equal
protection of laws, or when such guarantees exist on paper but are not
respected in practice, opposition, legal action and even social unrest may
ensue. Civil Rights movements began as early as 1848 in the USA with such
documents as the Declaration of Sentiment. Consciously modeled after the
Declaration of Independence, the Declaration of Rights and Sentiments became
the founding document of the American women's movement, and it was adopted at
the Seneca Falls Convention, July 19 and 20, 1848 Most civil rights movements
relied on the technique of civil resistance, using nonviolent methods of
struggle, to achieve their aims. In some countries, struggles for civil rights
were accompanied, or followed, by civil unrest and even armed rebellion. While
civil rights movements over the last 60 years have resulted in an extension of
civil and political rights, the process was long and tenuous in many countries,
and many of these movements did not achieve or fully achieve their objectives.
Problems and analysis. Questions about civil and political rights have
frequently emerged. For example, to what extent should the government intervene
to protect individuals from infringement on their rights by other individuals,
or from corporationsÂ â€” e.g., in what way should employment discrimination in
the private sector be dealt with? Political theory deals with civil and
political rights. Robert Nozick and John Rawls expressed competing visions in
Nozick's "Anarchy, State, and Utopia" and Rawls' "A Theory of Justice". Other
influential authors in the area include Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld and Jean Edward
Smith.
