Political decoy A political decoy is a person employed to impersonate a
politician, to draw attention away from the real person or to take risks on
their behalf. This can also apply to military figures, or civilians
impersonated for political/espionage purposes. The political decoy is an
individual who has been selected because of their strong physical resemblance
to the person they are impersonating. This resemblance can be strengthened by
plastic surgery. Often, such decoys are trained to speak and behave like their
'target'. Decoying: theory and practice. The practice of decoying is
essentially little different from the profession of celebrity lookalike, in
which people mimic famous entertainers whom they resemble. The only difference
is that the 'lookalike' presents an acknowledged artifice. The decoy must
conceal his or her imposture from the 'audience'. In 2001, Poland hosted the
first-ever doppelganger convention, to which lookalikes from across the country
turned up, offering the unlikely spectacle of Joseph Stalin hobnobbing with
Elizabeth Taylor. Nearly all the doppelgangers at the event had complemented
their resemblance to a famous person by costume. The famous incident in which
Charlie Chaplin (at the height of his fame) failed to get through to the final
selection in a 'Charlie Chaplin Look-alike' contest suggests that
preconceptions by observers can be just as important as any physical
resemblance when it comes to impersonation. Some 'lookalikes' actually stop
mimicking their targets and start pretending to "be" them. Comedian Robin
Williams is one such victim, whose identity was allegedly 'stolen' by
professional look-alike Michael Clayton, for financial reasons. Political
decoys in history. Since deception is the whole purpose of employing a
political decoy, there are many instances of alleged decoying which remain
uncertain. Joe R. Reeder, an undersecretary for the U.S. Army from 1993 to
1997, has gone on record with claims that a number of figures around the world
have or have had decoys, including Manuel Noriega, Raoul Cédras, Enver Hoxha,
Fidel Castro, George W. Bush and Osama bin Laden. Of Noriega's alleged four
decoys, Reeder said: "They were good. They practiced his gait, his manner of
speech and his modus operandi – what he did during the day and night."
Information on these instances of decoying is hard to come by. And falsely
accusing an enemy of using a decoy can be an effective psyop tactic (making an
enemy seem like a coward who dare not appear in person, for example). This
means that the confusion generated by the existence of real decoys is deepened
by counterclaims of decoys where there may be none. The case of Osama bin Laden
is instructive. In the absence of confirmed sightings of the terrorist
figurehead, many sources openly speculated that videotaped messages from bin
Laden were in fact recordings of a double - either as part of a 'frame-up'
operation, or as part of a strategy of deception on bin Laden's part.
Speculation in such situations is naturally liable to run high. For the
purposes of this entry, only well-documented allegations or confirmed cases of
political decoying are discussed. Instances which are still under debate will
have section headings in quotes. Bernard Montgomery/Clifton James and "Tex"
Banwell (1944). Perhaps the most famous political decoy, soldier M.E. Clifton
James successfully impersonated General Bernard Montgomery ("Monty") for
intelligence purposes during World War II. In 1940, James acted in an Army
production called "When Knights Were Bold" and his photograph appeared in an
Army newspaper with a remark about how much he resembled General Montgomery. As
a result, he was approached by actor David Niven in May 1944. Niven, then a
Colonel in the Army Kinematograph Section, told James he was wanted to
impersonate "Monty", as this would allow Montgomery to be somewhere else, thus
confusing the Germans. James had to learn Montgomery's gestures, mannerisms,
gait and voice and had to give up smoking. Because James had lost his right-
hand middle finger in the First World War, a realistic replacement was made.
Even his wife had to be deceived and was both kept in the dark and sent back to
Leicester. Once he was trained, his trip as "Monty" was to Gibraltar and from
there to Algiers. "Monty's" presence succeeded in confusing the Germans in
regard to the invasion plans. James was later the subject of a biopic called "I
Was Monty's Double" starring James himself in (of course) the double role as
Monty and himself. The second (and less famous) 'Monty's Double', Keith Deamer
Banwell was serving with the land-based Long Range Desert Group. Banwell was
captured in a raid on Tobruk, but with a friend managed to steal a German
vehicle and escape. During a subsequent raid on Crete he was taken prisoner at
Heraklion and put under the personal supervision of former world heavyweight
boxing champion Max Schmeling, who was serving in the German Army. Banwell and
a few of his comrades managed to slip away from their captors and then acquired
an assault landing craft. With the help of some Cretan fishermen they made
their getaway, but the craft ran out of fuel and drifted for nine days before
reaching the North African coast. The privations of this voyage put Banwell in
hospital for 12 weeks. When he had recovered, someone noticed that he bore a
resemblance to General Montgomery. It was decided that he participate in
deception ploys, and so Banwell was sent to Cairo to meet Montgomery, given the
appropriate clothing, insignia and General's badges and sent on trips around
the Middle East to confuse enemy spies. However, as he was considerably taller
than Montgomery, he was told that on no account should he get out of the car.
Banwell, finding the assignment boring, sought a return to the infantry. Adolf
Hitler/unknown (?–1945). Adolf Hitler is known to have employed at least one
double and it has been alleged that he employed as many as six. One of these
unfortunate men, Gustav Weler, was later knowingly executed by guards as part
of a disinformation strategy and his corpse was found by Allied forces who
initially believed it to be Hitler. Heinrich Himmler/unknown (?–1945). Hugh
Thomas claims that the man who committed suicide after his capture in Lüneburg
in May 1945, was not in fact Heinrich Himmler. This claim is based on a number
of physical discrepancies, including the apparent lack of a dueling scar on the
corpse. Himmler was known to have a 'Y'-shaped scar on his left cheek, left by
an epee; the corpse had none. Thomas claims that the substitution was
deliberate, in order to throw the Allies off Himmler's scent. It is known that
British intelligence agents, including Kim Philby, did not believe the
Lüneburg prisoner was Himmler. Thomas's book on this subject "SS1- The
Unlikely Death of Heinrich Himmler" - sets out the alleged deception in great
detail. This theory is not generally accepted by historians. Joseph Stalin/
"Rashid"/Felix Dadaev (1940s–50s). Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin is alleged
to have had a double, identified only as "Rashid". Officials at the KGB
allegedly learned that Rashid was a 'double' for Stalin and employed him to
replace Stalin for some public functions after World War II. Rashid spent two
years studying with Alexei Dikiy, an actor who played the role of Stalin in
propaganda films. Rashid claimed there were other Stalin lookalikes employed by
the KGB, although he never met any. He claimed to have heard of another Stalin
double who was hired to live in the dictator's dacha outside of Moscow in the
late 1940s and 1950s when Stalin was dying. This double filled in for Stalin
for media events and at times when Stalin had to meet government functionaries
and others. Rashid died in 1991, aged 93. Recently another one of Stalin's
doubles came forward, having written a book about his adventures as a political
decoy. At age 88, Felix Dadaev has been given permission from the Putin
government to tell his story. Sukarno/unknown (1950s). The U.S. Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA) had planned to bring down Indonesia's first president
Sukarno by portraying him in a pornographic film in the late 1950s. The agency
put together a pornographic film starring a Sukarno look-alike in bed with a
blonde playing a Soviet agent. The humiliation caused by circulating the film
was supposed to drive Sukarno from office but the plan was unsuccessful. Lee
Harvey Oswald/unknown (1950s–1963). Impersonation of Oswald has featured in
various John F. Kennedy conspiracy theories for decades, based on Oswald's
apparent use of aliases and conflicting eyewitness accounts of Oswald's
behaviour. The first such claim was made in Professor Richard Popkins' "The
Second Oswald", published in 1964. Some conspiracy theorists cite an alleged
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) memo dated June 3, 1960, from J. Edgar
Hoover, stating that "there is a possibility that an imposter is using Oswald's
birth certificate." In 2004, conspiracy theorist John Armstrong published a
book entitled "Harvey and Lee", which claimed to have identified a Lee Harvey
Oswald double who had impersonated Oswald as part of an intelligence operation.
Armstrong bases his claims on photographs which appear to show discrepancies in
Oswald's physique and facial features. Armstrong cites contradictory eyewitness
testimony from the Warren Report, placing Oswald in two different locations at
the same time. Henry Kissinger/unknown (1971). A former aide to Henry Kissinger
has gone on the record with claims that Henry Kissinger was impersonated at
least once during his secret visit to China in 1971. Since no-one was allowed
to examine 'Kissinger' at close quarters, the resemblance of the impersonator
to his 'target' must remain under some doubt. Boris Yeltsin/unknown
(1996–2000). In 1998, Duma deputy Aleksandr Salii asked the office of the
Russian Prosecutor-General to investigate claims that a double had been
impersonating Yeltsin for official purposes since the real Yeltsin's heart
surgery in November 1996. Salii told journalists that he and colleagues had
examined some 1,500 photographs and gathered evidence showing that a "New
Yeltsin" had appeared after 1996, with the supposed decoy frequently displaying
his injured hand, whereas the real Yeltsin had always tried to conceal that
hand. Yeltsin had frequently disappeared from public view in preceding years,
sometimes in circumstances that aroused widespread suspicion. In July 1995,
Yeltsin disappeared from public view for weeks following a heart operation. A
photograph of Yeltsin was released to dispel rumours about his health, which
actually inflamed the situation when it emerged that it appeared to be a staged
photograph based on a photograph taken some months earlier. Saddam Hussein/
several unknowns (1990s–2003). In 2003, German television network ZDF
broadcast claimed that Iraq's former president Saddam Hussein was frequently
replaced with doubles for TV appearances. This analysis was based on
sophisticated measuring techniques, which detected discrepancies in the
position of Hussein's facial features and blemishes from appearance to
appearance. It was supported by the opinion of Jerrald Post, the man who
created the CIA's Psychological Profile Unit. It was also alleged that Austrian
politician Jörg Haider had actually met a double when he thought he was
meeting Hussein. This claim is however disputed, Dr Ala Bashir, Saddam Hussein
former personal physician stated "The stories about Saddam Hussein having body
doubles, to foster the impression that the Iraqi dictator was everywhere, are
nonsense." Voice-only decoys. These are generally exceptionally good
impersonators, who are used to give the impression that their 'target' is
conducting a radio interview, telephone call or other vocal assignment. Winston
Churchill/Norman Shelley (1940s). A recurring rumour holds that some of Winston
Churchill's most famous speeches to Parliament during World War II were
subsequently recorded for radio broadcast not by Churchill, but by Norman
Shelley impersonating Churchill. Churchill is known to have commented that
Shelley's impersonations were excellent. Although the rumour has been promoted
by some historians, there is a lack of supporting evidence and it is best
classified as an urban legend. Shelley did however record a performance of
Churchill's "We shall fight on the beaches" speech, but that was several years
after the speech was originally made. Harry S. Truman/unknown (1947). Edwin
Wright served the U.S. federal government under President Harry S. Truman as
General staff G-2 and Middle East specialist, Washington (1945–46); on the
Bureau of Near East-South Asian-African Affairs, Department of State (1946
onwards); country specialist (1946–47); advisor U.N. affairs (1947–50); and
advisor on intelligence (1950–55). According to Wright, an unknown individual
impersonated President Truman's voice on the telephone in order to sway foreign
leaders into voting in particular ways at the United Nations. There are two
documents from Truman himself alleging this, both currently lodged at the
Truman Presidential Library. Wright comments: "In other words, somebody
impersonated President Truman and threatened the President of Haiti. There were
people who used President Truman's voice and name and he didn't know who they
were." Indira Gandhi/Rustom Nagarwala (1971). On 24 May 1971, a Parsi ex-Indian
Army Captain and serving intelligence officer, Rustom Sohrab Nagarwala, was
able to take out 6 million Rupees from the State Bank of India's Parliament
Street branch by mimicking the voice of the then serving Indian prime minister,
Indira Gandhi to chief cashier Ved Prakash Malhotra. The reason for the
unsuccessful fraud remains unknown. Nagarwala was arrested, however, after
Malhotra went in person to collect a receipt from P. N. Haksar, Indira Gandhi's
personal secretary, informing him that the requested payment was done. A
stunned Haksar informed Malhotra that Mrs Gandhi had instructed nothing of the
sort and urged him to inform the police immediately. Later that year, Nagarwala
died of a heart attack in prison. Political decoys in fiction. Many stories
feature the replacement of a known figure with a lookalike. These may be
conspiracy theories, proving the swap with the discrepancies, real or
fictional, between the earlier and later personalities of the political figure.
For example, there is a movie where the inner circle of Communists finds
Vladimir Lenin's decoy better than the original, so the leader is murdered and
the Balt decoy replaces him. A story by Jaakko Okker draws heavily on President
of Finland Urho Kekkonen's real-life use of pseudonyms in his civilian trade,
journalism, and turns it upside down so that Kekkonen is replaced multiple
times during his careers by several lookalike journalists.
