Post-democracy The term Post-democracy designates a state conducted by
democratic rules, but whose application is progressively limited. The English
conservative journalist Peter Oborne presented a documentary of the 2005
general election, arguing that it had become anti-democratic because it
targeted a number of floating voters with a narrow agenda. The basic claim is
based on certain certain observations on the economic and thus also political
power of multinational corporations. Corporations and governments are in close
relation because states are in need of corporations as great employers which
cause enormous cash flow. But much of the production is outsourced and
corporations have almost no difficulties to move to other countries. As a
consequence labor-law is becoming employee unfriendly and tax bites were moved
from companies to individuals in order to make better conditions for
corporations. The neoliberal doctrine brings state and the corporations even
closer. The neoliberal order is the total rejection of the state as an
institution which can serve the needs of the people and provide public and
social services to the population regardless of wealth, class or creed. Once
the state begins to abandon that, these tasks are handed over to private
corporations. That allows corporations to influence the decisions of the state
like how, where and what to build, what to buy, environmental and labor laws.
Definition tentative. This term appeared to define a running evolution within
the democracies during the 21st century. It is a polemic term because it calls
attention to recognised democracies that are losing some of their foundations
evolving toward an Aristocratic regime. Hereby, while thus contradicting
pluralist assumptions, it seems to be an accepted presumption, that the common
good were something to be determined objectively and that conflicts of interest
were not to be handled within democratic processes but instead within
administrative proceedings.
