Poverty threshold The poverty threshold, or poverty line, is the minimum level
of income deemed adequate in a given country. In practice, like the definition
of poverty, the official or common understanding of the poverty line is
significantly higher in developed countries than in developing countries. The
common international poverty line has in the past been roughly $1 a day. In
2008, the World Bank came out with a revised figure of $1.25 at 2005
purchasing-power parity (PPP). Determining the poverty line is usually done by
finding the total cost of all the essential resources that an average human
adult consumes in one year. The largest of these expenses is typically the rent
required to live in an apartment, so historically, economists have paid
particular attention to the real estate market and housing prices as a strong
poverty line affector. Individual factors are often used to account for various
circumstances, such as whether one is a parent, elderly, a child, married, etc.
The poverty threshold may be adjusted annually. Absolute poverty. Absolute
poverty is a level of poverty as defined in terms of the minimal requirements
necessary to afford minimal standards of food, clothing, health care and
shelter. For the measure to be absolute, the line must be the same in different
countries, cultures, and technological levels. Such an absolute measure should
look only at the individual's power to consume and it should be independent of
any changes in income distribution. The intuition behind an absolute measure is
that mere survival takes essentially the same amount of resources across the
world and that everybody should be subject to the same standards if meaningful
comparisons of policies and progress are to be made. Notice that if everyone's
real income in an economy increases, and the income distribution does not
change, absolute poverty will decline. Measuring poverty by an absolute
threshold has the advantage of applying the same standard across different
locations and time periods, it makes comparisons easier. On the other hand, it
suffers from the disadvantage that any absolute poverty threshold is to some
extent arbitrary; the amount of wealth required for survival is not the same in
all places and time periods. For example, a person living in far northern
Scandinavia requires a source of heat during colder months, while a person
living on a tropical island does not. This type of measure is often contrasted
with measures of relative poverty (see below), which classify individuals or
families as "poor" not by comparing them to a fixed cutoff point, but by
comparing them to others in the population under study. The term "absolute
poverty" is also sometimes used as a synonym for extreme poverty. Absolute
poverty is the absence of enough resources (such as money) to secure basic life
necessities. According to a UN declaration that resulted from the World Summit
on Social Development in Copenhagen in 1995, absolute poverty is "a condition
characterised by severe deprivation of basic human needs, including food, safe
drinking water, sanitation facilities, health, shelter, education and
information. It depends not only on income but also on access to services." For
example, a person who lives in a home with a mud floor is considered severely
deprived of shelter. A person who never attended school and cannot read is
considered severely deprived of education. A person who has no newspaper,
radio, television, or telephone is considered severely deprived of information.
All people who meet any two of these conditionsÂ â€” for example, they live in
homes with mud floors "and" cannot readÂ â€” are considered to be living in
absolute poverty. Relative poverty. A measure of "relative poverty" defines
"poverty" as being below some relative poverty threshold. For example, the
statement that "households with an accumulated income less than 60% of the
median equivalized household disposable income are living in poverty" uses a
relative measure to define poverty. In this system, if everyone's real income
in an economy increases, but the income distribution stays the same, then the
rate of relative poverty will also stay the same. This means, by its very
nature, that there will always be a family living in (relative) poverty, even
if they have a very high living standard, unless everyone has almost exactly
the same income. Relative poverty measurements can sometimes produce odd
results, especially in small populations. For example, if the median household
in a wealthy neighborhood earns US$1 million each year, then a family that
earns US$100,000 would be considered poor on the relative poverty scale, even
though such a family could meet all of its basic needs and much more. At the
other end of the scale, if the median household in a very poor neighborhood
earned only 50% of what it needs to buy food, then a person who earned the
median income would not be considered poor on a relative poverty scale, even
though the person is clearly poor on an absolute poverty scale. Measures of
relative poverty are almost the same as measuring income inequality: If a
society gets a more equal income distribution, relative poverty will fall. They
point out that if society changed in a way that hurt high earners more than low
ones, then relative poverty would decrease, but every citizen of the society
would be worse off. Likewise in the reverse direction: it is possible to reduce
absolute poverty while increasing relative poverty. The term "relative poverty"
can also be used in a different sense to mean "moderate poverty"Â â€“- for
example, a standard of living or level of income that is high enough to satisfy
basic needs (like water, food, clothing, shelter, and basic health care), but
still significantly lower than that of the majority of the population under
consideration. Basic needs. Some measurements combine certain aspects of
absolute and relative measures. For example, the Fraser Institute publishes a
basic needs poverty measure for Canada. According to the Fraser Institute, "the
basic-needs approach is partly absolute (the list necessities is limited to
items required for long-term physical well-being) and partly relative,
reflecting the standards that apply in the individual's own society at the
present time." The Fraser Institute's list of necessities for living creditably
in Canada includes not only food, shelter, clothing, and health care, but also
personal care, furniture, transportation, communication, laundry, and home
insurance. It is criticized for not including any entertainment items like
cable television, daily newspapers, and tickets to movies or sporting events.
National poverty lines. National estimates are based on population-weighted
subgroup estimates from household surveys. Definitions of the poverty line may
vary considerably among nations. For example, rich nations generally employ
more generous standards of poverty than poor nations. Thus, the numbers are not
comparable among countries. In 2010, in the United States, the poverty
threshold for one person under 65 was US$11,344 (annual income); the threshold
for a family group of four, including two children, was US$22,133. According to
the U.S. Census Bureau data released on September 13, 2011, the nation's
poverty rate rose to 15.1 percent in 2010. In the UK, "more than five million
peopleÂ â€“ over a fifth (23 percent) of all employeesÂ â€“ were paid less than
Â£6.67 an hour in April 2006. This is based on a low pay rate of 60 percent of
full-time median earnings, equivalent to a little over Â£12,000 a year for a
35-hour working week. In April 2006, a 35-hour week would have earned someone
Â£9,191 a yearÂ â€“ before tax or National Insurance". India's official poverty
level, on the other hand, is split according to rural vs. urban thresholds. For
urban dwellers, the poverty line is defined as living on less than 538.60
rupees (approximately USD $12) per month, whereas for rural dwellers, it is
defined as living on less than 356.35 rupees per month (approximately USD
$7.50). Criticisms. Using a poverty threshold is problematic because having an
income marginally above it is not substantially different from having an income
marginally below it: the negative effects of poverty tend to be continuous
rather than discrete, and the same low income affects different people in
different ways. To overcome this problem, poverty indices are sometimes used
instead; see income inequality metrics. A poverty threshold relies on a
quantitative, or purely numbers-based, measure of income. If other human
development-indicators like health and education are used, they must be
quantified, which is not a simple (if even achievable) task. Overstating
poverty. In-kind gifts, whether from public or private sources, are not counted
when calculating a poverty threshold. For example, if a parent pays the rent on
an apartment for an adult son directly to the apartment owner, instead of
giving the money to the son to pay the rent, then that money does not count as
income to the son. If a church or non-profit organization gives food to an
elderly person, the value of the food is not counted as income to the elderly
person. Rea Hederman, a senior policy analyst in the Center for Data Analysis
at the Heritage Foundation, said "Poor poverty yardsticks", Rea S. Hederman,
Jr., September 8, 2006, The Heritage Foundation Studies measuring the
difference between income before and after taxes and government transfers,
however, have found that without these programs poverty would be roughly 30% to
40% higher than the official poverty line indicates, despite many of their
benefits not being counted as income. Further, the U.S. Census Bureau
calculates the poverty line the same throughout the U.S. regardless of the
cost-of-living in a state or urban area. For instance, the cost-of-living in
California, the third largest state, was 142% of the U.S. average in 2010 while
the cost-of-living in Texas, the second largest state, was 90% of the U.S.
average.
