Pro-war rhetoric Pro-war rhetoric is a type of propaganda designed to convince
its audience that war is necessary. Propaganda is public communication aimed at
a mass designed to control attitudes and behavior in times of crisis. The two
main analytical approaches to pro-war rhetoric were founded by Ronald Reid, a
Professor of Communication Studies at the University of Massachusetts Amherst,
and Robert Ivie, a Professor of Rhetoric and Public Communication and Culture
at Indiana University (Bloomington). Reid's framework originated from
inductively studying propaganda. Ivie uses a deductive approach based on the
work of Kenneth Burke, claiming that "a people strongly committed to the ideal
of peace, but simultaneously faced with the reality of war, must believe that
the fault for any such disruption of their ideal lies with others" (Ivie 279).
Rhetorical framework of Ronald Reid. According to Reid, pro-war rhetoric uses
three appeals: territorial, ethnocentric, and optimistic. Territorial appeals
threaten the audience's "sense of territoriality" (Reid 260). The audience is
more likely to support entering the war on the defensive rather than offensive
side because of an actual or threatened invasion. Ethnocentric appeals create a
dichotomy between the audience and the enemy. Ethnocentrism should be evoked to
a "high level of emotional intensity" in attempt to complete two goals: hate
the "inferior alien" and depict threats to cultural values (Reid 267). The most
common method of evoking ethnocentric appeals come in the form of Barbarism vs.
Gallantry (Reid 269). It depicts the enemy's cultural values with evil
characteristics, and the audience's as angelic. The optimistic appeal assures
the audience that victory is inevitable should they enter into war.(Reid 282).
Rhetorical framework of Robert Ivie. According to Ivie, pro-war rhetoric
identifies three topoi; force vs. freedom, irrational vs. rational, and
aggression vs. defense. This tactic portrays to the audience that they are
entering war to provide freedom, and the opponent to force their values upon
others (Ivie 284). This is accomplished by implying that the opponent is
violent, while the audience's nation is willing to negotiate (Ivie 284). This
topos holds that the enemy is portrayed as irrational, responding "more to
animalistic drives than principles of law" (Ivie 288). The enemy has an
unenlightened intellect, not based on reason. Rhetors use this argument to
prove that when an enemy such as this threatens the well-being of the world,
even for a nation committed to neutrality and peace, war is the only choice
(Ivie 289). This idea portrays the enemy as the voluntary aggressor and the
nation of the audience as the passive victims of aggression, only entering into
war to ensure security (Ivie 290). "While the savage has acted against order,
the victim has been forced to respond in its defense" (Ivie 290). Ivie
describes the actions as either "voluntary" and "initial" or "involuntary" and
"defensive" (Ivie 290). The purpose of this topos is to lay the blame on the
enemy and justify reasons for the victimized nation to engage in action.
