United States pro-life movement The United States pro-life movement (also known
as the United States anti-abortion movement) is a social and political movement
in the United States opposing elective abortion on moral or sectarian grounds
and usually supporting its legal prohibition or restriction. Advocates
generally maintain that the human fetus (and in most cases the human embryo) is
a person and therefore has a right to life. The movement grew following the
Supreme Court's 1973 decision in "Roe v. Wade", which struck down most state
laws restricting abortion. In the United States this movement is frequently,
but not exclusively, allied with the Republican Party, and seeks to restrict
abortion with legislation such as the Human Life Amendment. The "pro-life"
concept also refers to opposing positions on the issue of euthanasia and
embryonic stem-cell research. On the other side of the abortion debate in the
United States is the United States pro-choice movement. Subscribing to
different moral grounds than the pro-life movement, pro-choicers hold the view
that a woman should be allowed to terminate her pregnancy. History. In the late
1960s, a number of organizations formed opposed to abortion. In the United
States, the National Right to Life Committee was formed in 1968, while in
Australia, the National Right to Life formed in 1970. The term "pro-life" was
coined by U.S. leaders of the right-to-life (anti-abortion) movement following
the January 1973 U.S. Supreme Court case "Roe v. Wade", which held that a
mother may abort her pregnancy in the first trimester, and may also abort
"subsequent to viabilityÂ ... for the preservation of the life or health of the
mother." The term "pro-life" was adopted instead of "anti-abortion" to
highlight the belief that they consider abortion the taking of a human life,
rather than an issue concerning the restriction of women's reproductive rights.
The first organized action was initiated by U.S. Catholic bishops who
recommended in 1973 that the U.S. Constitution should be amended to ban
abortion. "Roe v. Wade" led to the growth of a largely religious-based anti-
abortion movement even as Americans became, in the 1970s and 1980s,
increasingly pro-choice. The first major pro-life success came in 1976 with the
passing of the Hyde Amendment prohibiting the use of certain federal funds for
abortions. In "Harris v. McRae", pro-life advocates won a 1980 challenge to the
Hyde Amendment. That same year, the pro-life movement gained control of the
Republican Party's platform committee, adding pro-life planks to the Republican
position, and calling for a Human Life Amendment to the U.S. Constitution,
banning abortion. Two pro-life U.S. PresidentsÂ â€“ Ronald Reagan and George H.
W. BushÂ â€“ were elected, although according to M. McKeegan, the majority of
Reagan voters were pro-choice. Barnes also discussed the rise in opposition to
abortion among the younger generations, especially the millennials, the
prevalence of crisis pregnancy centers, and the rejuvenation of old pro-life
groups, such as Students for Life, and the rise of new ones, such as 40 Days
for Life and Live Action. Lisa Miller of "The Washington Post" wrote about the
younger, more feminine face of the pro-life movement with the rise of leaders
such as Lila Rose of Live Action, Marjorie Dannenfelser of the Susan B. Anthony
List, Charmaine Yoest of Americans United for Life, Penny Nance of Concerned
Women for America, and Kristan Hawkins of Students for Life, all "youngish
Christian working mothers with children at home" who offer a pro-life
perspective on the women's rights aspect of the abortion issue instead of
focusing exclusively on the fetus. The pro-life movement has been highly
successful in recent years in advancing new laws against abortion within the
states. The Guttmacher Institute said eighty laws restricting abortion were
passed in the first six months of 2011, "more than double the previous record
of 34 abortion restrictions enacted in 2005â€”and more than triple the 23
enacted in 2010". Roman Catholics. Before the "Roe v. Wade" decision, the
right-to-life movement in the U.S. consisted of lawyers, politicians, and
doctors, almost all of whom were Catholic. The only coordinated opposition to
abortion during the early 1970s came from the United States Conference of
Catholic Bishops and the Family Life Bureau, also a Catholic organization.
Mobilization of a wide-scale pro-life movement among Catholics began quickly
after the "Roe v. Wade" decision with the creation of the National Right to
Life Committee (NRLC). The NRLC also organized non-Catholics, eventually
becoming the largest pro-life organization in the United States. Connie Paige
has been quoted as having said that, "he Roman Catholic Church created the
right-to-life movement. Without the church, the movement would not exist as
such today." Evangelicals. Before 1980, the Southern Baptist Convention
officially advocated for loosening of abortion restrictions. During the 1971
and 1974 Southern Baptist Conventions, Southern Baptists were called upon "to
work for legislation that will allow the possibility of abortion under such
conditions as rape, incest, clear evidence of severe fetal deformity, and
carefully ascertained evidence of the likelihood of damage to the emotional,
mental, and physical health of the mother." W. Barry Garrett wrote in the
"Baptist Press", "Religious liberty, human equality and justice are advanced by
the v. Wade Supreme Court Decision." By 1980, conservative Protestant leaders
became vocal in their opposition to legalized abortion, and by the early 1990s
Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition of America became a significant pro-life
organization. In 2005, Richard Land, president of the Southern Baptist
Conventionâ€™s Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission, said that making
abortion illegal is more important than any other issue. Overview. Pro-life
individuals generally believe that human life should be valued either from
fertilization or implantation until natural death. The contemporary pro-life
movement is typically, but not exclusively, influenced by Conservative
Christian beliefs, especially in the United States, and has influenced certain
strains of bioethical utilitarianism. From that viewpoint, any action which
destroys an embryo or fetus kills a person. Any deliberate destruction of human
life is considered ethically or morally wrong and is not considered to be
mitigated by any benefits to others, as such benefits are coming at the expense
of the life of what they believe to be a person. In some cases, this belief
extends to opposing abortion of fetuses that would almost certainly expire
within a short time after birth, such as anencephalic fetuses. Some pro-life
advocates oppose certain forms of birth control, particularly hormonal
contraception such as emergency contraception (ECPs), and copper IUDs which
prevent the implantation of an embryo. Because they believe that the term
"pregnancy" should be defined so as to begin at fertilization, they refer to
these contraceptives as abortifacients because they cause the embryo to starve.
An embryo gets it's nourishment off the uterine wall and "dies" if not
attached. The Catholic Church endorses this view, but the possibility that
hormonal contraception has post-fertilization effects is disputed within the
scientific community, including some pro-life physicians. Attachment to a pro-
life position is often but not exclusively connected to religious beliefs about
the sanctity of life (see also culture of life). Exclusively secular-humanist
positions against abortion tend to be a minority viewpoint among pro-life
advocates. Many holding the pro-life position also tend toward a
complementarian view of gender roles, though there is also a self-described
feminist element inside the movement. Moreover, conservative publications, such
as "American Thinker", cite studies such as a comprehensive review of
literature published in the "British Journal of Psychiatry" which suggests
that, among women, "there is a significant increase in mental health problems
after abortion." However, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
responded to the review with a position statement in which they said that three
previously published systematic reviews and the RCOG guideline development
group (who reviewed all available literature up to February 2011) have
concluded that women who have an abortion are not at increased risk of mental
health problems when compared with women who continue an unintended pregnancy.
Furthermore, they questioned the fact that while the paperâ€™s findings pointed
to increased substance misuse and suicidal behaviors among the groups of women,
the research did not fully examine if these women had pre-existing mental
health complications such as dependency issues and mood disorders before the
abortion. Religion and pro-life movements. The variety in opinion on the issue
of abortion is reflected in the diverse views of religious groups. For example,
the Roman Catholic Church condemns every procured abortion as morally evil,
while traditional Jewish teachings allow abortion as a means of safeguarding
the life and well-being of the pregnant woman. Christianity. Much of the pro-
life movement in the United States and around the world finds support in the
Roman Catholic Church, Christian right, the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod and
the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod, the Church of England, the Anglican
Church in North America, the Eastern Orthodox Church, and The Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS). However, the pro-life teachings of these
denominations vary considerably. The Eastern Orthodox Church and Roman Catholic
Church consider abortion to be immoral in all cases, but permit acts which
indirectly result in the death of the fetus in the case where the mother's life
is threatened. In Pope John Paul II's Letter to Families he simply stated the
Roman Catholic Church's view on abortion and euthanasia: "Laws which legitimize
the direct killing of innocent human beings through abortion or euthanasia are
in complete opposition to the inviolable right to life proper to every
individual; they thus deny the equality of everyone before the law." The
National Association of Evangelicals and the LDS Church oppose abortion on
demand; however, the NAE considers abortion allowable in cases with clear
evidence of severe fetal deformity, dire threat to the life/physical health of
the pregnant woman, or when a pregnancy results from rape or incest. The
Taskforce of United Methodists on Abortion and Sexuality (TUMAS) was formed in
1987 to further the pro-life ministry in The United Methodist Church. The
Southern Baptist Convention believes that abortion is allowable only in cases
where there is a direct threat to the life of the woman. Other Mainline
Protestant denominations in the United States, such as the Episcopal Church,
the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.),
and the United Church of Christ, are pro-choice. Islam. Attitudes to abortion
vary greatly in the Muslim world. Although there are different opinions among
Muslim scholars on the topic of Islam and abortion, most agree that the
termination of a pregnancy after four monthsâ€”the point at which, in Islam, a
fetus is thought to become a living soulâ€”is not permissible. Many Islamic
thinkers contend that in cases prior to four months of gestation, abortion
should be permissible only in instances in which a mother's life is in danger
or in cases of rape, with Hanafi being an exception. However, even the more
restrictive paradigms allow some flexibility, due to the roles played by
socioeconomic conditions and health. The legal situation in the Muslim world
also varies from country to country. In some countries, abortion is legal with
no restrictions or with nominal restrictions. In many countries where abortion
is illegal except in cases where the pregnancy threatens the woman's life, a
woman must nonetheless obtain her husband's consent. Although according to
Islamic tradition she is considered to have a right to life, unlike in much
Western anti-abortion thought, her rights are restricted by community
standards. Hinduism. Although traditional Hindu texts and teachings have
opposed elective abortions, a vocal pro-life movement is limited in India, the
nation with the largest Hindu population. Most abortions in India are done for
sex selection, with boys being favored. As a result, activists who argue
against abortion in India are typically women's rights activists. Recently,
these pro-life activists took Google, Yahoo, and Microsoft to court, suing to
remove web ads that sell products that enable parents to determine the sex of a
fetus. Some Hindu institutions oppose abortion, and teach that abortion
prevents a soul in its karmic progress toward God. Other Hindu theologians
believe personhood begins at 3 months and develops through to 5 months of
gestation, possibly implying permitting abortion in extenuating circumstances
up to the third month and considering any abortion past the third month to be
destruction of the soul's current incarnate body. Judaism. In Judaism, views on
abortion draw primarily upon the legal and ethical teachings of the Hebrew
Bible, the Torah, the case-by-case decisions of responsa, and other rabbinic
literature. In the modern period, moreover, Jewish thinking on abortion has
responded both to liberal understandings of personal autonomy as well as
Christian opposition to abortion. Polls of Jews in America report that 88% of
American Jews are pro-choice. Prominent Jewish pro-life activist Michael Medved
has said, "Jewish law for millennia has been extremely clear, that abortion is
only permitted when the life of the mother is directly threatened... To link
Jewish tradition to the pro-choice position is 'ludicrous and ignorant'."
Current activity. The pro-life movement includes a variety of organizations,
with no single centralized decision-making body. There are diverse arguments
and rationales for the pro-life stance. There are many socially conservative
organizations in the U.S. that support the pro-life movement. Some groups focus
solely on promoting the pro-life cause, such as the Susan B. Anthony List,
National Right to Life Committee, Americans United for Life, and Live Action,
among many others. Other groups support not only the pro-life cause but the
broader family values cause, such as Family Research Council, Focus on the
Family, American Family Association, and Concerned Women for America, among
many others. "Consistent Life Ethic". A major stated goal within the pro-life
movement is to "restore legal protection to innocent human life." This
protection would include fetuses and embryos, persons who cannot communicate
their wishes due to physical or mental incapacitation, and those who are too
weak to resist being euthanized. Some pro-life advocates, such as those
subscribing to the philosophy of a Consistent Life Ethic (formerly known as the
Seamless Garment), oppose virtually all acts that end human life. They would
argue that abortion, euthanasia, capital punishment, and unjust war are all
wrong. Prominent organizations advocating a Consistent Life Ethic include
Democrats For Life of America (which includes dozens of Congressmen),
Sojourners Magazine, and Priests for Life. Others (mainly Catholics) argue that
the death penalty can be a fair punishment for murder, justifiably inflicted by
lawful authority, whereas abortion is an attack on an innocent. The increasing
attention paid to this controversial position may result from the large Roman
Catholic membership of the pro-life movement, striving to adhere to Catholic
Church teachings on the death penalty. The debate. In some countries, the
abortion issue remains one of the broader and more controversial societal
issues. A broad spectrum of positions exists on this issue, from those who
advocate abortion-on-demand at any point during a pregnancy until birth on the
one end, to those who oppose every form of abortion on the other. Between these
two there is a considerable range of positions. Some oppose abortion, but are
content to work at reducing the number of abortions through prevention of
unwanted pregnancies, a task they accomplish through encouraging abstinence,
targeted sex education and/or increased availability of contraception. Current
legislation in United States Congress, the Pregnant Women Support Act, seeks to
reduce the abortion rate in the U.S. without making any procedure illegal and
without overturning "Roe v. Wade". There are many who support legal abortion
within the first trimesters but oppose late-term abortions. Those who oppose
late-term abortions usually take the view that once a fetus has reached the
point where it could live independently from the woman, the balance of rights
swings in favour of the fetus. Some oppose most abortions but make exception
for cases where the woman's life is in serious risk. In this category, some
likewise make an exception for severe fetal deformities. Others make exceptions
when the pregnancy was not caused by consensual sexual activity or may violate
social taboos, as in cases of rape and incest. Some allow for all these
exceptions, but stop short of abortion-on-demand. Another issue is that of
mandatory notification and consent. Some believe that a pregnant minor should
not be allowed to abort her pregnancy without notifying her parent or guardian
because of the risks and possible medical complications. Likewise, some believe
that notifying the woman's husband should be required because of parental
rights. In a 2003 Gallup poll in the United States, 72% of respondents were in
favour of spousal notification, with 26% opposed; of those polled. In many
states, such restrictions are mandated by law, though often with the right of
judicial oversight. Others believe that the child's biological father must be
notified. Generally speaking, the pro-life position regards abortion as a form
of infanticide, and thus seeks legal restrictions on abortions. Pro-life
advocates typically argue that if a pregnant woman is unable or unwilling to
raise the child, there is the option of placing the child up for adoption. One
analysis suggests that, since pro-life families may be expected to have fewer
abortions (and more children) than their pro-choice counterparts and they may
pass their beliefs on to their children, this will change the voter demographic
of future generations. In this way, legal abortion-on-demand may "also" serve
to "increase" the dominance of the pro-life position in society. This
hypothesis has been called the "Roe effect", and may explain the trend towards
more widespread support of the pro-life movement. The debate is between those
who believe fetuses are persons and should therefore have rights, vs. those who
believe fetuses are not persons but "future persons" or "potential persons".
However, not all pro-choice advocates claim that fetuses are non-persons; there
are also those who say that even if fetuses are persons, their position inside
the body of another person entitles that other person to kill them anyway. It
need not be based only on the fetus' location; it can also be justified by
citing the fact that the fetus is taking nutrients from the mother's
bloodstream, and injecting metabolic end-products into her bloodstream, and
preparing to subject her to a major medical/surgical trauma (childbirth), all
of which she is entitled to prevent, even by means of deadly force. Some pro-
choice advocates also point out that, while they too would prefer to see
abortion not happen, when abortion is illegal, women who want abortions seek
unsafe abortions, placing their own lives at risk. Legal and political aspects.
The United States Republican Party platform advocates a pro-life position,
though there are some pro-choice Republicans. The Republican group The Wish
List supports pro-choice Republican women just as EMILY's List supports pro-
choice Democratic women. The Susan B. Anthony List (SBA List) is dedicated to
"increasing the percentage of pro-life women in Congress and high public
office," and seeks to eliminate abortion in the U.S. The Democrats for Life of
America are a group of pro-life Democrats on the political left who advocate
for a pro-life plank in the Democratic Party's platform and for pro-life
Democratic candidates. Former vice-presidential candidate Sargent Shriver, the
late Robert Casey, a former two-term governor of Pennsylvania, and former Rep.
Bart Stupak (D-Mich), a vocal pro-life proponent and leader of the Democratic
pro-life caucus in the United States House of Representatives, have been among
the most well-known pro-life Democrats. However, following his vote in favor of
the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Marjorie Dannenfelser of the
SBA List reported that her organization was revoking a pro-life award it had
been planning to give to Stupak, and pro-life organizations accused Stupak of
having betrayed the pro-life movement. "The New York Times" reported in 2011
that the pro-life movement in the United States has been undergoing a
disagreement over tactics. Since "Roe v. Wade" was decided in 1973, the
movement has usually focused on chipping away at "Roe" through incremental
restrictions such as laws requiring parental consent or women to see sonograms,
restricting late-term abortions, etc., with the goal of limiting abortions and
changing "hearts and minds" until there is a majority on the Supreme Court to
overturn "Roe". However, some activists are calling for "an all-out legal
assault on "Roe. v. Wade"", seeking the enactment of laws defining legal
personhood as beginning at fertilization or prohibiting abortions after a fetal
heartbeat is detectable at six to eight weeks in the hope that court challenges
to such laws would lead the Supreme Court to overturn "Roe v. Wade". They
believe that Justice Anthony Kennedy, who nearly decided to overturn "Roe" in
"Planned Parenthood v. Casey", is open to rethinking "Roe". Others fear that
the Court would not only strike down the laws in question but other state laws
as well, and take the opportunity to solidify the ruling in "Roe". Evangelical
Christian groups tend to be in the former camp and Catholic groups in the
latter. Controversies over terminology. Pro-life advocates tend to use terms
such as "unborn baby", "unborn child", or "pre-born child". Pro-life
individuals may also prefer to refer to the pregnant woman as a "mother", while
some pro-choice individuals consider this inappropriate, and some in the
medical community may see its usage as insensitive and biased in certain
narrowly defined contexts. Both "pro-choice" and "pro-life" are examples of
terms labeled as political framing: they are terms which purposely try to
define their philosophies in the best possible light, while by definition
attempting to describe their opposition in the worst possible light. "Pro-
choice" implies that the alternative viewpoint is "anti-choice", while "pro-
life" implies the alternative viewpoint is "pro-death" or "anti-life". The
Associated Press encourages journalists to use the terms "abortion rights" and
"anti-abortion". In a 2009 Gallup Poll, a majority of U.S. adults (51%) called
themselves "pro-life" on the issue of abortionâ€”for the first time since
Gallup began asking the question in 1995â€”while 42% identified themselves as
"pro-choice", although pro-choice groups noted that acceptance of the "pro-
life" label did not in all cases indicate opposition to legalized abortion, and
that another recent poll had indicated that a plurality were pro-choice. A
March 2011 Rasmussen Reports poll concluded that Americans are "closely divided
between those who call themselves pro-life" and those who consider themselves
as "pro-choice". In a February 2011 Rasmussen Reports poll of "Likely U.S.
Voters", fifty percent view themselves as "pro-choice" and forty percent "say
they are pro-life". Types of advocacy. Pro-life advocacy involves a variety of
activities, from promoting the pro-life position to the public in general,
lobbying public officials, or attempting to dissuade individual women to forgo
abortions. Some efforts involve distributing literature, providing counseling
services, conducting public demonstrations or protests and private or public
prayer. Specialty license plates. In the United States, some states issue
specialty license plates that have a pro-life theme. Choose Life, an advocacy
group founded in 1997, was successful in securing a pro-life automobile tag in
Florida. Subsequently, the organization has been actively helping groups in
other states pursue "Choose Life" license plates. Violence. Against abortion
providers. Violent incidents directed against abortion providers range from the
murders and attempted murders of physicians and clinic staff to arson and
bombings of abortion clinics, to ordinary fisticuffs. G. Davidson Smith of the
Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) defined violence related to
abortion extremism, animal rights, and environmentalism as "single issue
terrorism". Acts of violence against abortion providers and facilities in North
America have largely subsided following a peak in the mid-1990s. The National
Clinic Violence Survey, conducted by the pro-choice Feminist Majority
Foundation, reported in 2006 that severe violence affected 18.4% of abortion
providers and facilities in the preceding year, 2005. This figure is lower than
at any time since 1994, which is consistent with statistics from the National
Abortion Federation that show violence against abortion clinics or providers
has steadily decreased since 2001. A notable example of anti-abortion violence
in the United States is the murder of Dr. George Tiller, a physician who
provided late term abortions as part of his practice. He was shot and killed in
the foyer of the church where he was a member. A large number of pro-life
leaders and groups condemned the killing. The National Right to Life Committee,
the largest pro-life organization in the United States, has stated that it
"unequivocally condemns any acts of violence used by individuals regardless of
their motivation". The American Life League has issued a "Pro-life Proclamation
Against Violence". Nearly all pro-life leaders condemned the use of violence in
the movement even before Tiller's death, describing violence as an aberration
and saying that no one in their organizations was associated with acts of
violence. In the 1990s, the Revered Patrick Mahoney addressed the issue of
violence, saying, "I think that extremists opposed to abortion got frustrated,
felt they were losing the battle and felt it was incumbent upon themselves to
resort to violence." In the same era, the Flip Benham, director of Operation
Save America, also addressed the issue, saying "This whole thing isn't about
violence. It's all about silenceÂ â€“ silencing the Christian message. That's
what they want." He also stated, "They screech and scream about us crying fire
in a crowded theater. And I agree it is wrong, unless there is a fire. If
there's a fire in that theater, we better call it that. Our inflammatory
rhetoric is only revealing a far more inflammatory truth." Against pro-life
people. On September 11, 2009, pro-life activist James Pouillon was shot and
killed as he was displaying pictures of aborted fetuses in front of a school in
Owosso, Michigan. Harlan James Drake was charged with two murders: Pouillon's
murder and the murder of a gravel pit contractor, Mike Fuoss. Drake reportedly
"didn't like Pouillon's graphic antiabortion signs" and had a grudge against
Fuoss and against James Howe, a real estate agent whom Drake targeted. Two days
after the murder, president Barack Obama issued a statement saying that
"hichever side of a public debate you're on, violence is never the right
answer".
