Productive forces Productive forces, "productive powers" or "forces of
production" German, "Produktivkr√§fte" is a central idea in Marxism and
historical materialism. In Karl Marx and Frederick Engels's own critique of
political economy, it refers to the combination of the means of labor (tools,
machinery, land, infrastructure and so on) with human labour power. Marx and
Engels probably derived the concept from Adam Smith's reference to the
"productive powers of labour" (see e.g. chapter 8 of "The Wealth of Nations"),
although the German political economist Friedrich List also mentions the
concept of "productive powers" in "The National System of Political Economy"
(1841). All those forces which are applied by people in the production process
(body & brain, tools & techniques, materials, resources and equipment) are
encompassed by this concept, including those management and engineering
functions technically indispensable for production (as contrasted with social
control functions). Human knowledge can also be a productive force. Together
with the social and technical relations of production, the productive forces,
constitute a historically specific mode of production. Productive forces and
labour. Karl Marx emphasized that, with few exceptions, means of labour are not
a productive force unless they are actually operated, maintained and conserved
by living human labour. Without applying living human labour, their physical
condition and value would deteriorate, depreciate, or be destroyed (an example
would be a ghost town or capital depreciation due to strike action). Capital
itself, being one of the factors of production, comes to be viewed in
capitalist society as a productive force in its own right, independent from
labour, a subject with "a life of its own". Indeed, Marx sees the essence of
what he calls "the capital relation" as being summarised by the circumstance
that "capital buys labour", i.e. the power of property ownership to command
human energy and labour-time, and thus of inanimate "things" to exert an
autonomous power over people. What disappears from view is that the power of
capital depends in the last instance on human cooperation. The productive power
of cooperation comes to be viewed as the productive power of capital, because
it is capital which forcibly organises people, rather than people organising
capital. Marx regarded this as a supreme reification. Marxist-Leninist
definition of productive forces in the Soviet Union. The Institute of Economics
of the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R., textbook (1957, p xiv) says that
"he productive forces reflect the "relationship" of people to the objects and
forces of nature used for the production of material wealth." (italics added)
While productive forces are a "human" activity, the concept of "productive
forces" includes the concept that technology mediates the human-nature
relationship. Productive forces do "not" include the subject of labor (the raw
materials or materials from nature being worked on). Productive forces are not
the same thing as the means of production. Marx identified three components of
production: human labor, subject of labor, and means of labor (1967, p 174).
Productive forces are the union of human labor and the means of labor; "means
of production" are the union of the subject of labor and the means of labor.
(Institute of Economics of the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R., 1957, p
xiii). Productive forces and the reification of technology. Other
interpretations, sometimes influenced by postmodernism and the concept of
commodity fetishism have by contrast emphasized the reification of the powers
of technology, said to occur by the separation of technique from the producers,
and by falsely imputing human powers to technology as autonomous force, the
effect being a perspective of inevitable and unstoppable technological progress
operating beyond any human control, and impervious to human choices. In turn,
this is said to have the effect of naturalising and legitimating social
arrangements produced by people, by asserting that they are technically
inevitable. The error here seems to be that that social relations between
people are confused and conflated with technical relations between people and
things, and object relations between things; but this error is said to be a
spontaneous result of the operation of a universal market and the process of
commercialization. Productive forces and productivity. Marx's concept of
productive forces also has some relevance for discussions in economics about
the meaning and measurement of productivity. Modern economics theorises
productivity in terms of the marginal product of the factors of production.
Marx theorises productivity within the capitalist mode of production in terms
of the social and technical relations of production, with the concept of the
organic composition of capital and the value product. He suggests there is no
completely neutral view of productivity possible; how productivity is defined
depends on the values and interests people have. Thus, different social classes
have different notions of productivity reflecting their own station in life,
and giving rise to different notions of productive and unproductive labour.
Critique of technology. In the romantic or ecological critique of technology,
technical progress boosting productivity often does not mean human progress at
all. The design of production technologies may not be suited to human needs or
human health, or technologies may be used in ways which do more harm than good.
In that case, productive forces are transformed into destructive forces.
Sometimes this view leads to cultural pessimism or a theory of "Small is
beautiful" as proposed by E. F. Schumacher. Ideas about alternative technology
are also proposed. All of this suggests that the technologies we have, are only
"options" which have been chosen from different technical possibilities
existing at the time, and that the same technologies can be used for good or
for ill, in different contexts. A technology may be chosen because it is
profitable, and once adopted on a mass scale, it may be difficult to create
alternatives to it, particularly because it becomes integrated with other
technologies and a whole "life style" (e.g. petrol-fueled cars). Yet that may
not mean that the technology is ultimately desirable for human life on earth.
Productive force determinism is then criticised on the ground that whatever
technologies are adopted, these are the result of human choices between
technical alternatives, influenced by the human interests and stakes existing
at the time. What may be presented as a pre-determined "technical necessity"
may in reality have more to do with considerations of political, sociological,
or economic power. Advocates of technological progress however argue that even
if admittedly "progress may have its price", without technical innovation there
would be no progress at all; the same people who criticize technology also
depend on it for their everyday existence.
