Profit (economics) In neoclassical microeconomic theory, the term profit has
two related but distinct meanings. Normal profit represents the total
opportunity costs (both explicit and implicit) of a venture to an investor,
whereas economic profit (also abnormal, pure, supernormal or excess profit, as
the case may be monopoly or oligopoly profit) is, at least in the neoclassical
microeconomic theory which dominates modern economics, the difference between a
firm's total revenue and all costs (including normal profit). A related
concept, sometimes considered synonymous in certain contexts, is that of
economic rent. In Classical economics and Marxian economics, profit is the
return to an owner of capital stock (means of production) in any productive
pursuit involving labor, or a return on bonds and money invested in capital
markets. Specifically in Marxian economic theory, the maximization of profit
and the accumulation of capital is the driving force behind economic activity
within capitalist economic systems. Other types of profit have been referenced,
including "social profit" (related to externalities). It is not to be confused
with profit in finance and accounting, which is equal to revenue minus only
explicit costs, and superprofit, a concept in Marxian economic theory. Profit
is not synonymous with the concepts of profitability and the profit motive.
Normal profit. "Normal" profit is a component of (implicit) costs, and so not a
component of business profit at all. It represents the opportunity cost for
enterprise, since the time that the owner spends running the firm could be
spent on running another firm. The enterprise component of normal profit is
thus the profit that a business owner considers necessary to make running the
business worth his while i.e. it is comparable to the next best amount the
entrepreneur could earn doing another job. Particularly if enterprise is not
included as a factor of production, it can also be viewed a return to capital
for investors including the entrepreneur, equivalent to the return the capital
owner could have expected (in a safe investment), plus compensation for risk.
In other words, the cost of normal profit varies both within and across
industries; it is commensurate with the riskiness associated with each type of
investment, as per the risk-return spectrum. Only normal profits arise in
circumstances of perfect competition when long run economic equilibrium is
reached; there is no incentive for firms to either enter or leave the industry.
Economic profit. An "economic" profit arises when revenue exceeds the
opportunity cost of inputs, noting that these costs include the cost of equity
capital that is met by normal profits. If a firm is making an economic loss
(its economic profit is negative), it follows that all costs are not being met
in full, and the firm would do better to leave the industry in the long run. In
terms of the wider economy, economic profit indicates that resources are being
employed in useful endeavours, while economic losses indicate that those
resources would be better employed elsewhere. In competitive and contestable
markets. Economic profit does not occur in perfect competition in long run
equilibrium; if it did, there would be an incentive for new firms to enter the
industry, aided by a lack of barriers to entry until there was no longer any
profit. As new firms enter the industry, they increase the supply of the
product available in the market, and these new firms are forced to charge a
lower price to entice consumers to buy the additional supply these new firms
are supplying (they compete for customers). Incumbent firms within the industry
face losing their existing customers to the new firms entering the industry,
and are therefore forced to lower their prices to match the lower prices set by
the new firms. New firms will continue to enter the industry until the price of
the product is lowered to the point that it is the same as the average cost of
producing the product, and all of the economic profit disappears. When this
happens, economic agents outside of the industry find no advantage to entering
the industry, supply of the product stops increasing, and the price charged for
the product stabilizes. The same is likewise true of the long run equilibria of
monopolistically competitive industries and, more generally, any market which
is held to be contestable. Normally, a firm that introduces a differentiated
product can initially secure market power for a short while. At this stage, the
initial price the consumer must pay for the product is high, and the demand
for, as well as the available of the product in the market, will be limited. In
the long run, however, when the profitability of the product is well
established, and because there are few barriers to entry, the number of firms
that produce this product will increase until the available supply of the
product eventually becomes relatively large, the price of the product shrinks
down to the level of the average cost of producing the product. When this
finally occurs, all monopoly associated with producing and selling the product
disappears, and the initial monopoly turns into a competitive industry. In the
case of contestable markets, the cycle is often ended with the departure of the
former "hit and run" entrants to the market, returning the industry to its
previous state, just with a lower price and no economic profit for the
incumbent firms. Profit can, however, occur in competitive and contestable
markets in the short run, as firms jostle for market position. Once risk is
accounted for, long-lasting economic profit in a competitive market is thus
viewed as the result of constant cost-cutting and performance improvement ahead
of industry competitors, allowing costs to be below the market-set price. In
uncompetitive markets. Economic profit is, however, much more prevalent in
uncompetitive markets such as in a perfect monopoly or oligopoly situation. In
these scenarios, individual firms have some element of market power: Though
monopolists are constrained by consumer demand, they are not price takers, but
instead either price-setters or quantity setters. This allows the firm to set a
price which is higher than that which would be found in a similar but more
competitive industry, allowing them economic profit in both the long and short
run. The existence of economic profits depends on the prevalence of barriers to
entry: these stop other firms from entering into the industry and sapping away
profits, like they would in a more competitive market. In cases where barriers
are present, but more than one firm, firms can collude to limit production,
thereby restricting supply in order to ensure the price of the product remains
high enough to ensure all of the firms in the industry achieve an economic
profit. However, some economists, for instance Steve Keen, argue that even an
infinitesimal amount of market power can allow a firm to produce a profit and
that the absence of economic profit in an industry, or even merely that some
production occurs at a loss, in and of itself constitutes a barrier to entry.
In a single-goods case, a positive economic profit happens when the firm's
average cost is less than the price of the product or service at the profit-
maximizing output. The economic profit is equal to the quantity of output
multiplied by the difference between the average cost and the price. Government
intervention. Often, governments will try to intervene in uncompetitive markets
to make them more competitive. Antitrust (US) or competition (elsewhere) laws
were created to prevent powerful firms from using their economic power to
artificially create the barriers to entry they need to protect their economic
profits. This includes the use of predatory pricing toward smaller competitors.
For example, in the United States, Microsoft Corporation was initially
convicted of breaking Anti-Trust Law and engaging in anti-competitive behavior
in order to form one such barrier in "United States v. Microsoft"; after a
successful appeal on technical grounds, Microsoft agreed to a settlement with
the Department of Justice in which they were faced with stringent oversight
procedures and explicit requirements designed to prevent this predatory
behaviour. With lower barriers, new firms can enter the market again, making
the long run equilibrium much more like that of a competitive industry, with no
economic profit for firms. If a government feels it is impractical to have a
competitive market - such as in the case of a natural monopoly - it will
sometimes try to regulate the existing uncompetitive market by controlling the
price firms charge for their product. For example, the old AT&T (regulated)
monopoly, which existed before the courts ordered its breakup, had to get
government approval to raise its prices. The government examined the monopoly's
costs, and determined whether or not the monopoly should be able raise its
price and if the government felt that the cost did not justify a higher price,
it rejected the monopoly's application for a higher price. Though a regulated
firm will not have a economic profit as large as it would be in an unregulated
situation, it can still can make profits well above a competitive firm has in a
truly competitive market. Other applications of the term. The "social" profit
from a firm's activities is the normal profit plus or minus any externalities
that occur in its activity. A firm may report relatively large monetary
profits, but by creating negative externalities their social profit could be
relatively small. "Profitability" is a term of economic efficiency.
Mathematically it is a relative index â€“ a fraction with profit as numerator
and generating profit flows or assets as denominator. Maximization. It is a
standard economic assumption (though not necessarily a perfect one in the real
world) that, other things being equal, a firm will attempt to maximize its
profits. Given that profit is defined as the difference in total revenue and
total cost, a firm achieves a maximum by operating at the point where the
difference between the two is at its greatest. In markets which do not show
interdependence, this point can either be found by looking at these two curves
directly, or by finding and selecting the best of the points where the
gradients of the two curves (marginal revenue and marginal cost respectively)
are equal. In interdependent markets, game theory must be used to derive a
profit maximising solution.
