Property rights (economics) Property rights are the exclusive authority to
determine how a resource is used, and who owns that resource - government,
collective bodies, or by individuals. Property rights can be viewed as an
attribute of an economic good. This attribute has four broad componentsÂ Â  â€¢
Â Â  â€¢ Dean Lueck (2008). "property law, economics and," "The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Economics", 2nd Editio. Abstract. In economics, property usually
refers to ownership (rights to the proceeds of output generated) and control
over the use of the means of production. They may be owned privately, by the
state, by those who use it, or held in common by society. The concept of
property rights as used by economists and legal scholars (see property for the
legal concept) are related but distinct. The distinction is largely seen in the
economists' focus on the ability of an individual or collective to control the
use of the good. For example, a thief who has stolen a good would not be
considered to have legal (de jure) property right to the good, but would be
considered to have economic (de facto) property right to the good. Property-
rights regimes. Property rights to a good must be defined, their use must be
monitored, and possession of rights must be enforced. The costs of defining,
monitoring, and enforcing property rights are termed transaction costs.
Depending on the level of transaction costs, various forms of property rights
institutions will develop. Each institutional form can be described by the
distribution of rights. The following list is ordered from no property rights
defined to all property rights being held by individuals Open-access property
is property that is not owned by anyone. It is non-excludable (no one can
exclude anyone else from using it) and non-rival (one person's use of it does
not prevent others from simultaneously using it). Open-access property is not
managed by anyone, and access to it is not controlled. There is no constraint
on anyone using open-access property (excluding people is either impossible or
prohibitively costly). The tragedy of the commons should be called the tragedy
of open access. 'Open-access property may exist because ownership has never
been established, because the state has legislated it, or because no effective
controls are in place, or feasible, i.e., the cost of exclusion outweighs the
benefits. The state can sometimes effectively convert open access property into
private, common or public property by legislating to define rights and enforce
them'. Examples of open-access property are the atmosphere or ocean fisheries.
State property (also known as public property) is property that is owned by
all, but its access and use is controlled by the state. An example is a
national park. Common property or "collective property" is property that is
owned by a group of individuals. Access, use, and exclusion are controlled by
the joint owners. True commons can break down, but, unlike open-access
property, common property owners have greater ability to manage conflicts
through shared benefits and enforcement. Private property is both excludable
and rival. Private property access, use, exclusion and management are
controlled by the private owner or a group of legal owners. Property rights and
the environment. Implicit or explicit property rights can be created by
regulating the environment, either through prescriptive command and control
approaches (e.g. limits on input/output/discharge quantities, specified
processes/equipment, audits) or by more flexible market-based instruments (e.g.
taxes, transferable permits or quotas). It has been proposed by Ronald Coase
(Jnl of Law and Economics, 5 October 1960) that clearly defining and assigning
property rights would resolve environmental problems by internalizing
externalities and relying on incentives of private owners to conserve resources
for the future. However, this assumes that it is possible to internalize all
environmental benefits, that owners will have perfect information, that scale
economies are manageable, transaction costs are bearable, and that legal
frameworks operate efficiently. Strengthening markets and creating and
strengthening property rights could reduce, but not eliminate, such problems.
