Prospect theory Prospect theory is a behavioral economic theory that describes
decisions between alternatives that involve risk, where the probabilities of
outcomes are known. The theory says that people make decisions based on the
potential value of losses and gains rather than the final outcome, and that
people evaluate these losses and gains using interesting heuristics. The model
is descriptive: it tries to model real-life choices, rather than optimal
decisions. The paper "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk" has
been called a "seminal paper in behavioral economics". Model. The theory was
developed by Daniel Kahneman, a professor at Princeton University's Department
of Psychology, and Amos Tversky in 1979 as a psychologically more accurate
description of preferences compared to expected utility theory. It describes
how people choose between probabilistic alternatives and evaluate potential
losses and gains. In the original formulation the term "prospect" referred to a
lottery. The theory describes the decision processes in two stages, editing and
evaluation. In the first, outcomes of the decision are ordered following some
heuristic. In particular, people decide which outcomes they see as basically
identical, set a reference point and then consider lesser outcomes as losses
and greater ones as gains. In the following evaluation phase, people behave as
if they would compute a value (utility), based on the potential outcomes and
their respective probabilities, and then choose the alternative having a higher
utility. The formula that Kahneman and Tversky assume for the evaluation phase
is (in its simplest form) given by where formula_2 is the overall or expected
utility of the outcomes to the individual making the decision, formula_3 are
the potential outcomes and formula_4 their respective probabilities. formula_5
is a so-called value function that assigns a value to an outcome. The value
function (sketched in the Figure) that passes through the reference point is s-
shaped and asymmetrical. Losses hurt more than gains feel good (loss aversion).
This differs greatly from expected utility theory, in which a rational agent is
indifferent to the reference point. In expected utility theory, the individual
only cares about absolute wealth, not relative wealth in any given situation.
The function formula_6 is a probability weighting function and expresses that
people tend to overreact to small probability events, but underreact to medium
and large probabilities. To see how Prospect Theory (PT) can be applied in an
example, consider the decision to buy insurance. Assuming the probability of
the insured risk is 1%, the potential loss is $1,000 and the premium is $15. If
we apply PT, we first need to set a reference point. This could be the current
wealth or the worst case (losing $1,000). If we set the frame to the current
wealth, the decision would be either to 1. Pay $15 for sure, which yields a PT-
utility of formula_7, OR 2. Enter a lottery with possible outcomes of $0
(probability 99%) or -$1,000 (probability 1%), which yields a PT-utility of
formula_8. These expressions can be computed numerically. For typical value and
weighting functions, the latter expression could be larger due to the convexity
of formula_5 in losses, and hence the insurance looks unattractive. If we set
the frame to âˆ’$1,000, both alternatives are set in gains. The concavity of
the value function in gains can then lead to a preference for buying the
insurance. In this example, a strong overweighting of small probabilities can
also undo the effect of the convexity of formula_5 in losses: the potential
outcome of losing $1,000 is overweighted. The interplay of overweighting of
small probabilities and concavity-convexity of the value function leads to the
so-called "fourfold pattern of risk attitudes": risk-averse behavior in gains
involving moderate probabilities and of small probability losses; risk-seeking
behavior in losses involving moderate probabilities and of small probability
gains. Applications. Some behaviors observed in economics, like the disposition
effect or the reversing of risk aversion/risk seeking in case of gains or
losses (termed the "reflection effect"), can also be explained by referring to
the prospect theory. The pseudocertainty effect is the observation that people
may be risk-averse or risk-acceptant depending on the amounts involved and on
whether the gamble relates to becoming better off or worse off. This is a
possible explanation for why the same person may buy both an insurance policy
and a lottery ticket. An important implication of prospect theory is that the
way economic agents subjectively frame an outcome or transaction in their mind
affects the utility they expect or receive. This aspect has been widely used in
behavioral economics and mental accounting. Framing and prospect theory has
been applied to a diverse range of situations which appear inconsistent with
standard economic rationality: the equity premium puzzle, the excess returns
puzzle and long swings/PPP puzzle of exchange rates through the endogenous
prospect theory of Imperfect Knowledge Economics, the status quo bias, various
gambling and betting puzzles, intertemporal consumption, and the endowment
effect. Another possible implication for economics is that utility might be
reference based, in contrast with additive utility functions underlying much of
neo-classical economics. This means people consider not only the value they
receive, but also the value received by others. This hypothesis is consistent
with psychological research into happiness, which finds subjective measures of
wellbeing are relatively stable over time, even in the face of large increases
in the standard of living (Easterlin, 1974; Frank, 1997). Military historian
John A. Lynn argues that prospect theory provides an intriguing if not
completely verifiable framework of analysis for understanding Louis XIV's
foreign policy nearer to the end of his reign (Lynn, pp.Â 43â€“44). Limits and
extensions. The original version of prospect theory gave rise to violations of
first-order stochastic dominance. That is, prospect A might be preferred to
prospect B even if the probability of receiving a value x or greater is at
least as high under prospect B as it is under prospect A for all values of x,
and is greater for some value of x. Later theoretical improvements overcame
this problem, but at the cost of introducing intransitivity in preferences. A
revised version, called cumulative prospect theory overcame this problem by
using a probability weighting function derived from Rank-dependent expected
utility theory. Cumulative prospect theory can also be used for infinitely many
or even continuous outcomes (for example, if the outcome can be any real
number).
