Provisional ballot Whether a provisional ballot is counted is contingent upon
the verification of that voter's eligibility. Many voters do not realize that
the provisional ballot is not counted until 7â€“10 days after election so their
vote does not affect the calling of the states to different candidates. A
guarantee that a voter could cast a provisional ballot if he or she believes
that they are entitled to vote was one of the guarantees of the Help America
Vote Act of 2002. History. The right of political parties to have observers at
polling places is old. One of the established roles for such observers is to
act as challengers, in the event that someone attempts to vote at the polling
place who is not eligible to vote. When a voter's right to vote was challenged,
state laws typically allowed them to cast a "challenged ballot". After the
polls closed, the canvassing board was then charged with examining the
challenged ballots and determining whether the challenge was to be upheld or
not. The right to a provisional ballot, as enacted by the Help America Vote
Act, brings a degree of uniformity to the array of various challenged ballot
rules enacted by various states. Potential problems. At their best, provisional
ballots provide voters who would otherwise be turned away from the polls to
have their votes counted, but at their worst, the offer of a provisional ballot
can be "a way to brush off troublesome voters by letting them think they have
voted." It is possible for parties to force certain voters to cast provisional
ballots so they can suppress the vote total of an opponent being counted on
election night. In the 2004 US Presidential Election, controversy arose out of
arguments regarding the interpretation of the criteria for determining the
eligibility of voters using provisional ballots. Many allege that these
discrepancies of interpretations, particularly in Ohio, may have been a
deciding factor in the outcome of the election. In the 2004 election, at least
1.9 million provisional ballots were cast, and 676,000 were never counted due
to various states' rules on counting provisional ballots. Studies of the use of
provisional ballots in the 2006 general election in the United States show that
around 21% of provisional ballots were rejected, where the majority of rejected
ballots were cast by registered voters and the majority of rejections were for
reasons that were preventable. Number of provisional ballots not counted in US
elections. According to the Election Assistance Commission thousands of
provisional ballots are not counted each election. 2004 US Election In the 2004
US Election 35.5 percent of all provisional ballots cast were discarded for
various reasons. This meant a total of 675,676 votes were not counted. See 2004
EAC report here. 2006 US Election In the 2006 US Election 20.5 percent of all
provisional ballots cast were discarded for various reasons. This meant a total
of 170,872 votes which were cast provisionally were not counted. See 2006 EAC
report here. Reasons for rejection. The most common reason for rejection of
provisional ballots is due to voters who have been purged off the voting rolls.
44 percent of those provisional ballots rejected in 2006 were due to this
factor.
