Public value Public value is the equivalent of shareholder value in public
management. Public value can be instituted as an organising principle in a
public sector organisation, providing a focus in the context of which
individual employees are free to pursue and propose new ideas about how to
improve the working of the organisation, in terms of efficiency or services.
Public organisations seeking to use public value as a principle need to create
a corporate culture in which the pursuit of public value by employees is
rewarded just as pursuing shareholder value is rewarded in private
corporations. Origin. The term and concept were invented by Harvard professor
Mark H. Moore, who published a book on the subject, "Creating Public Value
Strategic Management in Government", in 1995. Usage. The concept has been taken
up initially by academics, think tanks and NGOs, and later by a number of
public sector organisations in the United Kingdom. In 2004 it was used by the
BBC as the cornerstone of its manifesto for the renewal of its charter. In 2006
Accenture launched the Institute for Public Service Value, to explore how
public value is created in government organizations. In 2006, the Center for
Technology in Government (CTG) in partnership with SAP AG, conducted research
on the topic of public value in the context of governments’ investments in
Information Technology (IT). The results of this research found that
governments’ ability to realize the full value of IT investments is not
completely measurable in terms of financial results. More specifically, the
five U.S. and international governments studied, looked for the full value of
government IT investments in both the internal value to government operations
and the broader political and social returns to the public at large. From this
point of view, there are two sources of public value: 1. Value that results
from improving the government itself as an asset to society and 2. value that
results from the delivery of specific benefits directly to persons or groups.
In October 2008 UK-based The Work Foundation published [http://
www.theworkfoundation.com/assets/docs/publications/
201_PV_public_service_reform_final.pdf "Public Value: The Next Steps in Public
Service Reform" . References. Mark H. Moore (1995), "Creating Public Value
Strategic Management in Government", Harvard University Press [http://
www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674175587] Martin Cole and Greg
Parston (2006), "Unlocking Public Value", John Wiley & Sons. Inc. [http://
www.amazon.com/dp/0471959456/] Cresswell, A.M., Burke, G.B., Pardo, T.A.
(2006), "Advancing Return on Investment Analysis for Government: A Public Value
Framework", The Center for Technology in Government, University at Albany,
State University of New York [http://www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/reports/
advancing_roi] External links. DEMOS - The Public Value of Science (2005)
[http://www.demos.co.uk/publications/publicvalueofscience] DEMOS - Capturing
Cultural Value (2005) [http://www.demos.co.uk/publications/culturalvalue] Prime
Minister's Strategy Unit (2002) - Creating Public Value [http://
www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/strategy/downloads/files/public_value2.pdf]
