Public opinion Public opinion is the aggregate of individual attitudes or
beliefs held by the adult population. Public opinion can also be defined as the
complex collection of opinions of many different people and the sum of all
their views. Since the 1950s, television has been the main medium for molding
public opinion. Concepts of public opinion. Public opinion as a concept gained
credence with the rise of "public" in the eighteenth century. The English term
"public opinion" dates back to the eighteenth century and has derived from the
French "lâ€™opinion", which was first used in 1588 by Montaigne. This concept
came about through the process of urbanization and other political and social
forces. For the first time, it became important what people thought, as forms
of political contention changed. Adam Smith, one of the earliest classical
economists, refers to public opinion in his Theory of Moral Sentiments, but it
was Jeremy Bentham, the famous utilitarian Philosopher, who fully developed
theories of public opinion. He opined that public opinion had the power to
ensure that rulers would rule for the greatest happiness of the greater number.
He brought in Utilitarian philosophy in order to define theories of public
opinion. The German sociologist Ferdinand TÃ¶nnies, by using the conceptional
tools of his theory of Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft, argued (1922, ""Kritik
der Ã¶ffentlichen Meinung""), that 'public opinion' has the equivalent social
function in societies ("Gesellschaften") which religion has in communities
("Gemeinschaften"). German social theorist JÃ¼rgen Habermas contributed the
idea of "Public Sphere" to the discussion of public opinion. The Public Sphere,
or bourgeois public, is according to Habermas, where "something approaching
public opinion can be formed" (2004, p.Â 351). Habermas claimed that the Public
Sphere featured universal access, rational debate, and disregard for rank.
However, he believes that these three features for how public opinion are best
formed are no longer in place in western liberal democratic countries. Public
opinion, in western democracy, is highly susceptible to elite manipulation. The
American sociologist Herbert Blumer has proposed an altogether different
conception of the "public." According to Blumer, public opinion is discussed as
a form of collective behavior (another specialized term) which is made up of
those who are discussing a given public issue at any one time. Given this
definition, there are many publics; each of them comes into being when an issue
arises and ceases to exist when the issue is resolved. Blumer claims that
people participate in public in different capacities and to different degrees.
So, public opinion polling cannot measure the public. An educated individual's
participation is more important than that of a drunk. The "mass," in which
people independently make decisions about, for example, which brand of
toothpaste to buy, is a form of collective behavior different from the public.
Public opinion plays an important role in the political sphere. Cutting across
all aspects of relationship between government and public opinion are studies
of voting behavior. These have registered the distribution of opinions on a
wide variety of issues, have explored the impact of special interest groups on
election outcomes and have contributed to our knowledge about the effects of
government propaganda and policy. Formation of Public Opinion. The formation of
public opinion starts with agenda setting by major media outlets throughout the
world. This agenda setting dictates what is newsworthy and how and when it will
be reported. The media agenda is set by a variety of different environmental
and newswork factors that determines which stories will be newsworthy. Another
key component in the formation of public opinion is framing. Framing is when a
story or piece of news is portrayed in a particular way and is meant to sway
the consumers attitude one way or the other. Most political issues are heavily
framed in order to persuade voters to vote for a particular candidate. For
example, if Candidate X once voted on a bill that raised income taxes on the
middle class, a framing headline would read "Candidate X Doesn't Care About the
Middle Class". This puts Candidate X in a negative frame to the news reader.
Social desirability is another key component to the formation of public
opinion. Social desirability is the idea that people in general will form their
opinions based on what they believe is the popular opinion. Based on media
agenda setting and media framing, most often a particular opinion gets repeated
throughout various news mediums and social networking sites, until it creates a
false vision where the perceived truth is actually very far away from the
actual truth. Private opinion and public policy. The most pervasive issue
dividing theories of the opinion-policy relation bears a striking resemblance
to the problem of monism-pluralism in the history of philosophy. The
controversy deals with the question of whether the structure of socio-political
action should be viewed as a more or less centralized process of acts and
decisions by a class of key leaders, representing integrated hierarchies of
influence in society or whether it is more accurately envisaged as several sets
of relatively autonomous opinion and influence groups, interacting with
representative decision makers in an official structure of differentiated
governmental authority. The former assumption interprets individual, group and
official action as part of a single system and reduces politics and
governmental policies to a derivative of three basic analytical terms: society,
culture and personality. Public opinion it enables the organisation to expand
internally and externally through public introspection. The use of public
opinion studies. The rapid spread of public opinion measurement around the
world is reflection of the number of uses to which it can be put. Public
opinion can be accurately obtained through a random sample survey, if done
correctly. Governments have increasingly found surveys to be useful tools for
guiding their public policies. The US Department of Agriculture was one of the
first government agencies to sponsor systematic and large scale surveys. It was
followed by many other federal bodies, including the US information agency
which has conducted opinion research in all parts of the world. Public opinion
can be influenced by public relations and the political media. Additionally,
mass media utilizes a wide variety of advertising techniques to get their
message out and change the minds of people. The tide of public opinion becomes
more and more crucial during political elections, most importantly elections
determining the national executive. Some think the Overton window is a method
for shifting or describing shifts in public opinion. It is frequently measured
using the method of survey sampling.
