Radical democracy Radical democracy as an ideology was articulated by Ernesto
Laclau and Chantal Mouffe in their book Hegemony and Socialist Strategy:
Towards a Radical Democratic Politics, written in 1985. They argue that social
movements which attempt to create social and political change need a strategy
which challenges neoliberal and neoconservative concepts of democracy. This
strategy is to expand the liberal definition of democracy, based on freedom and
equality, to include difference. "Radical democracy" means "the root of
democracy." Laclau and Mouffe claim that liberal democracy and deliberative
democracy, in their attempts to build consensus, oppress differing opinions,
races, classes, genders, and worldviews. In the world, in a country, and in a
social movement there are many (a plurality of) differences which resist
consensus. Radical democracy is not only accepting of difference, dissent and
antagonisms, but is dependent on it. Laclau and Mouffe argue based on the
assumption that there are oppressive power relations that exist in society and
that those oppressive relations should be made visible, re-negotiated and
altered. By building democracy around difference and dissent, oppressive
relations of power that exist in society are able to come to the forefront so
that they can be challenged. In other contexts, "radical democracy" is a term
used to refer to the post-Marxist perspectives of Italian radicalism -
especially Paolo Virno. Re-interpretations. Since Laclau and Mouffe argued for
a radical democracy, many other theorists and practitioners have adapted and
changed the term. For example, bell hooks and Henry Giroux have all written
about education for a radical democracy. Paulo Freire's work, although
initiated decades before Laclau and Mouffe, can also be read through similar
lenses. Theorists such as Paul Chatterton and Richard JF Day have written about
the importance of radical democracy within some of the autonomous movements in
Latin America (namely the EZLN - Zapatista Army of National Liberation in
Mexico, the MST - Landless Workers' Movement in Brazil, and the Piquetero -
Unemployed Workers Movement in Argentina). Challenges. Because of radical
democracy's focus on difference, and challenging oppressive power relations, it
has been seen as conducive to post-colonial theory and decolonization. However,
the concept of radical democracy is seen in some circles as colonial in nature
due to its reliance on a western notion of democracy. Also, radical democracy
challenges consensus decision-making processes which are essential to many
indigenous governing practices.
