Reaganomics Reaganomics (; (a portmanteau of "Reagan" and "economics"
attributed to Paul Harvey) refers to the economic policies promoted by the U.S.
President Ronald Reagan during the 1980s. These policies are commonly
associated with supply-side economics, or pejoratively as trickle-down
economics. The four pillars of Reagan's economic policy were to reduce the
growth of government spending, reduce income tax and capital gains tax, reduce
government regulation of economy, and control money supply to reduce inflation.
Historical context. Prior to the Reagan administration, the United States
economy experienced a decade of rising unemployment and inflation (known as
stagflation). Political pressure favored stimulus resulting in an expansion of
the money supply. President Richard Nixon's wage and price controls were phased
out. The federal oil reserves were created to ease any future short term
shocks. President Jimmy Carter had begun phasing out price controls on
petroleum, while he created the Department of Energy. Much of the credit for
the resolution of the stagflation is given to two causes: a three year
contraction of the money supply by the Federal Reserve Board under Paul
Volcker, initiated in the last year of Carter's presidency, and long term
easing of supply and pricing in oil during the 1980s oil glut. In his stated
intention to increase defense spending while lowering taxes, Reagan's approach
was a departure from his immediate predecessors. Reagan enacted lower marginal
tax rates in conjunction with simplified income tax codes and continued
deregulation. During Reagan's presidency the annual deficits averaged 4.2% of
GDP after inheriting an annual deficit of 2.7% of GDP in 1980 under president
Carter. The real (inflation adjusted) rate of growth in federal spending fell
from 4% under Jimmy Carter to 2.5% under Ronald Reagan. GDP per working-age
adult, which had increased at only a 0.8% annual rate during the Carter
administration, increased at a 1.8% rate during the Reagan administration. The
increase in productivity growth was even higher: output per hour in the
business sector, which had been roughly constant in the Carter years, increased
at a 1.4% rate in the Reagan years. Before Reagan's election, supply side
policy was considered unconventional by the moderate wing of the Republican
Party. While running against Reagan for the Presidential nomination in 1980,
George H. W. Bush had derided Reaganomics as "voodoo economics". Similarly, in
1976, Gerald Ford had severely criticized Reagan's proposal to turn back a
large part of the Federal budget to the states. Reagan's policies have since
become widely accepted by many Republicans. Justifications. In his 1980
campaign speeches, Reagan presented his economic proposals as a return to the
free enterprise principles that had been in favor before the Great Depression.
At the same time he attracted a following from the supply-side economics
movement, which formed in opposition to Keynesian demand-stimulus economics.
This movement produced some of the strongest supporters for Reagan's policies
during his term in office. The contention of the proponents, that the tax rate
cuts would more than pay for themselves, was influenced by a theoretical
taxation model based on the elasticity of tax rates, known as the Laffer curve.
Arthur Laffer's model predicts that excessive tax rates actually reduce
potential tax revenues, by lowering the incentive to produce; the model also
predicts that insufficient tax rates (rates below the optimum level for a given
economy) lead directly to a reduction in tax revenues. Policies. President
Reagan lifted remaining domestic petroleum price and allocation controls on
January 28, 1981, and lowered the oil windfall profits tax in August 1981. He
ended the oil windfall profits tax. Reagan followed his 1981 tax cuts with the
Tax Reform Act of 1986, which sought to eliminate deductions, lower marginal
rates for the wealthy, and significantly raise taxes on those earning less than
$50,000 In 1982 Reagan agreed to a rollback of corporate tax cuts and a smaller
rollback of individual income tax cuts. The 1982 tax increase undid a third of
the initial tax cut. In 1983 Reagan instituted a payroll tax on Social Security
and Medicare hospital insurance. With the Tax Reform Act of 1986, Reagan and
Congress sought to raise taxes on lower incomes, eliminate many deductions, and
reduce tax rates on the wealthy. In 1983, Democrats Bill Bradley and Dick
Gephardt had offered a proposal; in 1984 Reagan had the Treasury Department
produce its own plan. The eventual bipartisan 1986 act aimed to be revenue-
neutral: while it reduced the top marginal rate, it also partially "cleaned up"
the tax base by curbing tax loopholes, preferences, and exceptions, thus
raising the effective tax on activities previously specially favored by the
code. Ultimately, the combination of the increase in tax rates on lower incomes
and decrease in deductions raised revenue equal to about 4% of existing tax
revenue. The primary effect of the tax changes over the course of Reagan's term
in office was a change in the "composition" of tax revenue, towards payroll and
new investment, and away from higher earners and capital gains on existing
investments. Federal revenue share of GDP fell from 19.6% in fiscal 1981 to
17.3% in 1984, before rising back to 18.4% by fiscal year 1989. Personal income
tax revenues fell during this period relative to GDP, while payroll tax
revenues rose relative to GDP. President Ronald Reagan's 1981 cut in the top
regular tax rate on unearned income reduced the maximum capital gains rate to
only 20%—its lowest level since the Hoover administration. This tax benefits
the wealthy, however, in 1986 President Reagan set tax rates on capital gains
at the same level as the rates on ordinary income like salaries and wages, with
both topping out at 28 percent. Reagan significantly increased public
expenditures, primarily the Department of Defense, which rose (in constant 2000
dollars) from $267.1 billion in 1980 (4.9% of GDP and 22.7% of public
expenditure) to $393.1 billion in 1988 (5.8% of GDP and 27.3% of public
expenditure); most of those years military spending was about 6% of GDP,
exceeding this number in 4 different years. All these numbers had not been seen
since the end of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War in 1973. In 1981, Reagan
significantly reduced the maximum tax rate, which affected the highest income
earners, and lowered the top marginal tax rate from 70% to 50%; in 1986 he
further reduced the rate to 28%. The federal deficit fell from 6% of GDP in
1983 to 3.2% of GDP in 1987. The Federal deficit in Reagan's final budget fell
to 2.9% of GDP. The rate of growth in Federal spending fell from 4% under Jimmy
Carter to 2.5% under Ronald Reagan. As a short-run strategy to reduce inflation
and lower nominal interest rates, the U.S. borrowed both domestically and
abroad to cover the Federal budget deficits, raising the national debt from
$997 billion to $2.85 trillion. This led to the U.S. moving from the world's
largest international creditor to the world's largest debtor nation. Reagan
described the new debt as the "greatest disappointment" of his presidency.
According to William A. Niskanen, one of the architects of Reaganomics, "Reagan
delivered on each of his four major policy objectives, although not to the
extent that he and his supporters had hoped", and notes that the most
substantial change was in the tax code, where the top marginal individual
income tax rate fell from 70.1% to 28.4%, and there was a "major reversal in
the tax treatment of business income", with effect of "reducing the tax bias
among types of investment but increasing the average effective tax rate on new
investment". Roger Porter, another architect of the program, acknowledges that
the program was weakened by the many hands that changed the President's
calculus, such as Congress. President Reagan, has remained popular as an
antitax hero despite raising taxes eleven times over the course of his
presidency, all in the name of fiscal responsibility. Reagan ultimately raised
taxes more times than he cut them. According to Paul Krugman, "Over all, the
1982 tax increase undid about a third of the 1981 cut; as a share of G.D.P.,
the increase was substantially larger than Mr. Clinton's 1993 tax increase."
According to historian and domestic policy adviser Bruce Bartlett, Reagan's tax
increases over the course of his presidency took back half of the 1981 tax cut.
Results. Overview. Spending during Reagan's two terms (FY 1981–88) averaged
22.4% GDP, well above the 20.6% GDP average from 1971 to 2009. In addition, the
public debt rose from 26% GDP in 1980 to 41% GDP by 1988. In dollar terms, the
public debt rose from $712 billion in 1980 to $2,052 billion in 1988, a roughly
three-fold increase. The unemployment rate rose from 7% in 1980 to 10.8% in
1982, then declined to 5.4% in 1988. The inflation rate declined from 10% in
1980 to 4% in 1988. Many economists have stated that Reagan's policies were an
important part of bringing about the second longest peacetime economic
expansion in U.S. history, and followed by an even longer 1990s expansion that
began under George H.W. Bush in 1991. This economic expansion continued through
the Clinton administration with unemployment rates steadily decreasing
throughout his presidency (7.3% at the start of his presidency and 4.2% at the
culmination, with the lowest rate reaching 3.9% in 2000). During the Reagan
administration, the American economy went from a GDP growth of -0.3% in 1980 to
4.1% in 1988 (in constant 2005 dollars), which reduced the unemployment rate by
1.6%, from 7.1% in 1980 to 5.5% in 1988, but with peaks of around 10.8% in
1983. A net job increase of about 21 million also occurred through mid-1990.
Reagan's administration is the only one not to have raised the minimum wage.
The inflation rate, 13.5% in 1980, fell to 4.1% in 1988, which was achieved by
applying high interest rates by the Federal Reserve (peaked at 20% in June
1981). The latter contributed to a relatively brief recession in 1982:
unemployment rose to 9.7% and GDP fell by 1.9%. Unemployment rates. The job
growth under the Reagan administration was an average of 2.1% per year, with
unemployment averaging 7.5%. The unemployment averaged 6.4 percent under
President Carter and 7.8 percent under President Ford. Growth rates. Comparing
the recovery from the 1981–82 recession (1983–1990) with the years between
1971 (end of a recession) and 1980 shows that the rate of growth of real GDP
per capita averaged 2.77 under Reagan and 2.50% under Nixon, Ford and Carter.
Following the recession, the unemployment rate had averaged slightly higher
(6.75% vs. 6.35%), productivity growth lower (1.38% vs. 1.92%), and private
investment as a percentage of GDP slightly less (16.08% vs. 16.86%). Real wages
were lower following the recession, while real median family income grew by
$4,000 during the Reagan period. Poverty level. During the period 1980–1988,
the percentage of the total population below the poverty level ranged from a
low of 13.0% in 1980 and 1988 to a high of 15.2% in 1983. During Reagan's first
term, critics pointed to homelessness as a visible problem in America's urban
centers. In the closing weeks of his presidency, Reagan told "The New York
Times" that the homeless "make it their own choice for staying out there".
Political opponents chided his policies as "Trickle-down economics", due to the
significant cuts in the upper tax brackets. Federal income tax and payroll tax
levels. During the Reagan administration, federal receipts grew from $618
billion to $991 billion (an increase of 60%); while outlays grew from $ 746
billion to $1144 billion (an increase of 53%). According to a 1996 report of
the Joint Economic Committee of the United States Congress, during Reagan's two
terms, and through 1993, the top 10% of taxpayers paid an increased share of
income taxes (not including payroll taxes) to the Federal government, while the
lowest 50% of taxpayers paid a reduced share of income tax revenue. Personal
income tax revenues declined from 9.4% GDP in 1981 to 8.3% GDP in 1989, while
payroll tax revenues increased from 6.0% GDP to 6.7% GDP during the same
period. This represented a more regressive tax regime, with more revenue
derived from the flat payroll tax versus the progressive income tax. Tax
revenue. According to a United States Department of the Treasury economic
study, the major tax bills enacted under Reagan, in the short term, increased
total tax revenue and reduced the tax burden on the economy (~-1% of GDP). The
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 resulted in a reduced tax burden on the
economy (~-3% of GDP) while other tax bills had neutral or, in the case of the
Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982, a (~+1% of GDP) increase in
revenue as a share of GDP. It should be however noted that the study did not
examine the longer-term impact of Reagan tax policy, including sunset clauses
and "the long-run, fully-phased-in effect of the tax bills". The fact that tax
receipts "as a percentage of GDP" fell following the Economic Recovery Tax Act
of 1981 shows a decrease in tax burden as share of GDP. Total tax revenue from
income tax receipts increased during this time. The economic growth and
increase in GDP outpaced the increase in tax receipt revenue, resulting in a
slightly reduced tax burden as a percentage of GDP for the economy. The effect
of Reagan's tax cuts were at least partially offset by phased in Social
Security payroll tax increases that had been enacted by President Jimmy Carter
and the 95th Congress in 1977. An accounting indicated nominal tax receipts
increased from $599 billion in 1981 to $1.032 trillion in 1990, an increase of
72% in current dollars. In 2005 dollars, the tax receipts in 1990 were $1.5
trillion, an increase of 20%. From 1991 to 2000, receipts increased by 90% in
current dollars, or 60% in 2005 dollars. An analysis from the Center on Budget
and Policy Priorities calculated that the average annual growth rate of real
income-tax receipts per working-age person eventually rose over the two decades
from 0.2% (1981–90) to 3.1% (1990-01). Fiscal consequences. The nominal
national debt rose from $900 billion to $2.8 trillion during Reagan's tenure,
an average national budget deficit per year of $237.5 billion, as compared to
an average national budget deficit per year of $56.9 billion during Carter's
tenure. The federal deficit as percentage of GDP rose from 2.65% of GDP in
1980, Carter's final budget year, to 3.04% of GDP in 1988, Reagan's final
budget year. Analysis. According to a 1996 study by William A. Niskanen and
Stephen Moore: On 8 of the 10 key economic variables examined, the American
economy performed better during the Reagan years than during the pre- and post-
Reagan years. Real median family income grew by $4,000 during the Reagan period
after experiencing no growth in the pre-Reagan years; it experienced a loss of
almost $1,500 in the post-Reagan years. Interest rates, inflation, and
unemployment fell faster under Reagan than they did immediately before or after
his presidency. The only economic variable that was worse in the Reagan period
than in both the pre- and post-Reagan years was the savings rate, which fell
rapidly in the 1980s. The productivity rate was higher in the pre-Reagan years
but lower in the post-Reagan years. Stephen Moore stated, "No act in the last
quarter century had a more profound impact on the U.S. economy of the eighties
and nineties than the Reagan tax cut of 1981." He claims that Reagan's tax
cuts, combined with an emphasis on federal monetary policy, deregulation, and
expansion of free trade created a sustained economic expansion creating
America's greatest sustained wave of prosperity ever. He also claims that the
American economy grew by more than a third in size, producing a $15 trillion
increase in American wealth. Consumer and investor confidence soared. Cutting
federal income taxes, cutting the U.S. government spending budget, cutting
useless programs, scaling down the government work force, maintaining low
interest rates, and keeping a watchful inflation hedge on the monetary supply
was Ronald Reagan's formula for a successful economic turnaround. Milton
Friedman stated, "Reaganomics had four simple principles: Lower marginal tax
rates, less regulation, restrained government spending, noninflationary
monetary policy. Though Reagan did not achieve all of his goals, he made good
progress." Entrepreneurs flourished as a result of Reaganomics: Lower tax rates
and inflation coupled with less regulation favored improved environments for
market-based funding, risk-taking, access to labor (leading to greater
employment), and a more level playing field between these entrepreneurs and
large corporations. Further, the Heritage Foundation stated, "the U.S.
government must allow the entrepreneur to enjoy the rewards of success. If
taxes take away most profit, then the entrepreneur will have less incentive to
take a risk. If there are great restrictions on how the entrepreneur can use
his profit, then there is little reason for the entrepreneur to take a risk.
The entrepreneur's courage to take a risk is what leads to new American
discoveries and what drives the U.S. economy forward. Reaganomics knows this.
It is one of the reasons why Ronald Reagan has reduced American taxes
dramatically." The Tax Reform Act of 1986 and its impact on the Alternative
Minimum Tax (AMT) reduced nominal rates on the wealthy and eliminated tax
deductions, while raising tax rates on lower-income individuals. The across the
board tax system reduced marginal rates and further reduced bracket creep from
inflation. The highest income earners (with incomes exceeding $1,000,000)
received a tax break, restoring a flatter the tax system. In 2006, the IRS's
National Taxpayer Advocate's report characterized the effective rise in the AMT
for individuals as a problem with the tax code. Through 2007, the revised AMT
had brought in more tax revenue than the former tax code, which has made it
difficult for Congress to reform. Economist Paul Krugman argued the economic
expansion during the Reagan administration was primarily the result of the
business cycle and the monetary policy by Paul Volcker. Krugman argues that
there was nothing unusual about the economy under Reagan because unemployment
was reducing from a high peak and that it is consistent with Keynesian
economics for the economy to grow as employment increases if inflation remains
low. The CBO Historical Tables indicate that federal spending during Reagan's
two terms (FY 1981–88) averaged 22.4% GDP, well above the 20.6% GDP average
from 1971 to 2009. In addition, the public debt rose from 26.1% GDP in 1980 to
41.0% GDP by 1988. In dollar terms, the public debt rose from $712 billion in
1980 to $2,052 billion in 1988, a three-fold increase. Krugman argued in June
2012 that Reagan's policies were consistent with Keynesian stimulus theories,
pointing to the significant increase in per capita spending under Reagan.
William Niskanen noted that during the Reagan years privately held federal debt
increased from 22% to 38% of GDP, despite a long peacetime expansion. Second,
the savings and loan problem led to an additional debt of about $125 billion.
Third, greater enforcement of U.S. trade laws increased the share of U.S.
imports subjected to trade restrictions from 12% in 1980 to 23% in 1988.
Economists Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales pointed out that many deregulation
efforts had either taken place or begun before Reagan (note the deregulation of
airlines and trucking under Carter, and the beginning of deregulatory reform in
railroads, telephones, natural gas, and banking). They stated, "The move toward
markets preceded the leader who is seen as one of their saviors." Economists
Paul Joskow and Roger Noll made a similar contention. Economist William A.
Niskanen, a member of Reagan's Council of Economic Advisers wrote that
deregulation had the "lowest priority" of the items on the Reagan agenda given
that Reagan "failed to sustain the momentum for deregulation initiated in the
1970s" and that he "added more trade barriers than any administration since
Hoover." By contrast, economist Milton Friedman has pointed to the number of
pages added to the Federal Register each year as evidence of Reagan's anti-
regulation presidency (the Register records the rules and regulations that
federal agencies issue per year). The number of pages added to the Register
each year declined sharply at the start of the Ronald Reagan presidency
breaking a steady and sharp increase since 1960. The increase in the number of
pages added per year resumed an upward, though less steep, trend after Reagan
left office. In contrast, the number of pages being added each year increased
under Ford, Carter, George H. W. Bush, Clinton, and others. The number of pages
in Federal Register is however criticized as an extremely crude measure of
regulatory activity, because it can be easily manipulated (e.g. font sizes have
been changed to keep page count low). The apparent contradiction between
Niskanen's statements and Friedman's data may be resolved by seeing Niskanen as
referring to "statutory" deregulation (laws passed by Congress) and Friedman to
"administrative" deregulation (rules and regulations implemented by federal
agencies).
