Real estate economics Real estate economics is the application of economic
techniques to real estate markets. It tries to describe, explain, and predict
patterns of prices, supply, and demand. The closely related fields of housing
economics is narrower in scope, concentrating on residential real estate
markets as does the research of real estate trends focus on the business and
structural changes impacting the industry. Both draw on partial equilibrium
analysis (supply and demand), urban economics, spatial economics, extensive
research, surveys and finance. Demand for housing. The main determinants of the
demand for housing are demographic. However other factors like income, price of
housing, cost and availability of credit, consumer preferences, investor
preferences, price of substitutes and price of complements all play a role. The
core demographic variables are population size and population growth: the more
people in the economy, the greater the demand for housing. But this is an
oversimplification. It is necessary to consider family size, the age
composition of the family, the number of first and second children, net
migration (immigration minus emigration), non-family household formation, the
number of double family households, death rates, divorce rates, and marriages.
In housing economics, the elemental unit of analysis is not the individual as
it is in standard partial equilibrium models. Rather, it is households that
demand housing services: typically one household per house. The size and
demographic composition of households is variable and not entirely exogenous.
It is endogenous to the housing market in the sense that as the price of
housing services increase, household size will tend also to increase. Income is
also an important determinant. Empirical measures of the income elasticity of
demand in North America range from 0.5 to 0.9 (De Leeuw, F. 1971). If permanent
income elasticity is measured, the results are a little higher (Kain and
Quigley 1975) because transitory income varies from year-to-year and across
individuals so positive transitory income will tend to cancel out negative
transitory income. Many housing economists use permanent income rather than
annual income because of the high cost of purchasing real estate. For many
people, real estate will be the most costly item they will ever buy. The price
of housing is also an important factor. The price elasticity of the demand for
housing services in North America is estimated as negative 0.7 by Polinsky and
Ellwood (1979), and as negative 0.9 by Maisel, Burnham, and Austin (1971). An
individual householdâ€™s housing demand can be modeled with standard utility/
choice theory. A utility function, such as U=U(X1,X2,X3,X4...Xn), can be
constructed in which the households utility is a function of various goods and
services (Xs). This will be subject to a budget constraint such as
P1X1+P2X2+...PnXn=Y, where Y is the households available income and the Ps are
the prices for the various goods and services. The equality indicates that the
money spent on all the goods and services must be equal to the available
income. Because this is unrealistic, the model must be adjusted to allow for
borrowing and/or saving. A measure of wealth, lifetime income, or permanent
income is required. The model must also be adjusted to account for the
heterogeneousness of real estate. This can be done by deconstructing the
utility function. If housing services (X4) is separated into the components
that comprise it (Z1,Z2,Z3,Z4...Zn), then the utility function can be rewritten
as U=U(X1,X2,X3,(Z1,Z2,Z3,Z4...Zn)...Xn) By varying the price of housing
services (X4) and solving for points of optimal utility, that household's
demand schedule for housing services can be constructed. Market demand is
calculated by summing all individual household demands. Supply of housing.
Housing supply is produced using land, labor, and various inputs such as
electricity and building materials. The quantity of new supply is determined by
the cost of these inputs, the price of the existing stock of houses, and the
technology of production. For a typical single family dwelling in suburban
North America, approximate percentage costs can be broken down as: acquisition
costs 10%, site improvement costs 11%, labour costs 26%, materials costs 31%,
finance costs 3%, administrative costs 15%, and marketing costs 4%. Multi-unit
residential dwellings typically break down as: acquisition costs 7%, site
improvement costs 8%, labour costs 27%, materials costs 33%, finance costs 4%,
administrative costs 17%, and marketing costs 5%. Public subdivision
requirements can increase development cost by up to 3% depending on the
jurisdiction. Differences in building codes account for about a 2% variation in
development costs. However these subdivision and building code costs typically
increase the market value of the buildings by at least the amount of their cost
outlays. A production function such as Q=f(L,N,M) can be constructed in which Q
is the quantity of houses produced, N is the amount of labour employed, L is
the amount of land used, and M is the amount of other materials. This
production function must, however, be adjusted to account for the refurbishing
and augmentation of existing buildings. To do this a second production function
is constructed that includes the stock of existing housing, and their ages, as
determinants. The two functions are summed yielding the total production
function. Alternatively an hedonic pricing model can be regressed. The long-run
price elasticity of supply is quite high. George Fallis estimates it as 8.2
(Fallis, G. 1985), but in the short run supply tends to be very price
inelastic. Supply price elasticity depends on the elasticity of substitution
and supply restrictions. There is significant substitutability both between
land and materials, and between labour and materials. In high-value locations,
multi-story concrete buildings are typically built to reduce the amount of
expensive land used. As labour costs increased since the 1950s, new materials
and capital intensive techniques have been employed to reduce the amount of
relatively expensive labour used. However supply restrictions can significantly
affect substitutability. In particular the lack of supply of skilled labour
(and labour union requirements), can constrain the substitution from capital to
labour. Land availability can also constrain substitutability if the area of
interest is delineated (that is, the larger the area, the more suppliers of
land, and the more substitution that is possible). Land use controls such as
zoning bylaws can also reduce land substitutability. Adjustment mechanism. The
basic adjustment mechanism is a stock/flow model to reflect the fact that about
98% the market is existing stock and about 2% is the flow of new buildings. In
the diagram to the right, the stock of housing supply is presented in the left
panel while the new flow is in the right panel. There are four steps in the
basic adjustment mechanism. First, the initial equilibrium price (Ro) is
determined by the intersection of the supply of existing housing stock (SH) and
the demand for housing (D). This rent is then translated into value (Vo) via
discounting cash flows. Value is calculated by dividing current period rents by
the discount rate, that is, as a perpetuity. Then value is compared to
construction costs (CC) in order to determine whether profitable opportunities
exist for developers. The intersection of construction costs and the value of
housing services determine the maximum level of new housing starts (HSo).
Finally the amount of housing starts in the current period is added to the
available stock of housing in the next period. In the next period, supply curve
SH will shift to the right by amount HSo. Adjustment with depreciation. The
diagram to the right shows the effects of depreciation. If the supply of
existing housing deteriorates due to wear, then the stock of housing supply
depreciates. Because of this, the supply of housing (SHo) will shift to the
left (to SH1) resulting in a new equilibrium demand of R1 (since the amount of
homes decreased, but demand still exists). The increase of demand from Ro to R1
will shift the value function up (from Vo to V1). As a result, more houses can
be produced profitably and housing starts will increase (from HSo to HS1). Then
the supply of housing will shift back to its initial position (SH1 to SHo).
Increase in demand. The diagram on the right shows the effects of an increase
in demand in the short run. If there is an increase in the demand for housing,
such as the shift from Do to D1 there will be either a price or quantity
adjustment, or both. For the price to stay the same, the supply of housing must
increase. That is, supply SHo must increase by HS. Increase in costs. The
diagram on the right shows the effects of an increase in costs in the short-
run. If construction costs increase (say from CCo to CC1), developers will find
their business less profitable and will be more selective in their ventures. In
addition some developers may leave the industry. The quantity of housing starts
will decrease (HSo to HS1). This will eventually reduce the level of supply
(from SHo to SH1) as the existing stock of housing depreciates. Prices will
tend to rise (from Ro to R1). Real estate financing. There are different ways
of real estate financing: governmental and commercial sources and institutions.
A home buyer or builder can obtain financial aid from savings and loan
associations, commercial banks, savings banks, mortgage bankers and brokers,
life insurance companies, credit unions, federal agencies, individual
investors, and builders. Savings and loan associations. "Main article": Savings
and loan association The most important purpose of these institutions is to
make mortgage loans on residential property. These organizations, which also
are known as savings associations, building and loan associations, cooperative
banks (in New England), and homestead associations (in Louisiana), are the
primary source of financial assistance to a large segment of American
homeowners. As home-financing institutions, they give primary attention to
single-family residences and are equipped to make loans in this area.
Commercial banks. "Main article": Commercial bank Due to changes in banking
laws and policies, commercial banks are increasingly active in home financing.
In acquiring mortgages on real estate, these institutions follow two main
practices: In addition, dealer service companies, which were originally used to
obtain car loans for permanent lenders such as commercial banks, wanted to
broaden their activity beyond their local area. In recent years, however, such
companies have concentrated on acquiring mobile home loans in volume for both
commercial banks and savings and loan associations. Service companies obtain
these loans from retail dealers, usually on a nonrecourse basis. Almost all
bank/service company agreements contain a credit insurance policy that protects
the lender if the consumer defaults. Savings banks. "Main article": Savings
bank These depository financial institutions are federally chartered, primarily
accept consumer deposits, and make home mortgage loans. Mortgage bankers and
brokers. "Main article": Mortgage broker Mortgage bankers are companies or
individuals, who originate mortgage loans, sell them to other investors,
service the monthly payments, and may act as agents to dispense funds for taxes
and insurance. Mortgage brokers present the consumer home buyer with the best
loan from a variety of loan sources. Their income comes from the lender making
the loan, just like with any other bank. Because they can tap a variety of
lenders, they can shop on behalf of the borrower and achieve the best available
terms. Despite legislation enacted that could favor the major banks, mortgage
bankers and brokers keep the market competitive so the largest lenders must
continue to compete on price and service. According to Don Burnette of
Brightgreen Homeloans in Port Orange, Florida, "The mortgage banker and broker
conduit is vital to maintain competitive balance in the mortgage industry.
Without it, the largest lenders would be able to unduly influence rates and
pricing, potentially hurting the consumer. Competition drives every
organization in this industry to constantly improve on their performance, and
the consumer is the winner in this scenario." Life insurance companies. Life
insurance companies are another source of financial assistance. These companies
lend on real estate as one form of investment and adjust their portfolios from
time to time to reflect changing economic conditions. Individuals seeking a
loan from an insurance company can deal directly with a local branch office or
with a local real estate broker who acts as loan correspondent for one or more
insurance companies. Credit unions. "Main article": Credit union These
cooperative financial institutions are organized by people who share a common
bond â€” for example, employees of a company, a labor union, or a religious
group. Some credit unions offer home loans in addition to other financial
services. Federally supported agencies. Under certain conditions and fund
limitations the Veterans Administration makes direct loans to creditworthy
veterans in housing credit shortage areas designated by the VA's administrator.
Such areas are generally rural areas and small cities and towns not near the
metropolitan or commuting areas of large cities â€” areas where GI loans from
private institutions are not available. The federally supported agencies
referred to here do not include the so-called second-layer lenders who enter
the scene after the mortgage is arranged between the lending institution and
the individual home buyer. Real estate investment trusts. "Main article": Real
estate investment trust Real estate investment trusts (REITs), which began when
the Real Estate Investment Trust Act became effective January 1, 1961, are
available. REITs, like savings and loan associations, are committed to real
estate lending and can and do serve the national real estate market, although
some specialization has occurred in their activities. In the U.S., REITs
generally pay little or no federal income tax, but are subject to a number of
special requirements set forth in the Internal Revenue Code, one of which is
the requirement to annually distribute at least 90% of their taxable income in
the form of dividends to shareholders. Other sources. "Main article": Creative
real estate investing Individual investors constitute a fairly large but
somewhat declining source of money for home mortgage loans. Experienced
observers claim that these lenders prefer shorter term obligations and usually
restrict their loans to less than two-thirds of the value of the residential
property. Likewise, building contractors sometimes accept second mortgages in
part payment of the construction price of a home if the purchaser is unable to
raise the total amount of down payment above the first mortgage money offered.
In addition, homebuyers or builders can save their money using FSBO in order
not to pay extra fees.
