Red Guard Party (United States) The Red Guards were a Chinese American civil
rights group active from 1967 to 1971. The movement drew inspiration from a
variety of sources including the Boxer Rebellion, the Red Guards in China, and
the Black Panthers. The I Wor Kuen were a similar group originally based in New
York City named after the Boxers and influenced by the Black Panther Party and
the Young Lords. In 1972 the two organizations merged to form a single national
revolutionary organization under the name I Wor Kuen. The newly formed national
party was affiliated with the New Communist Movement and was ideologically
aligned with Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought. "San Francisco’s Red Guard
was patterned closely after the Black Panther Party. In 1969, the federal
government wanted to shut down a Tuberculosis testing center located in San
Francisco’s Chinese community. At the time, Chinatown had the highest TB rate
in the country. The young Asians in the Red Guard organized the community and
staged successful protest demonstrations to keep that TB testing center open.
Through these protests and the programs that the Red Guard initiated,
Chinatown’s citizens were enlightened and became open to more progressive
politics. In 1970, members of the Red Guard were part of a delegation that was
invited to join Eldridge Cleaver and they accompanied him in a visit to China,
North Korea, and North Vietnam. After about two and a half years, due to
political and police repression, such as office raids, arrests without
warrants, false arrest, and armed stand-offs with police, the organization
collapsed."
