Refused ballot A refused ballot, or similar alternative, is a choice available
to voters in many elections. This is an alternative for many people to casting
a disparaging Spoiled ballot, which is not counted separately from ballots
which have been accidentally spoiled. Canada. Canadian federal elections allow
a ballot to be refused on certain grounds that no party satisfies the electors
vote. Referred to as a protest ballot, according to Elections Canada. During
the 2000 Canadian federal election, a number of voters (chiefly in Edmonton,
Alberta) "ate" their ballots, as part of what they dubbed the "Edible Ballot
Society", to protest what they saw as inherently unfair elections. The stunt
led Elections Canada to propose that there be legislation allowing federal
ballots to be officially refused. Russia. Russian electoral ballots used to
contain a box named "Against All", allowing the voter to register a "protest
vote" against all the candidates running. This was abolished by the Duma in
2006.[http://www.angus-reid.com/polls/index.cfm/fuseaction/viewItem/itemID/
12773] A March 2004 opinion poll saw ruling President Vladimir Putin draw 70%
support from Russians, but "Against All" managed to claim the second place,
ahead of the other candidates. In December 2004, "Against All" actually managed
to draw the highest number of votes in the electoral districts of St.
Petersburg, Sverdlovsk and Ulyanovsk. A repeat election led to St. Petersburg
and Sverdlovsk electing proper Members of Parliament. Ulyanovsk's second vote
however, after two candidates dropped out of the race, actually saw "Against
All" gain "more" support in the polls, now pulling in 21.5% of the vote, nearly
double what any of the actual candidates received.
