Refuse & Resist! Refuse & Resist! ("R&R!") was a human rights activist group
founded in New York City in 1987 by Emile de Antonio, Dore Ashton, Dennis
Brutus, John Gerassi, Abbie Hoffman, William Kunstler, C. Clark Kissinger,
Conrad Lynn, Sonia Sanchez, Rev. Fernando Santillana, and other activists who
were concerned that the American government, epitomized by U.S. President
Ronald Reagan, advocated a far right-wing political program directed against
the political rights of its people. Artist Keith Haring created R&R!'s logo in
1988. The organization's national office was located in New York City, with
chapters at various times in Atlanta, Georgia; Chicago, Illinois; Honolulu,
Hawaii; Los Angeles, California; Miami, Florida; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
New York City and the San Francisco Bay Area. The organization officially
dissolved in 2006. At that time, the national office closed, and the
organization's files transferred to the Tamiment Library at New York
University. Refuse & Resist! opposed censorship, war, acts of police brutality,
in support of political prisoners and against the death penalty. The
organization advocated reproductive rights and played an active role in the
defense of abortion clinics. It also supported rights for undocumented
immigrants. The group did not endorse candidates for elected public office.
Governance and methods. The organization was made up of affiliated independent
organizations, individuals, local chapters, and less formal national 'networks'
organized around specific initiatives or interests. The central form of the
organization was a National Council which met periodically to "identify new
reactionary attacks and to encourage resistance to them." From September 1987
through early 2002, Refuse & Resist! published the print periodical
"CounterAttack" and from 1995 until 2006 it maintained the "Refuse & Resist!"
website as media for information about political and social events of concern
in the United States and internationally. In 1988, R&R! organized "Resist in
Concert!" at the New York Palladium, with performances by Sin√©ad O'Connor,
Afrika Bambaataa, De La Soul, Ikey C & Easy-Ad, Karen Finley, Lenny Kaye,
Shinehead, and others. In addition to the "Resist in Concert!" initiative,
Refuse & Resist! involved and supported progressive art and artists, including
supporting artists and arts organizations whose work was the object of
governmental repression. Visual and performing artists, especially in New York
and Los Angeles, were active in the Artists' Network of Refuse & Resist! and
experimented with ways to integrate political themes of resistance with
aesthetic expression. R&R! initiated a periodic Courageous Resister Award to
recognize important individual acts of resistance and in support of civil
rights and civil liberties. Recipients included health care workers, activists
against police brutality, artists, and even small towns. The first awards were
presented at Resist in Concert! 1988, by Susan Sarandon, Robbie Conal, and
Philip Agee. R&R! organized public demonstrations and other forms of protest in
support of abortion rights, immigrants' rights, political prisoners, and for
other causes. For example, R&R! activists were actively involved in
demonstrations against the 1991 invasion of Iraq and marched with thousands in
the streets of New York City to protest the politics of the 2004 Republican
National Convention. Campaigns. R&R! organized against many forms of
censorship. For example, when in 1989 the U.S. Congress adopted the so-called
Jesse Helms Amendment, which required the National Endowment for the Art not to
fund "obscene or indecent" art, R&R! organized both the "Jesse Helms Degenerate
Art Show" and the "New Blasphemy Forum" in New York City as forums for artists
to express opposition to the new restrictions. Likewise, R&R! came to the
defense of artists, such as Ice T, whose art was the object of censorship. R&R!
opposed the invasion of privacy and government surveillance. For example, when
the 1990 Census was conducted, R&R! organized public demonstrations across the
U.S., in which census forms were burned in protest of what they saw as
intrusive questions asked on the forms. R&R! upheld reproductive freedom for
women and posed the slogan "Abortion on Demand & without Apology!" In this
activity, they frequently defended physicians and women's health clinics. In
response to the judicial opinions in "Webster v. Reproductive Health Services"
and "Rust v. Sullivan", R&R! deliberately disrupted two sessions of the U.S.
Supreme Court, which was the first time that court had ever experienced public
protest. In related events, activists occupied the offices of U.S. Congressman
Henry Hyde and the National Right to Life Committee, both whom opposed
abortion. During the 1990s, R&R! were vocal and uncompromising opponents of
Operation Rescue, a group known for staging protests and civil disobedience
against abortion clinics. Refuse & Resist! also co-initiated the National Day
of Appreciation for Abortion Providers in 1996, which has since become an
annual event. R&R! supported the defense of Mumia Abu-Jamal, an early member,
who was accused and convicted of murder in 1982. Citing suppressed and
allegedly falsified evidence presented against Mumia, R&R! joined with many
others in exposing his trial and conviction as political persecution and a
vendetta conducted by the Philadelphia Police Department. R&R! was active in
the international "Free Mumia" campaign. in 1995, R&R initiated a series of
"Philly Freedom Summers" in which students and other youth converged in
Philadelphia, to raise public awareness and support for Abu-Jamal and for a new
trial. It was during the first summer that they spoke out against Pennsylvania
Governor Tom Ridge, who signed a death warrant for Abu-Jamal that June. That
August the execution order was stayed, but Abu-Jamal remains in prison pending
the outcome of his appeal. R&R! supported the rights of all immigrants, raising
the slogan "We Are All Illegals!" Activists often protested at the offices of
the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and at the United States Coast
Guard base in Miami, Florida, in opposition to the return of Haitian refugees
back to Haiti. In Texas, activists were arrested for climbing the fences of a
'secret' INS detention facility and exposing its activities. R&R! organized the
first National Conference Against the War on Drugs. They revealed photographs
of alleged "boot camps" supposedly being used to incarcerate youths as
punishment for what they felt were victimless drug crimes.
