Regime The word regime (also "r√©gime", from the original French pronunciation)
refers to a set of conditions, most often of a political nature. Politics. In
politics, a regime is the form of government: the set of rules, cultural or
social norms, etc. that regulate the operation of government and its
interactions with society. Modern usage While the word "regime" originates as a
synonym for any form of government, modern usage often gives the term a
negative connotation, implying an authoritarian government or dictatorship.
Webster's definition states that the word "regime" refers simply to a form of
government, while Oxford English Dictionary defines "regime" as "a government,
especially an authoritarian one". Nowadays the political use the word "regime"
is most commonly applied to any government that is most of the time not
democratically elected and imposes strict and often arbitrary rules and laws on
the people that are, because of the undemocratic nature of the government, non-
negotiable. International regime International political use of "regime"
concerns international regulatory agencies (see International regime), which
lie outside of the control of national governments. These have more power over
a greater range than postal or telecommunications agreements, for example, and
constrain national governments. Science. In scientific discussions, a regime is
a class of physical conditions, usually parameterised by some specific
measures, where a particular physical phenomenon or boundary condition is
significant. Very often a regime corresponds to a limiting condition. The
region of measurable parameter space that corresponds to a regime is very often
loosely defined. Examples include "the superfluid regime", "the steady state
regime" or "the femtosecond regime". In geography and hydrography, "regime"
refers to the changing conditions of river beds and other features, such as
systems of sandbars. Notes. "Essentials of Comparative Government", Patrick
O'Neil.
