Remanufacturing Remanufacturing is the process of disassembly and recovery at
the module level and, eventually, at the component level. It requires the
repair or replacement of worn out or obsolete components and modules. Parts
subject to degradation affecting the performance or the expected life of the
whole are replaced. See an example of a professional automotive electronics
remanufacturing flow. Remanufacturing is a form of a product recovery process
which differs from other recovery processes in its completeness: a
remanufactured machine should match the same customer expectation as new
machines. Other forms of product recovery. Many formal definitions of
remanufacturing exist in the literature, but the first published report on
remanufacturing, by R. Lund (1998), describes remanufacturing as "â€¦ an
industrial process in which worn-out products are restored to like-new
condition. Through a series of industrial processes in a factory environment, a
discarded product is completely disassembled. Useable parts are cleaned,
refurbished, and put into inventory. Then the product is reassembled from the
old parts (and where necessary, new parts) to produce a unit fully equivalent
and sometimes superior in performance and expected lifetime to the original new
product". Different types of remanufacturing. There are three types of
remanufacturing activities, each with different operational challenges.
Remanufacturing with loss of original product identity. With this method, used
goods are disassembled into pre-determined components and repaired to stock,
ready to be reassembled into a remanufactured product. This is the case when
remanufacturing automobile components, photocopiers, toner cartridges,
furniture, ready-to-use cameras and personal computers. Once the product is
disassembled and the parts are recovered, the process concludes with an
operation not too different from original manufacturing. Disassembled parts are
inventoried, just like purchased parts and made available for final assembly.
Remanufacturing with loss of original product identity encompasses some unique
challenges in inventory management and disassembly sequence development. Some
of the open questions relate to the commonality of parts in products of
different generations, the uncertainty in the supply of used products, and
their relationship with production planning. The National Center for
Remanufacturing and Resource Recovery (NCR3) at Rochester Institute of
Technology (NY) is researching remanufacturing processes including testing
standards for remanufactured products. Rebuilding. Rebuilding is an old name
for remanufacturing. It is still widely used by automotive industry. For
example, the Automotive Parts Remanufacturers Association (APRA), have the new
term in their name, but to be safe on their own website use the combined term
as 'rebuild/remanufacture'. The term 'rebuilding' is also often used by railway
companies; a steam locomotive may be rebuilt with a new boiler or a diesel
locomotive may be rebuilt with a new engine. This saves money (by re-using the
frame, and some other components, which still have years of useful life) and
allows the incorporation of improved technology. For example, a new diesel
engine may have lower fuel consumption, reduced exhaust emissions and better
reliability. Recent examples include British Rail Class 57 and British Rail
Class 43. External links. Ivor Searle's Engine Remanufacturing Process
