Representative democracy Representative democracy is a variety of democracy
founded on the principle of elected people representing a group of people, as
opposed to direct democracy. For example, three countries which use
representative democracy are the United States Of America (a representative
democracy), the United Kingdom (a constitutional monarchy) and Poland (a
parliamentary republic). It is an element of both the parliamentary system and
presidential system of government and is typically used in a lower chamber such
as the House of Commons (UK) or Bundestag (Germany), and is generally curtailed
by constitutional constraints such as an upper chamber. It has been described
by some political theorists as Polyarchy. Powers of representatives.
Representatives sometimes hold the power to select other representatives,
presidents, or other officers of government (indirect representation).
Representative democracy and republicanism. The related term republic may have
many different meanings. It normally means a state with an elected or otherwise
non-monarchical head of state, such as the Islamic Republic of Iran or Republic
of Korea. History. The Roman Republic was the first government in the western
world to have a representative government, although it didn't have much of a
democracy. The Romans invented the concept of classics and many works from
Ancient Greece were preserved. Additionally, the Roman model of governance
inspired many political thinkers over the centuries, and today's modern
representative democracies imitate more the Roman than the Greek models because
it was a state in which supreme power was held by the people and their elected
representatives, and which had an elected or nominated a leader. Representative
democracy is a form of democracy in which people vote for representatives who
then vote on policy initiatives as opposed to a direct democracy, a form of
democracy in which people vote on policy initiatives directly. A European
medieval traditions of selecting representatives from the various estates
(classes, but not as we know them today) to advise/control monarchs led to
relatively wide familiarity with representative systems inspired by Roman
systems. Representative democracy came into particular general favour in post-
industrial revolution nation states where large numbers of subjects or
(latterly) citizens evinced interest in politics, but where technology and
population figures remained unsuited to direct democracy. As noted above,
Edmund Burke in his speech to the electors of Bristol classically analysed
their operation in Britain and the rights and duties of an elected
representative. Globally, a majority of the world's people live in
representative democracies including constitutional monarchy with strong
representative branchâ€“ the first time in history that this has been true.
Criticisms. In his book "Political Parties", written in 1911, Robert Michels
demonstrates that most representative systems deteriorate towards an oligarchy.
This is known as the "Iron Law of Oligarchy" and also as the First Law of
Politicology. In line with this law, all representative democracies are known
to become after time a particracy. Representative democracies which are stable
have been analysed by Adolf Gasser and compared to the unstable representative
democracies. in his book "Gemeindefreiheit als Rettung Europas" which was
published in 1943 (first edition in German) and a second edition in 1947 (in
German). Adolf Gasser noted the following requirements for a representative
democracy in order to remain stable, unaffected by the "Iron Law of Oligarchy":
There is no hierarchical bureaucracy. The system of stochocracy has been
proposed as an improved system compared to the system of representative
democracy, where representatives are elected. Stochocracy aims to be at least
reduce this degradation by having all representatives appointed by lottery
instead of by voting. Therefore this system is also called lottocracy. The
system was proposed by the writer Roger de Sizif in 1998 in his book "La
Stochocratie".
