Reserved political positions Several politico-constitutional arrangements use
reserved political positions, especially when endeavoring to ensure the rights
of minorities or preserving a political balance of power. These arrangements
can distort the democratic principle of "one man - one vote" in order to
address special circumstances. Reserved seats for women,minorities or other
segments of society. Afghanistan. The Constitution of Afghanistan guarantees at
least 64 delegates to be female in the lower house of the bicameral National
Assembly ("The elections law shall adopt measures to attain, through the
electorate system, general and fair representation for all the people of the
country, and proportionate to the population of very province, on average, at
least two females shall be the elected members of the House of People from each
province."), while Kuchi nomads elect 10 representatives through a single
national constituency. Moreover, "one third of the members ("of the House of
Elders") shall be appointed by the President, for a five-year term, from
amongst experts and experienced personalities, including two members from
amongst the impaired and handicapped, as well as two from nomads. The President
shall appoint fifty percent of these individuals from amongst women.".
Argentina. The Argentine Constitution requires for a 30% quota for female
candidates for Congress. Bangladesh. 50 seats out of 350 in the Parliament are
reserved for women. Belgium. The Parliament of the Brussels-Capital Region in
Belgium includes 17 reserved seats for the Flemish minority, on a total of 89,
but there are no separate electorates. All seats in the Belgian Senate (except
those for the throne heirs) are allocated to the three linguistic communities:
41 for the Dutch language group, 29 for the French language group, plus one
German-speaking Community Senator. Croatia. Croatia reserves eight seats from
the minorities and five for citizens living abroad in its parliament. There are
three seats for Serbs, one for Italians, and a few more for other ethnic
groups, where a single representative represents more than one group (e.g.
there's only one representative for both Czechs and Slovaks). Cyprus. The
Republic of Cyprus is full of reserved political positions. Due to its nature
of bi-communal republic, certain posts are always appropriated among Greek
Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots. For example, the president is chosen from the
Greek Cypriot community by using separate electoral rolls, whereas the vice
president is chosen by the Turkish Cypriot community, using their own separate
electoral rolls. Similarly 70% of the parliament are chosen from Greek Cypriots
whereas 30% are chosen by the from Turkish Cypriots. In the Supreme Court,
there should be one Greek, One Turkish and one neutral foreign judge. Eritrea.
10 seats out of 105 seats in Parliament are reserved for women. German
Democratic Republic. East Germany reserved seats in the Volkskammer for
representatives of women, trade unions and youth organisations. Greece. During
the 1920s-1930s there was a system of separate electoral curiae for Muslim and
Jewish electors in Greece, with reserved seats. Fiji. Fiji provides for the
election of specific numbers of Members of Parliament on the basis of three
racially-defined constituencies: the indigenous Fijians, the Fijian Indians and
the "General" electorate. Hong Kong and Macau. Hong Kong and Macau provide for
constituencies which represent professional or special interest groups rather
than geographical locations. Voters for the members representing these
constituencies include both natural persons as well as non-human local
entities, including organizations and corporations. India. India has its 15% of
seats in the Parliament of the country, State Assemblies, Local Municipal
Bodies and Village level institutions reserved for untouchable castes, also
called Dalits or Scheduled Castes. Similarly 7.5% are reserved for tribes or
the aborigines. The election of Untouchables and Tribes candidates is by a
Joint or mixed electorate, which includes all religions voters like Hindu,
Muslim etc. and all castes including Untouchables and tribes, vote. This is
different from separate electorate practiced in other countries. Two Indian
states, Kerala and Bihar, have parliamentary reserved seats for the Anglo-
Indian community. Iran. Iran reserves a fixed number of seats in the Majlis for
certain recognized non-Muslim ethnoreligious groups. To wit, two seats are
reserved for the Christian Armenian community, and one seat each is reserved
for the Assyrian and Chaldean Catholic, Jewish, and Zoroastrian communities.
Jordan. Jordan has reserved seats for Christians, Circassians and Bedouins.
Lebanon. Lebanon specifies the religious affiliation of several of its high
officers, such as the President (Maronite), the Prime Minister (Sunni Muslim)
and the Parliament's Speaker (Shia Muslim). Every electoral district for the
parliamentary elections includes a fixed number of the various religious
communities. Pakistan. Pakistan reserves a fixed number of parliamentary seats
for non-Muslims and women. Palestine (British mandate). During the British
mandate of Palestine at the third election (1931) of the Asefat HaNivharim
there were three curiae, for the Ashkenazi Jews, the Sephardi Jews and for the
Yemeni Jews. Palestinian Authority. While the Palestinian Authority makes no
reservations within the Palestinian Legislative Council (there were reserved
seats for Christians and Samaritans in the electoral law for the Palestinian
general election, 1996), certain positions in local government are guaranteed
to certain minority groups, in order to retain particular traditional cultural
influence and diversity. For example, the mayor of Bethlehem is required to be
a Christian, even though the city itself currently has a Muslim majority.
Rwanda. In the Parliament of Rwanda, a minimum of 30% of elected members of the
26-member Senate must be women. In the 80-member Chamber of Deputies, twenty-
four of these seats are reserved for women, elected through a joint assembly of
local government officials; another three seats are reserved for youth and
disabled members. Partly resulting from this arrangement, 45 female deputies
were elected to the Parliament in 2008, making the country the first and only
independent country to possess a female majority in its national legislature.
Syria. Syria enjoyed an electoral system like Lebanon's, at least for the
parliamentary elections, up to 1949, when the subdivisions among each religion
were suppressed, then there were only reserved seats for Christians up to 1963,
when the Baathist regime suppressed free elections. Tanzania. 15 seats out of
255 in the Parliament are reserved for women. Uganda. The Ugandan constitution
provides for a reserved woman's parliamentary seat from each of the 39
districts. United Kingdom. Political parties are permitted to restrict the
selection of their candidates in constituencies to a specific gender under the
Sex Discrimination (Election Candidates) Act 2002; to date, only the Labour
Party utilises the law. Zimbabwe. Zimbabwe reserved a fifth of the seats in
Parliament for the white minority, until these were abolished by constitutional
amendment in 1987. Exemption of the election threshold. In the German LÃ¤nder
Schleswig-Holstein (for the Danish and Frisian minorities) and Brandenburg (for
the Sorbian minority) as well as in Poland (for the German minority), Romania
(18 recognized minorities) and Serbia, political parties representing
recognized ethnic minorities enjoy an exemption from the election threshold.
