Richard Carmona Richard Henry Carmona (born November 22, 1949) is an American
physician, police officer, public health administrator, and politician. He was
a vice admiral in the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps and served as
the seventeenth Surgeon General of the United States. Appointed by President
George W. Bush in 2002, Carmona left office at the end of July 2006 upon the
expiration of his term. After leaving office, Carmona was highly critical of
the Bush administration for suppressing scientific findings which conflicted
with the Administration's ideological agenda. In August 2006, Carmona returned
home to Tucson, Arizona. In November 2011, he announced he would seek the
Democratic Party's nomination for United States Senate in the hopes of
succeeding outgoing Republican Senator Jon Kyl, despite being registered as a
political Independent. Early life, education, and early career. Carmona was
born in New York City, of Puerto Rican descent, and raised in Harlem. After
dropping out of DeWitt Clinton High School at age 16, he enlisted in the U.S.
Army in 1967. While enlisted, he received his General Educational Development
(GED), joined the United States Army Special Forces, became a combat-decorated
Vietnam veteran, and began his career in medicine as a Special Forces medic.
After leaving active duty, Carmona attended the Bronx Community College of the
City University of New York, where he earned his associate of arts degree in
nursing. In 1977, he graduated from the University of California, San Francisco
(UCSF), with a bachelor of science degree in biology and chemistry; in 1979, he
received his medical degree from UCSF, where he was awarded the prestigious
gold headed cane as the top graduate. In 1998, he earned a Master's degree in
Public Health (M.P.H.) from the University of Arizona. Medical career. Carmona
worked in various positions in the medical field including paramedic,
registered nurse, and physician. He completed a surgical residency at UCSF and
a National Institutes of Health-sponsored fellowship in trauma, burns, and
critical care. Carmona is a Fellow of the American College of Surgeons and
certified in correctional health care and in quality assurance. Carmona has
been Chairman of the Arizona Southern Regional Emergency Medical System, Chief
Medical Officer, hospital CEO, public health officer, and chief executive
officer of the Pima County health care system. In 1997, the Pima County system,
which was in financial trouble before he was appointed, continued to lose
millions of dollars and he resigned. Carmona was not in control of the assets
of the system but was held responsible for them. Carmona was also a professor
of medicine at the University of Arizona. Law enforcement career. He worked for
the Pima County Sheriff's Department since 1986. He eventually worked his way
up to deputy sheriff. He served as medical director of the county's police and
fire departments. He was a peace officer leader of the SWAT division, with
expertise in special operations and emergency preparedness, including weapons
of mass destruction. In 1999, he confronted a mentally-ill person who was
assaulting someone else at a car accident. After the person would not step out
of his car, he shot at Carmona, grazing his head, and the Deputy Sheriff shot
back seven times, killing him. The deceased was an ex-convict who had shot and
killed his own father that day. In 2000, Carmona was honored at the National
Association of Police Organizations TOP COPS award ceremony. Surgeon General.
Nomination. President Bush nominated Carmona to become the 17th Surgeon General
of the United States in March 2002. During the nomination process, Carmona was
questioned about his management style and the amount of time it took him to
become board-certified in his field. Carmona described himself as an "agent of
change" willing to question the status quo, but that he always treated
"patients, staff, and co-workers with respect." Senators on both sides of the
aisle praised Carmona's qualifications and supported his nomination; he was
confirmed by the U.S. Senate on July 23, 2002 by a vote of 98-0. Secondhand
smoke. In 2006, Carmona released a landmark Surgeon General's report on the
health effects of secondhand smoke. Carmona's report underlined the risks of
secondhand smoke exposure, stating: "The debate is over. The science is clear:
Secondhand smoke is not a mere annoyance, but a serious health hazard." The
report encouraged the adoption of indoor smoking bans and noted that such bans
did not appear to have a harmful economic effect on bars and restaurants. After
leaving office, Carmona testified before Congress that the Bush Administration
had tried for years to "water down" his findings on the dangers of secondhand
smoke, and had pressured him not to testify in the tobacco industry's
racketeering trial. In earlier testimony before the U.S. Congress, Carmona
stated that he would not object to a ban on all tobacco products "if Congress
chose to go that way." The Bush Administration distanced itself from this
statement. Post-Surgeon General career. Carmona is currently vice chairman of
the Canyon Ranch resort and spa company, president of the non-profit Canyon
Ranch Institute, and a professor at the Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of
Public Health at the University of Arizona. On June 16, 2010, Ross University
School of Medicine named Carmona to its Board of Trustees. In 2006, Republicans
attempted to recruit Carmona to run for Congress in Arizona's 8th congressional
district, but he declined. Criticism of Bush administration. On July 10, 2007,
Carmona, along with former Surgeons General C. Everett Koop and David Satcher,
testified before the United States House Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform about political and ideological interference with the Surgeon General's
mission. Carmona accused the Bush Administration of preventing him from
speaking out on certain public health issues such as embryonic stem cell
research, global climate change, emergency contraception, and abstinence-only
sex education, where the Administration's political stance conflicted with
scientific and medical opinion. Carmona also testified that the Bush
Administration had attempted for years to "water down" his report on the
dangers of secondhand smoke and pressured him not to testify in the tobacco
industry's racketeering trial: "Anything that doesn't fit into the political
appointees' ideological, theological or political agenda is ignored,
marginalized or simply buried." According to Carmona, he was even ordered not
to attend the Special Olympics because the event was sponsored by the Kennedy
family, and was told to mention President Bush three times on every page of his
speeches. The "Washington Post" subsequently identified William R. Steiger as
the Bush Administration official who had blocked release of Carmona's report on
global health because it conflicted with the Administration's political
priorities. Reuters reported that Carmona's predecessors as Surgeon General had
acknowledged the high level of political interference he experienced, saying:
"We have never seen it as partisan, as malicious, as vindictive, as mean-
spirited as it is today, and you clearly have worse than anyone's had." 2012
U.S. Senate election. Carmona was the Democratic nominee for U.S. Senate in
Arizona in the race to replace retiring Republican Senator Jon Kyl. He lost to
Republican nominee Jeff Flake in the general election on November 6, 2012.
Carmona said that he would bring his experience in science and medicine to the
Senate, which will inform his analytical approach to the issues. He has been
harshly critical of politicians whose ideology outweighs scientific evidence,
such as Todd Akin, and said that health issues must not be politicized.
Personal life. Carmona is married to Diana Sanchez. They have two daughters and
two sons. Carmona resides in Tucson, Arizona.
