Rights and responsibilities of marriages in the United States According to the
United States Government Accountability Office (GAO), there are 1,138 statutory
provisions in which marital status is a factor in determining benefits, rights,
and privileges. These rights and responsibilities apply to only male-female
couples, from the 1996 Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), defining marriage as
between a man and a woman. Prior to the enactment of DOMA, the General
Accounting Office (as the GAO was then called) identified 1,049 federal
statutory provisions in which benefits, rights, and privileges are contingent
on marital status or in which marital status is a factor. An update was
published in 2004 by the GAO covering the period between September 21, 1996
(when DOMA was signed into law) and December 31, 2003. The update identified
120 new statutory provisions involving marital status, and 31 statutory
provisions involving marital status repealed or amended in such a way as to
eliminate marital status as a factor. See below for a partial list of these
provisions of federal law. States. In addition, community-property states
frequently have forms of ownership that allow a full basis step-up on one's own
share of community property on the death of a spouse (in addition to the normal
step-up on spouse's assets). Legal remedies enacted following the GAO report.
Following the 2004 GAO report at least one bill, the Uniting American Families
Act, has been proposed to attempt to remedy some of the differences in rights
between same-sex partnerships and marriages.
