Risk-free interest rate Risk-free interest rate is the theoretical rate of
return of an investment with no risk of financial loss. One interpretation is
that the risk-free rate represents the interest that an investor would expect
from an absolutely risk-free investment over a given period of time. Another
interpretation is that the risk free rate is the compensation that would be
demanded by a representative investor holding a representative market
portfolio, comprising all the assets in the economy, (i.e. the risk free rate
is the compensation for systemic risk which cannot be eliminated by holding a
diversified portfolio.) It is the second interpretation which is applied in the
Capital Asset Pricing Model. (Refer to The Econometrics of Financial Markets,
by Campbell, Lo and MacKinlay.) Since the risk free rate can be obtained with
no risk, it is implied that any additional risk taken by an investor should be
rewarded with an interest rate higher than the risk-free rate. Theoretical
Measurement of the Risk Free Rate. As stated by Malcolm Kemp in Chapter Five of
his book 'Market Consistency: Model Calibration in Imperfect Markets,' the risk
free rate means different things to different people and there is no consensus
on how to go about a direct measurement of it. i) Expected increases in the
money supply should result in investors preferring current consumption to
future income. ii) Expected increases in productivity should result in
investors preferring future income to current consumption. The correct
interpretation is that the risk free rate could be either positive or negative
and in practice the sign of the expected risk free rate is an institutional
convention - this is analogous to the argument that Tobin makes on page 17 of
his book, Money, Credit and Capital. In a system with endogenous money creation
and where production decisions and outcomes are decentralized and potentially
intractable to forecasting, this analysis provides support to the concept that
the risk free rate may not be directly observable. However, it is commonly
observed that for people applying this interpretation, the value of holding
currency is normally perceived as being positive. It is not clear what is the
true basis for this perception, but it may be related to the practical
necessity of some form of currency to support the specialization of labour, the
perceived benefits of which were detailed by Adam Smith in The Wealth of
Nations. However it should be observed that Adam Smith did not provide an
'upper limit' to the desirable level of the specialization of labour and did
not fully address issues of how this should be organised at the national or
international level. An alternative (less well developed) interpretation is
that the risk free rate represents the time preference of a representative
worker for a representative basket of consumption. Again, there are reasons to
believe that in this situation the risk free rate may not be directly
observable. Given the theoretical 'fog' around this issue, in practice most
industry practitioners rely on some form of proxy for the risk free rate, or
use other forms of benchmark rate which are presupposed to incorporate the risk
free rate plus some risk of default. (Again refer to Chapter Five of Malcolm
Kemp's book, 'Market Consistency: Model Calibration in Imperfect Markets.')
However there are also issues with this approach, which are discussed in the
next section. Further discussions on the concept of a 'stochastic discount
rate' are available in The Econometrics of Financial Markets by Campbell, Lo
and MacKinley. Proxies for the Risk-free Rate. The return on domestically held
short-dated government bonds is normally perceived as a good proxy for the risk
free rate. However, theoretically this is only correct if there is no perceived
risk of default associated with the bond. Government bonds are conventionally
considered to be relatively risk-free to a domestic holder of a government
bond, because there is by definition no risk of default - the bond is a form of
government obligation which is being discharged through the payment of another
form of government obligation (i.e. the domestic currency). (Tobin, Money,
Credit and Capital, page 16.) This implies the risk of the government 'printing
more money' to meet the obligation is perceived as a form of tax, rather than a
form of default, (the inflation tax)which is often discussed as similar concept
to that of 'seigniorage'. The same consideration does not necessarily apply to
a foreign holder of a government bond,since a foreign holder also requires
compensation for potential foreign exchange movements in addition to the
compensation required by a domestic holder. Therefore it is normally the case
that currency debasement is viewed as a form of default for foreign holders.
Since the risk free rate should theoretically exclude any risk of default, this
implies that the yields on foreign owned government debt cannot be used as the
basis for calculating the risk free rate. Since the required return on
government bonds for domestic and foreign holders cannot be distinguished in an
international market for government debt, this may mean that yields on
government debt are not a good proxy for the risk free rate. Another
possibility used to estimate the risk free rate is the inter-bank lending rate.
Again appears to be premised on the basis that these institutions benefit from
an implicit guarantee, underpinned by the role of the monetary authorities as
'the lending of last resort.' (It should be appreciated that in a system with
endogenous money supply the 'monetary authorities' may be private agents as
well as the Central Bank.) Again, the same observation applies to banks as a
proxy for the risk free rate - if there is any perceived risk of default
implicit in the interbank lending rate, it is not appropriate to this rate as a
proxy for the risk free rate. Similar conclusions can be drawn from other
potential benchmark rates, including short rated triple AAA rated corporate
bonds of institutions deemed 'too big to fail.' Unfortunately it has not been
possible to locate a well detailed discussion on the basis of the various
conventions for estimating the risk free rate through proxy rates, which
appears to be a major 'hole' in the theoretical literature. One solution that
has been proposed for solving the issue of not having a good 'proxy' for the
risk free asset, to provide an 'observable' risk free rate is to have some form
of international guaranteed asset which would provide a guaranteed return over
an indefinite time period (possibly even into perpetuity). There are some
assets in existence which might replicate some of the hypothetical properties
of this asset. For example, one potential candidate is the 'consul' bonds which
were issued by the British government in the 18th century. Application. The
risk-free interest rate is highly significant in the context of the general
application of Modern Portfolio Theory which is based on the Capital Asset
Pricing Model. There are numerous issues with this model, the most basic of
which is the reduction of the description of utility of stock holding to the
expected mean and variance of the returns of the portfolio. In reality, there
may be other utility of stock holding, as described by Shiller in his article
'Stock Prices and Social Dynamics,' (1984) Brooking Papers on Economic
Activity, pages 457 to 511. The risk free rate is also a required input in
financial calculations, such as the Blackâ€“Scholes formula for pricing stock
options and the Sharpe Ratio. Note that some finance and economic theories
assume that market participants can borrow at the risk free rate; in practice,
of course, very few (if any) borrowers have access to finance at the risk free
rate.
