Robert Filmer Sir Robert Filmer (1588 â€“ 26 May 1653) was an English political
theorist who defended the divine right of kings. His best known work,
"Patriarcha", published posthumously in 1680, was the target of numerous Whig
rebuttals, including Algernon Sidney's "Discourses Concerning Government",
James Tyrrell's "Patriarcha Non Monarcha", and John Locke's "Two Treatises of
Government". Filmer also wrote critiques of Thomas Hobbes, John Milton, Hugo
Grotius, and Aristotle. Life. The son of Sir Edward Filmer of East Sutton in
Kent, he studied at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1604.
Knighted by Charles I at the beginning of his reign, he was an ardent supporter
of the king's cause, and his house is said to have been plundered by the
parliamentarians ten times. He was imprisoned in Leeds Castle in 1643. He and
his father died in the same city, and he is buried in the church there,
surrounded by his descendants to the tenth generation. His son, also Robert,
was created the first of the Filmer baronets in 1674. "Patriarcha" and other
works. Filmer was already a middle-aged man when the controversy between the
king and the House of Commons roused him into literary activity. His writings
afford examples of the doctrines held by the extreme section of the Divine
Right party. The most complete expression of Filmer's thought is given in
"Patriarcha, or the Natural Power of Kings", which was published posthumously
in 1680, but was probably begun in the 1620s, and almost certainly was
completed before the Civil War began in 1642. According to Christopher Hill,
"The whole argument of ... "Patriarcha", and of his works published earlier in
the 1640s and 1650s, is based on Old Testament history from "Genesis" onwards".
His position was enunciated by the works which he published during his
lifetime. "Of the Blasphemie against the Holy Ghost" from 1646 or 1647 was
against Calvinists, starting from John Calvin's doctrine on blasphemy. "The
Freeholders Grand Inquest" (1648) concerned English constitutional history;
Filmer's early published works did not receive much attention, while
"Patriarcha" circulated only in manuscript. "Anarchy of a Limited and Mixed
Monarchy" (1648) was an attack on a treatise about monarchy by Philip Hunton.
Hunton had maintained that the king's prerogative is not superior to the
authority of the Houses of Parliament. His "Observations concerning the
Original of Government upon Mr Hobbes's Leviathan, Mr Milton against Salmasius,
and H. Grotius' De jure belli ac pacis" appeared in 1652. As its title
suggests, it attacks several political classics, the "De jure belli ac pacis"
of Grotius, the "Leviathan" of Thomas Hobbes, and the "Defensio pro Populo
Anglicano" of John Milton. The pamphlet entitled "The Power of Kings, and in
particular, of the King of England" (written 1648) was first published in 1680.
Views. Filmer's theory is founded upon the statement that the government of a
family by the father is the true origin and model of all government. In the
beginning God gave authority to Adam, who had complete control over his
descendants, even over life and death itself. From Adam this authority was
inherited by Noah; here, Filmer most likely quotes the legend of Noah, who
sailed up the Mediterranean and allocated the three continents of the Old World
to the rule of his three sons. From Shem, Ham and Japheth the patriarchs
inherited the absolute power which they exercised over their families and
servants; and it is from these patriarchs that all kings and governors (whether
a single monarch or a governing assembly) derive their authority, which is
therefore absolute, and founded upon divine right. The difficulty inherent in
judging the validity of claims to power by men who claim to be acting upon the
'secret' will of God was disregarded by Filmer, who held it in no way altered
the nature of such power, based on the natural right of a supreme father to
hold sway. The king is perfectly free from all human control. He cannot be
bound by the acts of his predecessors, for which he is not responsible; nor by
his own, for it is impossible that a man should give a law to himself - a law
must be imposed by another upon the person bound by it. With regard to the
English constitution, he asserted, in his "Freeholders Grand Inquest touching
our Sovereign Lord the King and his Parliament" (1648), that the Lords give
counsel only to the king, that the Commons are to perform and consent only to
the ordinances of parliament, and that the king alone is the maker of laws
which derive their power purely from his will. Filmer considered it monstrous
that the people should judge or depose their king, for they would then become
judges in their own cause. Filmer was a severe critic of democracy. In his
opinion, democracy of ancient Athens was in fact a "justice-trading system".
Athenians never knew real justice, only the will of the mob. Ancient Rome was,
according to Filmer, ruled fairly only after the Empire was established.
Reception. Filmer's theory, owing to a timely posthumous publication, obtained
a wide recognition. Nine years after the publication of "Patriarcha", at the
time of the Revolution which banished the Stuarts from the throne, John Locke
singled out Filmer among the advocates of Divine Right and attacked him
expressly in the first part of the "Two Treatises of Government". The first
"Treatise" goes into all his arguments seriatim, and especially pointing out
that even if the first principles of his argument are to be taken for granted,
the rights of the eldest born have been so often cast aside that modern kings
can claim no such inheritance of authority, as Filmer asserts. Filmer's
patriarchal monarchism was also the target of Algernon Sydney in his
"Discourses Concerning Government" and of James Tyrrell in his "Patriarcha non
monarcha". Family. His first son Sir Edward Filmer was Gentleman of the Privy
Chamber. He died in 1668 and the East Sutton estate passed to his brother
Robert who was created a baronet in 1674 in honour of their father's loyalty to
the Crown. See Filmer baronets.
