Robert F. Thompson Robert F. Thompson (born June 19, 1971) is a Democratic
member of the Arkansas Senate, representing the 11th District since 2007. This
district includes several counties in northeast Arkansas. From 2005 to 2007, he
was a State Representative for the 78th district of the Arkansas House of
Representatives, representing the city of Paragould in Greene County, Arkansas.
Thompson currently practices law at the Paragould law firm of Branch, Thompson,
Warmath, & Dale P.A. Biography. Thompson is a native of Paragould. Born at
Community Methodist Hospital (now Arkansas Methodist Medical Center) in June
1971, he was raised in Paragould and attended Paragould public schools. He
attended Hendrix College in Conway, Arkansas, graduating summa cum laude in
1993 with a Bachelor of Arts in history. Following college, Thompson attended
the University of St Andrews in Scotland on a Rotary Foundation Scholarship. He
graduated from the University of Arkansas School of Law in 1997. In law school,
he served as editor-in-chief of the Arkansas Law Review and graduated first in
his class . From 1997 to 1998, Thompson served as a law clerk to Chief Judge
Richard S. Arnold of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth
CircuitLater, as a member of the Arkansas House of Representatives, following
the death of Judge Arnold in September 2004, Thompson was a sponsor of a House
Resolution celebrating the life of Judge Arnold and his contributions to the
American legal system. Thompson has been awarded two honors by the Arkansas
Historical Association for his writings about Arkansas history. In 1993 he won
the Lucille Westbrook Award for an essay about debt slavery in Arkansas in the
1930s. In 1998, he won the Violet Gingles Award for his short biography of the
Arkansas legislator Paul Van Dalsem.[http://archives.uca.edu/
arkansas_historical_quarterly/17.pdf In 2008 Thompson was named as one of 24
fellows in the 2008 class of the Aspen Institute's Rodel Fellowships in Public
Leadership. Thompson is married to the former Tori Gibson of Osceola, Arkansas.
They have two sons and a daughter. He is an active member of the First United
Methodist Church of Paragould. Political career. In November 2004, Thompson was
elected to the Arkansas State House of Representatives, District 78, which
includes the city of Paragould. As a member of the House, he sat on the House
Judiciary Committee, the House Committee on State Agencies and Governmental
Affairs, and the Joint Public Retirement Committee. During the 2005 legislative
session, Thompson sponsored bills that created a Drug Court for Greene County,
Arkansas, strengthened laws on prosecuting sexual offenders, and addressed
financial problems of recently consolidated school districts . In June 2004 he
was one of Arkansas Business's "40 Under 40" up-and-coming young leaders.[http:
//www.arkansasbusiness.com/people_ab_40U.asp?id=517] In December 2004 he was
selected as NEA Business Today's 25 Outstanding Young Professionals in
northeast Arkansas. In May 2005 Thompson was named one of five "promising
legislative newcomers" by the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette . In 2006, Thompson ran
for the District 11 state senate seat being vacated by State Senator Tim
Wooldridge, who was forced out of office due to term limits. On May 23,
Thompson defeated Paragould resident and former state representative Gary Biggs
in the Democratic primary for the District 11 seat. As the Democratic nominee
in the general election, Thompson defeated Republican Lloyd Clark in a
landslide, 72.36% to 27.64%. Thompson currently serves as the Majority Leader
of the Senate.[http://www.swtimes.com/news/article_ba0c913e-e8ea-11df-8ba3-
001cc4c03286.html] He also serves as vice-chair of the Legislative Council, the
committee that oversees legislative operations when the Arkansas legislature is
not in session. Thompson is a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Senate
Committee on State Agencies and Governmental Affairs, and the Senate Efficiency
Committee, which administers the internal operations of the Arkansas Senate.
