Rudy Giuliani promotions of Bernard Kerik Rudy Giuliani, as mayor of the City
of New York, promoted the career of Bernard Kerik (by appointment or
recommendation) on several occasions. Critics have charged that Giuliani showed
consistently poor judgment in doing so. History of promotions. Bernard Kerik,
who started out as a New York Police Department detective driving for his
campaign, then became the city's Commissioner of the Department of Correction
and later New York City Police Commissioner and a founder of Giuliani Partners.
Kerik also served as bodyguard for Giuliani. Giuliani is godfather to Kerik's
two younger children, by Kerik's third wife, Hala Matli (born 1972, married
1998): Celine Christina and Angelina Amber. More than half of mayor Giuliani's
cabinet opposed his 2000 appointment of Kerik as police commissioner. Kerik's
selection came despite the fact that he lacked a college degree. (Kerik was a
high school dropout with a General Equivalency Diploma.) Possession of a
college degree was a requirement of police department officials at the captain
rank and higher, a practice instituted by former police commissioner Benjamin
Ward. After Giuliani's terms as mayor completed, Kerik became a founder of
Giuliani Partners. Giuliani then pushed President George W. Bush to nominate
Kerik to be Secretary of Homeland Security, at which point multiple scandals
derailed the nomination and Kerik's career; subsequently Kerik pled guilty to
corruption charges dating from his Corrections days (1999). (He pled guilty in
Bronx court to state misdemeanor charges related to undeclared acceptance of
$165,000 in apartment renovations performed by Interstate Industrial, a
reputably mob-associated firm.) In March 2007, "The New York Times" reported
that Kerik was likely to also be indicted for tax fraud and illegal
eavesdropping, and also disclosed that Giuliani had testified under oath in
April 2006 that he had in fact been briefed on Kerik's mob links in 2000 â€”
prior to his appointment of Kerik as Corrections Commissioner. Giuliani had
previously denied knowing of these connections until years later. Kerik is also
under investigation for conspiracy to eavesdrop on the conversations of the
husband of Jeanine Pirro, Albert Pirro, whom Ms. Pirro suspected of having an
affair. Briefing of Giuliani. Mayor Giuliani said that neither he nor his aides
could remember being briefed about Kerik's involvement with Interstate
Industrial. However, a late 2007 "New York Times" investigation of the diaries
and investigator's notes of Edward J. Kuriansky, the city investigations
commissioner, indicates that such a meeting did indeed occur. Additionally,
Kuriansky also remembered briefing one of Giuliani's closest aides, Dennison
Young Jr., about Kerik's involvement with Interstate Industrial just days
before the police commissioner appointment. Regarding Giuliani's appointment
patterns and loyalty as a factor in professional relationships, former deputy
mayor (under Giuliani) Fran Reiter said, "Rudy can fall for people big time,
and sometimes qualifications are secondary to loyalty." Effect on Giuliani
presidential campaign. Marc Mukasey, son of Michael Mukasey (then Attorney
General) and member of Bracewell & Giuliani, has been assigned by Giuliani's
2008 presidential campaign to block Kerik's legal defense team from
interviewing witnesses that might assist his defense. During a November 5, 2007
presidential campaign visit in Derry, New Hampshire, Giuliani said, "I think
Bernie Kerik, I should have checked out more carefully. I've said that. I've
apologized for it." Giuliani then stressed Kerik's contribution to crime
reduction in New York, as well as his record as Corrections Commissioner: "But
the reality is we brought down crime in record proportions, we brought down
violence in the prisons by record proportions." (However, Kerik had a
relatively short term in New York City's police commissioner. He served for one
year and four months, compared with the longer tenures of William Bratton and
Howard Safir.) On November 8, Giuliani declined to say whether he would grant
Kerik a presidential pardon were the circumstances to come about: "It wouldn't
be fair to ask that question at this point. He may or may not be charged, he
may or may not be convicted. Who knows what happens?" Of Giuliani's Republican
opponents, Senator John McCain was the most outspoken regarding the Kerik
association and the doubt it cast upon Giuliani's judgement, saying, "That's
why I never would've supported him to be the head of Homeland Security because
of his irresponsible act when he was over in Baghdad to try and help train the
police. One of the reasons why we had so much trouble with the initial training
of the police was because he came, didn't do anything and then went out to the
airport and left." On November 13, 2007, former publisher Judith Regan, with
whom Kerik had had an extramarital affair, filed a $100 million defamation
lawsuit against News Corporation, claiming among other things that News
Corporation executives told her in 2004 to lie to federal investigators about
her relationship with Kerik, in order to protect Giuliani's future presidential
campaign. By late December 2007, the Kerik relationship was seen as one of the
factors leading a difficult stretch for the Giuliani campaign.
