Government procurement in Russia Government procurement in Russia relates to
the public procurement in Russia by all governmental, regional and local
authorities. Legislation. Russian Federal Law N94-ФЗ of 21.07.2005 require
all federal, regional and municipal government customers to publish all
information about government tenders, auctions and other purchase procedures on
special public government websites. On June 2012 The Law "On the Federal
Contractual System of Procurement of Goods, Works and Services" came up for the
first reading in the State Duma. The bill is based on a comprehensive approach
to procurement of goods, works and services for state and municipal needs by
forming the federal contractual system. It, specifically, ensures the
regulation of the entire procurement cycle: planning and forecasting of state
and municipal needs, forming and placing orders, fulfillment of contractual
obligations and the analysis of the results, as well as monitoring, control and
auditing of the observance of requirements. The bill establishes a number of
anti-dumping measures enabling rejection of applications with inordinately
underestimated prices. Education. In many countries laws demands or recommends
customers and suppliers to have certified procurement specialists. Special
education organizations provide certification, courses and seminars and publish
recommendations for different procurement procedures. Statistics. About 3 000
of new tenders, auctions and requests for quotations published each day. About
250 000 purchase announcements published per year on federal procurement
website. Web resources that collects procurement information also are source
for additional statistics like usage of specific file formats among official
organizations or regional economic activities.
