SafeMinds The Coalition for SafeMinds (Sensible Action For Ending Mercury-
Induced Neurological Disorders) is a non-profit organization dedicated to
investigating the risks of exposure to mercury from medical products. SafeMinds
was founded in 2000 and is led by the parents of autistic children. The
organization contends that mercury in vaccines, in the form of thiomersal, is
related to the development of autism. Medical research has refuted any
causative link between thiomersal and autism. This research has not been
accepted by SafeMinds, which has continued to pursue the issue in the political
and judicial arenas. Principals. Lyn Redwood, the president and co-founder of
SafeMinds, is a nurse practitioner specializing in pediatrics and women's
health care. Her son Will was diagnosed with Pervasive Developmental Disorder -
Not Otherwise Specified (PDD-NOS). Redwood is co-author of "Autism: A Novel
Form of Mercury Poisoning", and has testified before the United States House of
Representatives Government Reform Committee, where she presented "Mercury in
Medicine: Are We Taking Unnecessary Risks?" Sallie Bernard, is the executive
director and co-founder of SafeMinds, and a co-author of research papers on the
links between vaccines and neurodevelopmental disorders. Her son Bill was
diagnosed with autism in 1993. She was a member of the panel that issued a 2007
federally-funded study that found no link between thimerosal exposure and
neurological problems, but she did not agree with the findings. Liz Birt was a
corporate, tax and health care attorney and lobbyist and a co-founder
SafeMinds. "Evidence of Harm". Several members of SafeMinds are discussed in
the book "Evidence of Harm" (2004), by David Kirby.
