Sales tax A sales tax is a tax paid to a governing body by a seller for the
sales of certain goods and services. Usually laws allow (or require) the seller
to collect funds for the tax from the consumer at the point of purchase. Laws
may allow sellers to itemized the tax separately from the price of the goods or
services, or require it to be included in the price (tax-inclusive). The tax
amount is usually calculated by applying a percentage rate to the taxable price
of a sale. When a tax on goods or services is paid to a governing body directly
by a consumer, it is usually called a use tax. Often laws provide for the
exemption of certain goods or services from sales and use tax. Types. A
conventional or retail sales tax is only levied on the sale of a good to its
final end user. Sales to businesses who later resell the goods are not charged
the tax. A purchaser who is not an end user is usually issued a "resale
certificate" by the taxing authority and required to provide the certificate
(or its ID number) to a seller at the point of purchase, along with a statement
that the item is for resale. The tax is otherwise charged on each item sold to
purchasers who do not provide such a certificate and who are under the
jurisdiction of the taxing authority. Most countries in the world have sales
taxes or value-added taxes at all or several of the national, state, county or
city government levels. Countries in Western Europe, especially in Scandinavia
have some of the world's highest valued-added taxes. Norway, Denmark and Sweden
have higher VATs at 25%, Hungary has the highest at 27%, although reduced rates
are used in some cases, as for groceries, art, books and newspapers. In some
jurisdictions of the United States, there are multiple levels of government
which each impose a sales tax. For example, sales tax in Chicago (Cook County),
IL is 10.25%â€”consisting of 6.25% state, 1.25% city, 1.75% county and 1%
regional transportation authority. Chicago also has the Metropolitan Pier and
Exposition Authority tax on food and beverage of 1% (which means eating out is
taxed at 11.25%). For Baton Rouge, Louisiana, the tax is 9%, consisting of 4%
state and 5% local rate. In California, sales taxes are made up of various
state, county and city taxes. The state tax is "imposed upon all retailers" for
the "privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail." Strictly
speaking, only the retailer is responsible for the payment of the tax; when a
retailer adds this tax to the purchase price, the consumer is merely
reimbursing the retailer by contractual agreement. When consumers purchase
goods from out-of-state (in which case the seller owes no tax to California)
the consumer is required to pay a "use tax" which is identical to the sales
tax. Use tax is levied upon the "storage, use, or other consumption in this
state of tangible personal property." Consumers are responsible for declaring
these purchases in the same filing as their annual state income tax, but it is
rare for them to do so. An exception is out of state purchase of automobiles,
in which case use tax is collected by the state as part of registering the
vehicle in California. The trend has been for conventional sales taxes to be
replaced by more broadly based value added taxes. Value added taxes provide an
estimated 20 percent of worldwide tax revenue and have been adopted by more
than 140 countries. The United States is now one of the few countries to retain
conventional sales taxes. Effects. Sales taxes are often seen as good tax
systems for economic growth, savings, and investment. Economists at the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development studied the effects of
various types of taxes on the economic growth of developed nations within the
OECD and found that sales taxes are one of the least harmful taxes for growth.
Some people consider sales taxes to be regressive; that is, they believe that
the tax imposes a greater burden on low-income families than wealthy families.
However, it has been suggested that any regressive effect of a sales tax could
be mitigated, e.g., by excluding rent, or by exempting "necessary" items, such
as food, clothing and medicines. Enforcement of tax on remote sales. In the
United States, every state with a sales tax law has a use tax component in that
law applying to purchases from out-of-state mail order, catalog and e-commerce
vendors, a category also known as "remote sales". As e-commerce sales have
grown in recent years, noncompliance with use tax has had a growing impact on
state revenues. The Congressional Budget Office estimated that uncollected use
taxes on remote sales in 2003 could be as high as $20.4 billion. Uncollected
use tax on remote sales was projected to run as high as $54.8 billion for 2011.
Enforcement of the tax on remote sales, however, is difficult. Unless the
vendor has a physical location, or "nexus", within a state, the vendor cannot
be required to collect tax for that state. This limitation was defined as part
of the Dormant Commerce Clause by the Supreme Court in the 1967 decision on
National Bellas Hess v. Illinois. An attempt to require a Delaware e-commerce
vendor to collect North Dakota tax was overturned by the court in the 1992
decision on Quill Corp. v. North Dakota. The Internet Tax Freedom Act of 1998
established a commission to study the possibility of internet taxation, but the
commission did not make any formal recommendations. In a report in 2003, the
Congressional Budget Office warned of the economic burden of a "multiplicity of
tax systems, particularly for smaller firms". In an effort to reduce the burden
of compliance with the tax laws of multiple jurisdictions, the Streamlined
Sales Tax Project was organized in March 2000. Cooperative efforts in this
project by 44 state governments and the District of Columbia eventually
produced the Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement in 2010. This agreement
establishes standards necessary for simplified and uniform sales tax laws. As
of December 2010, 24 states had passed legislation conforming with the
agreement. Whether the Streamlined Sales Tax can actually be applied to remote
sales ultimately depends upon Congressional support, because the 1992 Quill v.
North Dakota decision determined that only the U.S. Congress has the authority
to enact interstate taxes. History. Early examples. A tax imposed on the sale
of goods is depicted on the walls of ancient Egyptian tombs, which have been
dated as far back as 2000 BC. These paintings describe the collection of tax
for specific commodities, such as cooking oil. Sales tax amounts, measured in
drachmas at a rate of one percent, were recorded in a separate column of a
record prepared for the auction of 16 slaves in Piraeus, Greece in 415 BC.
Nearby Athens collected duties on the import and export of commodities,
recorded at a rate of two percent in 399 BC. At that period of time, Athens did
not rely on government agencies to collect its taxes; the responsibility was
delegated to the highest bidder, a practice known as tax farming. The Roman
emperor Augustus collected funds for his military aerarium in AD 6 with a one
percent general sales tax, known as the "centesima rerum venalium" (hundredth
of the value of everything sold). The Roman sales tax was later reduced to a
half percent ("ducentesima") by Tiberius, then abolished completely by
Caligula. In the United States. Although the United States government has never
used a general sales tax, an excise tax on whiskey enacted in 1791 was one of
its first fund raising efforts. The unpopularity of this tax with farmers on
the western frontier led to the Whiskey Rebellion in 1794. Federal and state
sales taxes in the United States remained selective, rather than general,
through the 19th century. However, excise taxes were applied to so many
specific commodities during the Civil War that they functioned collectively as
a general sales tax. The first broad-based, general sales taxes in the United
States were enacted by Kentucky and Mississippi in 1930, although Kentucky
repealed its sales tax in 1936. Twenty-two other states began imposing general
sales taxes later in the 1930s, followed by six in the 1940s and five in the
1950s. Kentucky re-enacted its sales tax law in 1960. Eleven more states
enacted sales tax laws during the 1960s, with Vermont as the last in 1969. Only
five states currently do not have general sales taxes: Alaska, Delaware,
Montana, New Hampshire, and Oregon. The 2010 health care reform law imposed a
10 percent federal sales tax on indoor tanning services, effective July 1,
2010. Unlike previous federal excise taxes, this tax is collected directly from
the consumer by the seller and based on the sale price rather than a quantity.
However, the new tax is "selective" rather than general, applying only to a
specific service. In Canada. Canada uses a value-added federal Goods and
Services Tax (GST) with a rate of 5 percent, effective since January 1, 2008.
Every province in Canada except Alberta has either a Provincial Sales Tax (PST)
or the Harmonized Sales Tax (HST), which is a single, blended combination of
the GST and PST. Sales tax avoidance. In the United States, online retailers
who have no physical presence in a given state can ship goods to customers
there without collecting that state's sales tax, because as of 2011, there is
no federal sales tax. Amazon.com has been criticized for not collecting sales
tax, and has intentionally disaffiliated itself from businesses in certain
states to continue doing so legally.
