Scarcity Scarcity is the fundamental economic problem of having humans who have
unlimited wants and needs in a world of limited resources. It states that
society has insufficient productive resources to fulfil all human wants and
needs. Alternatively, scarcity implies that not all of society's goals can be
pursued at the same time; trade-offs are made of one good against others. In an
influential 1932 essay, Lionel Robbins defined economics as "the science which
studies human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce means which
have alternative uses." In biology, "scarcity" can refer to the uncommonness or
rarity of certain species. Such species are often protected by local, national
or international law in order to prevent extinction. Scarcity in Economics.
Goods (and services) that are scarce are called economic goods (or simply
"goods" if their scarcity is presumed). Other goods are called free goods if
they are desired but in such abundance that they are not scarce, such as air
and seawater. Too much of something freely available can informally be referred
to as a "bad", but then its absence can be classified as a good, thus, a "mown"
lawn, "clean" air, etc. Economists study (among other things) how societies
perform the allocation of these resources â€” along with how communities often
fail to attain optimality and are instead inefficient. More clearly scarcity is
our infinite wants hitting up against finite resources. Physical goods are
likely to remain inherently scarce by definition. Also some non-physical goods
are likely to remain scarce by design, examples include positional goods such
as awards generated by honor systems, fame, and membership of elite social
groups. These things are said to derive all or most of their value from their
scarcity. Even in a theoretical post scarcity society, certain goods, such as
desirable land and original art pieces, would most likely remain scarce. On the
other hand, the ease with which some goods can be obtained or replicated (for
instance, intellectual property) led to the introduction of artificial scarcity
in the form of legal restrictions which limit the availability of such goods.
