Secret ballot The secret ballot is a voting method in which a voter's choices
in an election or a referendum are anonymous. The key aim is to ensure the
voter records a sincere choice by forestalling attempts to influence the voter
by intimidation or bribery. The system is one means of achieving the goal of
political privacy. However, the secret ballot may increase the amount of vote
buying where it is still legal by paying lukewarm supporters to turn out and
paying lukewarm opponents to stay home, and therefore may reduce the costs of
buying an election. Secret ballots are suitable for many different voting
systems. The most basic form may be blank pieces of paper, upon which each
voter writes only his or her choice. Without revealing their votes to anyone,
the electors place the ballots into a sealed box, which is emptied later for
counting. In the modern world one of the most common forms of the secret ballot
involves pre-printed ballot papers with the name of the candidates or questions
and respective checkboxes. Provisions are made at the polling place for the
voters to record their preferences in secret. The ballots are specifically
designed to eliminate bias and to prevent anyone from linking voter to ballot.
This system is also known as the Australian ballot, because it originated in
Australia during the 1850s. In the United States, it is also known as the
Massachusetts ballot since Massachusetts was the first U.S. state to use the
secret ballot. In the U.S., voting by secret ballot was universal by 1892, but
criminal prohibitions against paying people to vote for a particular candidate
or not were instituted in 1925. History. In ancient Greece, secret ballots were
used in several occasions, like ostracism and also to remain hidden from people
seeking favors. In ancient Rome, the laws regulating elections were
collectively known as "Tabellariae Leges", the first of which was introduced in
139 BC ("Lex Gabinia"). Today the practice of casting secret ballots is so
commonplace that most voters would not consider that any other method might be
used. France. Article 31 of the French Constitution of 1795 states that "All
elections are to be held by secret ballot". The same goes with the constitution
of 1848 : voters could hand-write the name of their preferred candidate on
their ballot at home (the only condition was to write on a white paper) or
receive one in a distribution in the street. The ballot is folded in order to
prevent other people from reading its content. Louis-Napol√©on Bonaparte
attempted to abolish the secret ballot for the 1851 plebiscite with an
electoral decree requesting electors to write down "yes" or "no" (in French:
"oui" or "non") under the eyes of everyone. But he faced a strong opposition
and finally changed his mind, allowing secret ballot to take place. According
to the official web site of the "Assemblee nationale" (the lower house of the
French parliament), the voting booth was permanently adopted only in 1913.
United Kingdom. The demand for a secret ballot was one of the six points of
Chartism. The British parliament of the time refused to even consider the
Chartist demands but it is notable that Lord Macaulay, in his speech of 1842,
while rejecting Chartism's six points as a whole, admitted that the secret
ballot was one of the two points he could support. The secret ballot was
eventually introduced in the Ballot Act 1872, substantially reducing the cost
of campaigning, and was first used on 15 August 1872 to re-elect Hugh Childers
as MP for Pontefract in a ministerial by-election following his appointment as
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. The original ballot box, sealed in wax
with a liquorice stamp, is held at Pontefract museum. The use of numbered
ballots makes it possible, given access to the relevant documents, to identify
who has voted for whom, although this is only rarely done. Australia. Chartist
ideas influenced the miners of Eureka Stockade in 1854 in Victoria where they
adopted all of Chartism's six points including the secret ballot. Secret
balloting appears to have been first implemented in the former Australian
colony (now a state) of Tasmania on February 7, 1856. Until the original
Tasmanian Electoral Act of 1856 was 're-discovered' recently, credit for the
first implementation of the secret ballot often went to the colonies of
Victoria and South Australia. Victoria enacted legislation for secret ballots
on March 19, 1856, and South Australian Electoral Commissioner William Boothby
generally gets credit for creating the system finally enacted into law in South
Australia on April 2 of that same year (a fortnight later). United States. In
the United States, most states had moved to secret ballots soon after the
presidential election of 1884. However, Kentucky was the last state to do so in
1891, when it quit using an oral ballot. Therefore, the first President of the
United States elected completely under the Australian ballot was president
Grover Cleveland in 1892. The first city to start using Australian ballot in
the United States was Louisville, Kentucky. However, the first state to adopt
Australian ballot was Massachusetts. Elections in the United States are mostly
held by secret ballot, although some states use mail ballots instead, which
violate two of the four requirements of the "Australian ballot". The
Constitution for the State of West Virginia still allows voters to cast "open
ballots". Disabled people. Ballot design and polling place architecture often
denies the disabled the possibility to cast a vote in secret. In many
democracies disabled persons vote by appointing another person who fills the
ballot in their name. This does not assure secrecy of the ballot. The United
Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities which entered
into force in 2008 assures secret ballot for disabled voters. Article 29 of the
Convention requires that all Contracting States protect "the right of persons
with disabilities to vote by secret ballot in elections and public
referendums". According to this provision, each Contracting State should
provide for voting equipment which would enable disabled voters to vote
independently and secretly. Some democracies, e.g. the United States, the
Netherlands, Slovenia, Albania or India allow disabled voters to use electronic
voting machines. In others, among them Azerbaijan, Canada, Ghana, the United
Kingdom, and most African and Asian countries, visually impaired voters can use
ballots in Braille or paper ballot templates. Article 29 also requires that
Contracting States ensure "that voting procedures, facilities and materials are
appropriate, accessible and easy to understand and use." In some democracies,
e.g. The United Kingdom, Sweden and the United States, all the polling places
already are fully accessible for disabled voters. Secrecy vs. reliability. The
United Kingdom secret ballot arrangements are sometimes criticised because it
is possible to link a ballot paper to the voter who cast it. Each ballot paper
is individually numbered and each elector also has a number. When an elector is
given a ballot paper, their number is noted down on the counterfoil of the
ballot paper (which also carries the ballot paper number). This means, of
course, that the secrecy of the ballot is not guaranteed, if anyone can gain
access to the counterfoils, which are locked away securely before the ballot
boxes are opened at the count. Polling station officials colluding with
election scrutineers may therefore determine how individual electors have
voted. This measure is thought to be justified as a security arrangement so
that if there was an allegation of fraud, false ballot papers could be
identified. The process of matching ballot papers to voters is permissible only
if an Election Court requires it, and this is an extremely unlikely occurrence.
In fact the Election Court has never made such an order since the secret ballot
was introduced in 1872. The legal authority for this system is set out in the
Parliamentary Elections Rules in Schedule 1 of the Representation of the People
Act 1983. In the United States, sometimes the number on the ballot is printed
on a perforated stub which is torn off and placed on a ring (like a shower
curtain ring) before the ballot is cast into the ballot box. The stubs prove
that an elector has voted and ensure he can only vote once, but the ballots
themselves are anonymous. At the end of voting day, the number of ballots
inside the box should match the number of stubs on the ring, certifying that
every ballot was cast by a registered elector, and that none of them were lost
or fabricated. Sometimes the ballots themselves are numbered, making the vote
trackable. This was ruled legal by Federal District Judge Christine Arguello,
who denied the existence of a constitutional right to a secret ballot.
