Sectionalism In national politics, sectionalism is loyalty to the interests of
one's own region or section of the country, rather than to the country as a
whole. It is often a precursor to separatism. In the United States.
Sectionalism in 1800's America refers to the different economies, social
structures, customs, and political values of the North and South. It increased
steadily 1800â€“1860 as the North, without slavery, industrialized, urbanized
and built prosperous farms, while the deep South concentrated on plantation
agriculture based on slave labor, together with subsistence farming for the
poor whites. The South expanded into rich new lands in the Southwest (from
Alabama to Texas). However, slavery declined in the border states and could
barely survive in cities and industrial areas (it was fading out in cities such
as Baltimore, Louisville and St. Louis), so a South based on slavery was rural
and non-industrial. On the other hand, as the demand for cotton grew the price
of slaves soared. Historians have debated whether economic differences between
the industrial Northeast and the agricultural South helped cause the Civil War.
Most historians now disagree with the economic determinism of historian Charles
Beard in the 1920s and emphasize that Northern and Southern economies were
largely complementary. However historians agree that social and cultural
institutions were very different North and South. In the South the rich men
owned all the good land, leaving the poor white farmers with marginal lands of
low productivity. Fears of slave revolts and abolitionist propaganda made the
South militantly hostile to suspicious ideas. Southerners complained that it
was the North that was changing, and was prone to new "isms", while the South
remained true to historic republican values of the Founding Fathers (many of
whom owned slaves, including Washington, Jefferson and Madison.) The issue of
accepting slavery (in the guise of rejecting slave-owning bishops and
missionaries) split the largest religious denominations (the Methodist, Baptist
and Presbyterian churches) into separate Northern and Southern denominations.
Industrialization meant that seven out of eight European immigrants settled in
the North. The movement of twice as many whites leaving the South for the North
contributed to the South's defensive-aggressive political behavior.
Sectionalism has also existed in the American West. Farmers in the late 19th
century, feeling exploited by railroads headquartered in the East, supported
the Populist political movement.
