Seven generation sustainability Seven generation sustainability is an
ecological concept that urges the current generation of humans to live
sustainably and work for the benefit of the seventh generation into the future.
It originated with the Iroquois - Great Law of the Iroquois - which holds
appropriate to think seven generations ahead (a couple hundred years into the
future) and decide whether the decisions they make today would benefit their
children seven generations into the future. "In every deliberation, we must
consider the impact on the seventh generation... even if it requires having
skin as thick as the bark of a pine." This is an often repeated saying, and
most who use it claim that it comes from “The Constitution of the Iroquois
Nations: The Great Binding Law.” In fact, the original language is as
follows: "In all of your deliberations in the Confederate Council, in your
efforts at law making, in all your official acts, self-interest shall be cast
into oblivion. Cast not over your shoulder behind you the warnings of the
nephews and nieces should they chide you for any error or wrong you may do, but
return to the way of the Great Law which is just and right. Look and listen for
the welfare of the whole people and have always in view not only the present
but also the coming generations, even those whose faces are yet beneath the
surface of the ground – the unborn of the future Nation." Oren Lyons, Chief
of the Onondaga Nation, writes: "We are looking ahead , as is one of the first
mandates given us as chiefs, to make sure and to make every decision that we
make relate to the welfare and well-being of the seventh generation to come. .
. ." "What about the seventh generation? Where are you taking them? What will
they have?"
