Sister Boom Boom Sister Boom Boom, was the drag nun persona of astrologer Jack
Fertig (February 21, 1955 – August 5, 2012), a retired member of the Sisters
of Perpetual Indulgence. Fertig was born in Chicago, Illinois. Often
erroneously credited as a founder of the group, Sister Boom Boom actually
joined the Sisters in 1980, several months after its founding. She left the
order in the Spring of 1986. Her full name was Sister Rose of the Bloody Stains
of the Sacred Robes of Jesus, which would trail into a sing-song cadence and a
long fermata. This called for a short nickname. In 1982, Sister Boom Boom ran
for a seat on the San Francisco Board of Supervisors with agitprop campaigning
tactics bringing humor and raising issues she felt were being ignored in the
race. She won 23,124 votes with her occupation listed as "Nun of the Above".
Five supervisors were elected; she placed eighth. After she started campaigning
for mayor in 1983 against incumbent Dianne Feinstein, San Francisco passed an
ordinance requiring candidates to use only their legal names on the ballot.
This was commonly called the "Sister Boom Boom law". Boom Boom wrote a
theatrical-ritual exorcism of Jerry Falwell and Phyllis Schlafly performed in
Union Square July 13, the Friday before the 1984 Democratic National Convention
in Union Square before a crowd of 2,000. She is one of the characters in Emily
Mann's play "Execution of Justice" about the trial of Dan White for the 1978
Moscone–Milk assassinations. George Moscone was mayor of San Francisco and
Harvey Milk was the city’s first openly gay supervisor. In the Broadway
production she was played by Wesley Snipes. Jack Fertig retired Sister Boom
Boom in 1985, and joined a sobriety program. Born to a Jewish father and a
Christian mother, he converted to Islam in 2003. He worked as an astrologer
until his death in San Francisco, California, from liver cancer on August 5,
2012.
