Skinheads Against Racial Prejudice Skinheads Against Racial Prejudice (SHARP)
are anti-racist skinheads who oppose neo-Nazis and other political racists,
particularly if those racists identify themselves as skinheads. SHARPs
recognise the biracial origins of the skinhead subculture, and resent what they
see as the hijacking of the skinhead name by white power skinheads - who are
consequently designated as "boneheads" by some SHARPs. The SHARP logo is based
on the logo of Trojan Records, which originally mainly released black Jamaican
ska, rocksteady and reggae artists. Beyond the issue of anti-racism, there is
no official political ideology of SHARP. History. The original skinhead
subculture started in the United Kingdom in late 1960s, and had heavy British
mod and Jamaican rude boy influences, including a love for ska and soul music.
Although some skinheads (including black skinheads) had engaged in "Paki
bashing" (random violence against Pakistanis and other South Asian immigrants),
skinheads were not associated with an organized racist political movement in
the 1960s. However, in the late 1970s, a skinhead revival in the UK included a
sizable white nationalist faction, involving organizations such as the National
Front, British Movement, Rock Against Communism and in the late eighties Blood
and Honor. Because of this, the mainstream media began to label the whole
skinhead identity as neo-Nazi. This new white power skinhead movement then
spread to other countries, including the United States. Skinheads Against
Racial Prejudice was started in New York City in 1987 by Marcus Pacheco &
Stevan M as a way to show that the skinhead subculture is not based on racism
and political extremism. Andr√© Schlesinger (and his Oi! band The Press) and
Jason O'Toole (vocalist of the hardcore punk group Life's Blood) were among
SHARP's early supporters. In 1989, Roddy Moreno of the Welsh Oi! band The
Oppressed visited New York City and met a few SHARP members. On his return to
the United Kingdom, he designed a new SHARP logo based on the Trojan Reggae
labels design and started promoting SHARP ideals to British skinheads. SHARP
then spread throughout Europe and in other continents. In the UK and other
European countries, the SHARP attitude was more based on the individual than on
organized groups. In the 2000s, SHARP is thought to have become more of an
individual designation than an official organization.
