Social welfare function In economics, a social welfare function is a real-
valued function that ranks conceivable social states (alternative complete
descriptions of the society) from lowest to highest. Inputs of the function
include any variables considered to affect the economic welfare of a society
(Sen, 1970, p. 33). In using welfare measures of persons in the society as
inputs, the social welfare function is individualistic in form. One use of a
social welfare function is to represent prospective patterns of collective
choice as to alternative social states. The social welfare function is
analogous to an indifference-curve map for an individual, except that the
social welfare function is a mapping of individual preferences or judgments of
everyone in the society as to collective choices, which apply to all, whatever
individual preferences are. One point of a social welfare function is to
determine how close the analogy is to an ordinal utility function for an
individual with at least minimal restrictions suggested by welfare economics.
Kenneth Arrow proved a more basic point for a set of seemingly reasonable
conditions. Bergsonâ€“Samuelson social welfare function. In a 1938 article
Abram Bergson introduced the "social welfare function". The object was "to
state in precise form the value judgments required for the derivation of the
conditions of maximum economic welfare" set out by earlier writers, including
Marshall and Pigou, Pareto and Barone, and Lerner. The function was real-valued
and differentiable. It was specified to describe the society as a whole.
Arguments of the function included the quantities of different commodities
produced and consumed and of resources used in producing different commodities,
including labor. Bergson showed how welfare economics could describe a standard
of economic efficiency despite dispensing with "interpersonally-comparable"
cardinal utility, the hypothesizaton of which may merely conceal value
judgments, and purely subjective ones at that. Auxiliary specifications enable
comparison of different social states by each member of society in preference
satisfaction. These help define "Pareto efficiency", which holds if all
alternatives have been exhausted to put at least one person in a more preferred
position with no one put in a less preferred position. Bergson described an
"economic welfare increase" (later called a "Pareto improvement") as at least
one individual moving to a more preferred position with everyone else
indifferent. The social welfare function could then be specified in a
"substantively" individualistic sense to derive Pareto efficiency (optimality).
Paul Samuelson (2004, p. 26) notes that Bergson's function "could derive Pareto
optimality conditions as "necessary" but not sufficient for defining
interpersonal normative equity." Still, Pareto efficiency could also
characterize "one" dimension of a particular social welfare function with
distribution of commodities among individuals characterizing "another"
dimension. As Bergson noted, a welfare improvement from the social welfare
function could come from the "position of some individuals" improving at the
expense of others. That social welfare function could then be described as
characterizing an equity dimension. He also presented a lucid verbal and
mathematical exposition of the social welfare function (1947, pp. 219-49) with
minimal use of Lagrangean multipliers and without the difficult notation of
differentials used by Bergson throughout. As Samuelson (1983, p. xxii) notes,
Bergson clarified how production and consumption efficiency conditions are
distinct from the interpersonal ethical values of the social welfare function.
Samuelson further sharpened that distinction by specifying the "Welfare
function" and the "Possibility function" (1947, pp. 243-49). Each has as
arguments the set of utility functions for everyone in the society. Each can
(and commonly does) incorporate Pareto efficiency. The Possibility function
also depends on technology and resource restraints. It is written in implicit
form, reflecting the "feasible" locus of utility combinations imposed by the
restraints and allowed by Pareto efficiency. At a given point on the
Possibility function, if the utility of all but one person is determined, the
remaining person's utility is determined. The Welfare function ranks different
hypothetical "sets" of utility for everyone in the society from ethically
lowest on up (with ties permitted), that is, it makes interpersonal comparisons
of utility. Welfare maximization then consists of maximizing the Welfare
function subject to the Possibility function as a constraint. The same welfare
maximization conditions emerge as in Bergson's analysis. Arrow social welfare
function (constitution). Kenneth Arrow (1963) generalizes the analysis. Along
earlier lines, his version of a social welfare function, also called a
'constitution', maps a set of individual orderings (ordinal utility functions)
for everyone in the society to a social ordering, a rule for ranking
alternative social states (say passing an enforceable law or not, ceteris
paribus). Arrow finds that nothing of behavioral significance is lost by
dropping the requirement of social orderings that are "real-valued" (and thus
cardinal) in favor of orderings, which are merely "complete" and "transitive",
such as a standard indifference-curve map. The earlier analysis mapped any set
of individual orderings to "one" social ordering, whatever it was. This social
ordering selected the top-ranked "feasible" alternative from the economic
environment as to resource constraints. Arrow proposed to examine mapping
different sets of individual orderings to possibly different social orderings.
Here the social ordering would depend on the set of individual orderings,
rather than being "imposed" (invariant to them). Stunningly (relative to a
course of theory from Adam Smith and Jeremy Bentham on), Arrow proved the
"General Possibility Theorem" that it is impossible to have a social welfare
function that satisfies a certain set of "apparently reasonable" conditions.
Cardinal social welfare functions. In the above contexts, a social welfare
function provides a kind of social preference based on only individual utility
functions, whereas in others it includes cardinal measures of social welfare
not aggregated from individual utility functions. Examples of such measures are
life expectancy and per capita income for the society. The rest of this article
adopts the latter definition. Here, the social welfare of society is taken to
be related to the income of the poorest person in the society, and maximising
welfare would mean maximising the income of the poorest person without regard
for the incomes of the others. These two social welfare functions express very
different views about how a society would need to be organised in order to
maximise welfare, with the first emphasizing total incomes and the second
emphasising the needs of the poorest. The max-min welfare function can be seen
as reflecting an extreme form of uncertainty aversion on the part of society as
a whole, since it is concerned only with the worst conditions that a member of
society could face. The average per capita income of a measured group (e.g.
nation) is multiplied with formula_6 where formula_7 is the Gini index, a
relative inequality measure. James E. Foster (1996) proposed to use one of
Atkinson's Indexes, which is an entropy measure. Due to the relation between
Atkinsons entropy measure and the Theil index, Foster's welfare function also
can be computed directly using the Theil-L Index. The value yielded by this
function has a concrete meaning. There are several possible incomes which could
be earned by a "person", who randomly is selected from a population with an
unequal distribution of incomes. This welfare function marks the income, which
a randomly selected person is most likely to have. Similar to the median, this
income will be smaller than the average per capita income. Here the Theil-
T index is applied. The inverse value yielded by this function has a concrete
meaning as well. There are several possible incomes to which an "Euro" may
belong, which is randomly picked from the sum of all unequally distributed
incomes. This welfare function marks the income, which a randomly selected Euro
most likely belongs to. The inverse value of that function will be larger than
the average per capita income. The article on the Theil index provides further
information about how this index is used in order to compute welfare functions.
