Social-imperialism Social-imperialism is a Marxist expression, typically used
in a derogatory fashion, to describe people, parties, or nations that are
"socialist in words, imperialist in deeds". The phrase was first used in
Marxist circles during the early 20th century discussions on the position of
the international workers' movement towards the impending European war and
particularly in regards to the Social Democratic Party of Germany. In this
context it is very similar to, but not interchangeable with, the terms social
chauvinism and social patriotism. In the later decades the most significant use
of the phrase has been in the Maoist critique of the Soviet Union. Mao Zedong
argued that the Soviet Union had itself become an imperialist power while
maintaining a socialist façade. Albanian Communist leader Enver Hoxha agreed
with Mao in this analysis, before later using the expression to also condemn
China's Three Worlds Theory. Academic use. The term has also been used as a
conceptual device by left-wing academics. The academic use of the phrase is
usually used to describe governments that engage in imperialism meant to
preserve the domestic social peace. The left-wing German historian Hans-Ulrich
Wehler has defined social imperialism "the diversions outwards of internal
tensions and forces of change in order to preserve the social and political
status quo", and as a "defensive ideology" to counter the "disruptive effects
of industrialization on the social and economic structure of Germany" In
Wehler's opinion, social imperialism was a device that allowed the German
government to distract public attention from domestic problems and preserve the
existing social and political order Wehler argued the dominant elites used
social imperialism as the glue to hold together a fractured society and to
maintain popular support for the social "status quo" Wehler argued German
colonial policy in the 1880s was the first example of social imperialism in
action, and was followed up by the "Tirpitz plan" for expanding the German Navy
starting in 1897 In this point of view, groups such as the Colonial Society and
the Navy League are seen as instruments for the government to mobilize public
support. The demands for annexing most of Europe and Africa in World War I are
seen by Wehler as the pinnacle of social imperialism. The British Marxist
historian Geoff Eley contends that there are three flaws to Wehler's theory of
social imperialism. The first is that Wehler credits leaders such as Admiral
Alfred von Tirpitz and Prince Bernhard von Bülow with a greater degree of
vision then what they in fact possessed The second is that many of the pressure
groups on the right who advocated an imperialist policy for Germany were not
the creations of the government, and in fact often demanded far more aggressive
policies then what the government was willing to undertake The third was that
many of these imperialist lobbying groups demanded a policy of political and
social reform at home, in addition to imperialism abroad Eley argued that what
is required in thinking about social imperialism is a broader picture with an
interaction from above and below, and a wider view of the relationship between
imperialism abroad and domestic politics. One of the more notable uses of the
social imperialism concept was by the British Marxist historian Timothy Mason
who argued that World War II was caused by social imperialism. In Mason’s
opinion, German foreign policy was driven by domestic political considerations,
and the launch of World War II in 1939 was best understood as a “barbaric
variant of social imperialism”. Mason argued that “Nazi Germany was always
bent "at some time" upon a major war of expansion” However, Mason that the
timing of a such a war was determined by domestic political pressures,
especially as relating to a failing economy According to Mason, by 1939, the
“overheating” of the German economy caused by rearmament, the failure of
various rearmament plans caused by the shortages of skilled workers, industrial
unrest caused by the breakdown of German social policies, and the a sharp drop
in living standards for the German working class forced Hitler into going to
war at a time and place not of his choosing in 1939 Mason contented that when
faced with the deep socio-economic crisis the Nazi leadership had decided to
embark upon a ruthless “smash and grab” foreign policy of seizing territory
in Eastern Europe which could be pitilessly plundered to support living
standards in Germany Mason described German foreign policy as driven by an
opportunistic “next victim” syndrome after the "Anschluss," in which the
“promiscuity of aggressive intentions” was nurtured by every successful
foreign policy move. In Mason’s opinion, the decision to sign the German-
Soviet Non-Aggression Pact and to attack Poland and with it risking a war with
Britain and France were the abandonment by Hitler of his foreign policy
programme outlined in "Mein Kampf" and "Zweites Buch" forced on him by the need
to stop a collapsing German economy by seizing territory abroad to be plundered
