Social policy Social policy primarily refers to guidelines, principles,
legislation and activities that affect the living conditions conducive to human
welfare. The Malcolm Wiener Center for Social Policy at Harvard University
describes it as "public policy and practice in the areas of health care, human
services, criminal justice, inequality, education, and labor." Social policy
often deals with wicked problems. Social Policy is defined as actions that
affect the well-being of members of a society through shaping the distribution
of and access to goods and resources in that society. History of social policy.
The earliest example of direct intervention by government in human welfare
dates back to Umar ibn al-KhattƒÅb's rule as the second caliph of Islam in the
6th century. He used zakah collections and also other governmental resources to
establish pensions, income support, child benefits, various stipends for people
of the non-Muslim community. In the West, proponents of scientific social
planning, such as the sociologist Auguste Comte, and social researchers, such
as Charles Booth, contributed to the emergence of social policy in the first
industrialised countries. Surveys of poverty that exposed the brutal conditions
in the urban slum conurbations of Victorian Britain pressured changes reform of
the Poor Law and welfare reforms by the British Liberal Party. Other
significant examples in the development of social policy are the Bismarckian
welfare state in 19th century Germany; social security policies introduced by
the New Deal in the United States between 1933 and 1935, and health reforms the
Beveridge Report of 1942. Social policy in the 21st century is complex and in
each state it is subject to local, national and supranational political
influence. For example, membership of the European Union is conditional to
member states' adherence to the Social Chapter of European Union law. Types of
social policy. Social policy aims to improve human welfare and to meet human
needs for education, health, housing and social security. Important areas of
social policy are the welfare state, social security, unemployment insurance,
environmental policy, pensions, health care, social housing, social care, child
protection, social exclusion, education policy, crime and criminal justice. The
term 'social policy' can also refer to policies which govern human behaviour.
In the United States, the term 'social policy' may be used to refer to abortion
and the regulation of its practice, euthanasia, homosexuality, the rules
surrounding issues of marriage, divorce, adoption, the legal status of
recreational drugs, and the legal status of prostitution. In academia. Social
Policy is also an academic discipline focusing on the systematic evaluation of
societies' responses to social need. It was developed in the early-to-mid part
of the 20th century as a complement to social work studies. London School of
Economics professor Richard Titmuss is considered to have established Social
Policy (or Social Administration) as an academic subject and many universities
offer the subject for undergraduate and postgraduate study. Further reading.
Social Policy & Administration Dean, H. (2006). Social Policy. Cambridge:
Polity Press. ISBN 978-0-7456-3434-0.
