Social cost Social cost in economics may be distinguished from "private
cost".Â Â  â€¢ Alan V. Deardorff. "Social cost," and "Private cost," "Glossary
of International Economics". Economic theorists model individual decision-
making as measurement of costs and benefits. Rational choice theory often
assumes that individuals consider only the costs they themselves bear when
making decisions, not the costs that may be borne by others. With pure private
costs, the costs carried by the individuals involved are the only economically
meaningful costs. The choice to purchase a glass of lemonade at a lemonade
stand has little consequence for anyone other than the seller or the buyer. The
costs involved in this economic activity are the costs of the lemons and the
sugar and the water that are ingredients to the lemonade, the opportunity cost
of the labour to combine them into lemonade, as well as any transaction costs,
such as walking to the stand. Implications. If there is a negative externality,
then social costs will be greater than private costs. Environmental pollution
is an example of a social cost that is seldom borne completely by the polluter,
thereby creating a negative externality. If there is a positive externality,
then one will have higher social "benefits" than private" benefits". For
example, when a supplier of educational services indirectly benefits society as
a whole but only receives payment for the direct benefit received by the
recipient of the education: the benefit to society of an educated populace is a
positive externality. In either case, economists refer to this as market
failure because resources will be allocated inefficiently. In the case of
negative externalities, private agents will engage in too much of the activity;
in the case of positive externalities, they will engage in too little. (The
marginal rate of transformation in production will not be equal to the marginal
rate of substitution in consumption due to the effect of the externality and as
a result Pareto optimality will not occurâ€”see welfare economics for an
explanation.) Theory. The ideas of social cost, externalities, and market
failure are often used as an argument for government intervention in the form
of regulations. Libertarians who believe in a free market respond that the
existence of market failure should not lead to government intervention. They
prefer to rely on tradition, community pressure, and dollar voting. Negative
externalities (external costs) lead to an over-production of those goods that
have a high social cost. For example, the logging of trees for timber may
result in society losing a recreation area, shade, beauty, good quality soil to
grow crops on, and air quality but this loss is usually not quantified and
included in the price of the timber that is made from the trees. As a result,
individual entities in the marketplace have no incentive to factor in these
externalities. More of this activity is performed than would be if its cost had
a true accounting. This can be illustrated with a diagram. Profit-maximizing
organizations will set output at Qp where marginal private costs (MPC) is equal
to marginal revenue (MR). (This diagram assumes perfect competition, under
which price (P) equals MR.) This will yield a profit shown by the triangular
area 0,C,F. But if externalities are present, the attainment of social
optimality requires that the full social costs must be considered. The socially
optimum level of output is Qs where marginal social costs (MSC) is equal to
marginal revenue (MR). The amount of output, Qp minus Qs, indicates the excess
output due to the externality. Profits will decrease also, from 0,C,F to 0,A,F.
It is clearly profitable for the firm to pollute, since "internalizing the
externality" hurts profits. The amount of the externality will decrease from
C,D to B,A. Because the marginal social cost curve (MSC) is "above" the
marginal private cost curve (MPC), this diagram illustrates the case of a
negative externality. If the marginal social cost curve was below the marginal
private cost curve, it would be a positive externality and social optimality
would require a greater output than Qp rather than a reduction of output.
Institutional ecological economists in the tradition of Karl William Kapp
provide a different definition of social costs, i.e. that share of the total
costs of production that is not born by producers but is shifted to 3rd
parties, future generations or society at large. Kapp, hence, rejected Pigou's
confusing terminology of externalities and provides several hundred pages of
empirical data to support his argument that social costs are systemic, i.e.
rooted in profit maximizing behavior of businesses, and an enormous problem of
modern civilization. In the real world, they are usually not or cannot be
internalized and must not be considered as accidental minor aberration from the
"optimal norm" that can be fixed with ad hoc measures.
