Songun S≈èn'gun, often spelled Songun, is North Korea's "Military First"
policy, which prioritizes the Korean People's Army in the affairs of state and
allocates national resources to the army first. "Military First" as a principle
guides political and economic life in North Korea, with "Military First
Politics" dominating the political system, "a line of Military First Economic
Construction" acting as an economic system, and "Military First Ideology"
serving as the guiding ideology. "Songun" elevates the Korean People's Army
within North Korea as an organization and as a state function, granting it the
primary position in the North Korean government and society. It guides domestic
policy and international interactions. It is the framework for the government,
designating the military as the "supreme repository of power." The North Korean
government grants the Korean People's Army the highest economic and resource-
allocation priority, and positions it as the model for society to emulate.
"Songun" is also the ideological concept behind a shift in policies since 1994
which emphasize the people's military over all other aspects of state and
society. History. The "songun" era began in 1960 when a young Kim Jong-il
together with his father Kim Il-sung went on a visit to the Seoul 105th Guards
Armored Division HQ in Pyongyang, the first of many visits to various Korean
People's Army installations all across the DPRK. "Songun" did not appear as an
official government policy until after Kim Il-sung's death in 1994, however. In
1995, "military first" policies were introduced as "a revolutionary idea of
attaching great importance to the army" and as "a politics emphasizing the
perfect unity and the single-hearted unity of the party, army and the people,
and the role of the army as the vanguards" in the wake of Kim Jong-il's first
military unit visit for that year. This was a slight shift from the
government's previous guiding policy, Kim Il-sung's "juche", or self-reliance
policy. In 1997, an editorial published in "Rodong Sinmun", the North Korean
Workers' Party official newspaper, stated: "Never before have the status and
role of the People's Army been so extraordinarily elevated as today when it is
being led energetically by the Respected and Beloved Comrade Supreme
Commander." By this point, the People's Army had also become "synonymous with
the people, the state, and the party." Together, all of this indicates not only
the centrality of Kim Jong-il to the "songun" ideology, but also its increasing
rhetorical centrality to the state and society. In 1998, "songun" began
appearing in conjunction with other terms, including "military first
revolutionary idea", "military first revolutionary leadership", and "military
first politics", expanding the concept of "songun" into even more aspects of
North Korean governance. "Songun" became an even more prominent concept in
January 1999, making its first appearance in the important New Year's Day
editorial published jointly by all the major news organs of North Korea. The
editorial tied "songun" with Kim Jong-il by declaring that he practiced
military-first leadership, which is "one in which the People's Army serves as
the main force of revolution and in which the unity of the army and the people
helps to safeguard as well as build socialism." In January 2003, the New Year's
editorial added military first ideology ("songun sasang") to the pantheon of
military first concepts. In December 2003, the "Essential Attributes of
Military-First Politics" was published as a new vision of the driving force of
the revolution in the quasi-Communist North Korea. It assigned the main force
of the revolution to the Korean People's Army. This is a role traditionally, in
Communist societies, assigned to the proletariat or, in China, to the
peasantry. For North Korea, "only the army meets the criteria of loyalty,
revolutionary spirit, cohesiveness, and esprit de corps." January 2004 saw
another increase in the omnipresence of "songun", as it was mentioned more
frequently than any other word in the New Year's Editorial, and was used to
describe everything from politics to Korea itself. "Songun" has continued to
expand in importance, and is even included in the ideological discussion of
reunification with South Korea. The North Korean press stated, ""songun"
politics is the guarantee that will secure the re-unification of the
Fatherland." North Korea also credits "songun" with safeguarding the peace on
the peninsula, and states that it is the only thing preventing the US from
attacking the North. "Songun" has become intrinsic to North Korea's domestic
politics, foreign policy, and decision-making, and has certainly taken its
place alongside "juche" as a guiding principle of the regime. Why "Songun"? Two
reasons have been offered as to why, after Kim Il-sung's death, North Korea
shifted to "songun" as their primary ideology. One strand of the debate points
to North Korea's desire to increase its military strength due to its precarious
international position. In this sense, "songun" is perceived as an aggressive,
threatening move to increase the strength of the North Korean military at the
expense of other parts of society. This argument also often points to the
series of crises that befell North Korea in the early 1990s, beginning with the
fall of Communism and its long-time ally the Soviet Union in 1991, followed by
the death of Kim Il-sung in 1994, which was then trailed by several natural
disasters and the North Korean famine and its concurrent economic crisis, all
before 1999. These also could have served as motivation for a new method of
consolidation of power. The second strand focuses on internal North Korean
politics as the cause for the move to military first politics. When Kim Il-sung
died, he left leadership of North Korea to his son, Kim Jong-il. At the time of
his father's death, the most important position held by Kim Jong-il in the
North Korean government was military, specifically second in command of the
military. This left him with no choice but to use the Korean People's Army to
consolidate his own power. Additionally, in order to keep control of the
government, Kim Jong-il would need to secure his support base within the Korean
People's Army. This line of argument points out that Kim Jong-il deliberately
chose to sideline other aspects of the government in order to assert the
primacy of the Korean People's Army. This included abolishing the Central
People's Committee, the state presidency, and sidelining the North Korean
Administration Council. Political implications. One implication of "songun"
policies is that they not only worked with "juche", the self-reliance ideal
promoted by Kim Il-sung, but also replaced it as the central state ideology as
Kim Jong-il consolidated his power. The ascendency of the Korean People's Army
concerns South Korea, and ties into the debate over the Sunshine Policy, its
most recent vision of Korean reunification. Given North Korea's insistence that
"songun" will facilitate reunification, it is difficult to tell what they
expect in the future from South Korea, whose government is not at all
supportive of "songun" policies, going so far as to outlaw websites within
South Korea that promote North Korea's military-first ideas. "Songun" politics
have also thrived on the ongoing nuclear crisis. For the United States, given
that its primary concern is the denuclearization of the peninsula, the concept
of military-first politics and ideology is a troubling one. "Songun" also seems
to fit very well with the possession of nuclear weapons, and can be seen as a
way of making such weapons central to the government's guiding ideology of
self-governance. This leads to the concern that, the longer military-first
ideology guides the North Korean government, the less likely it will be that
the United States will be able to convince North Korea to give up its nuclear
weapons program. A similar concern is that North Korea could perceive attempts
at denuclearization and normalization of affairs with the United States as a
threat to the primacy of the military within North Korea and, thus, a threat to
"songun" ideology, a fear which puts into doubt the idea that North Korea is
actually willing to give up its nuclear weapons program at all. Economic
implications. "Military First" politics originated with an attempt at recovery
from economic troubles during the famine that swept North Korea in the 1990s,
known as the Arduous March. In order to overcome the economic crisis, the army
was expected to work at the forefront. The Kim Jong-il regime set a strategic
goal of becoming a "A Powerful and Prosperous Nation" ("kangseong taeguk")
through "Military First" policy. Sergey Kurbanov, head of Institute of Korean
Studies of University of Saint Petersburg, described in his Daily NK interview
how the members of the nouveau riche in North Korea have the will to keep the
Military First politics in order to secure their wealth.
