Sortition In politics, sortition (also known as allotment or the drawing of
lots) is the selection of decision makers by lottery. The decision-makers are
chosen as a random sample from a larger pool of candidates. In ancient Athenian
democracy, sortition was the primary method for appointing officials, and its
use was widely regarded as a principal characteristic of democracy. It is
commonly used today to select prospective jurors in common law-based legal
systems. Ancient Athens. In Athens, "democracy" (literally meaning rule by the
people) was in opposition to those supporting oligarchy (rule by a few).
Athenian democracy was characterised by being run by the "many" (the ordinary
people) who were allotted to the committees which ran government. Thucydides
has Pericles make this point in his Funeral Oration: "It is administered by the
many instead of the few; that is why it is called a democracy." The Athenians
believed sortition to be more democratic than elections and used complex
procedures with purpose-built allotment machines ("kleroteria") to avoid the
corrupt practices used by oligarchs to buy their way into office. According to
the author Mogens Herman Hansen the citizen's court was superior to the
assembly because the allotted members swore an oath which ordinary citizens in
the assembly did not and therefore the court could annul the decisions of the
assembly. Past scholarship maintained that sortition had its roots in the use
of chance to divine the will of the gods, but this view is no longer common
among scholars. Today. Sortition is commonly used in selecting juries in Anglo-
Saxon legal systems and in small groups (e.g., picking a school class monitor
by drawing straws). In public decision-making, individuals are often determined
by allotment if other forms of selection such as election fail to achieve a
result. Examples include certain hung elections and certain votes in the UK
Parliament. Some contemporary thinkers have advocated a greater use of
selection by lot in todayâ€™s political systems for example reform of the
British House of Lords and proposals at the time of the adoption of the current
Constitution of Iraq. Sortition proposals put forward for discussion in the
modern world generally relate to the means for selecting a large legislative
body (such as the U.S. Congress) from among the adult population at large. One
such proposal is C. L. R. James's 1956 essay "Every Cook Can Govern." Methods.
Before the random selection can be done, the pool of candidates must be
defined. Systems vary as to whether they allot from eligible volunteers, from
those screened by education, experience, or a passing grade on a test, or
screened by election by those selected by a previous round of random selection,
or from the membership or population at large. A multi-stage process in which
random selection is alternated with screening for merit can overcome the risk
of selecting those who lack ability or enthusiasm. The selection method may
need to be carefully designed in order to preserve public confidence that it
has not been rigged. The process may be conducted or supervised by a panel
themselves selected at random, such as a grand jury being used to administer
the random selection of the next grand jury. One robust, general, public method
of allotment is RFC 3797: Publicly Verifiable Nominations Committee Random
Selection. Using it, multiple specific sources of random numbers (e.g.
lotteries) are selected in advance, and an algorithm is defined for selecting
the winners based on those random numbers. When the random numbers become
available, anyone can calculate the winners.
