Sovereign state A sovereign state is a political organization with a
centralized government that has supreme independent authority over a geographic
area. It has a permanent population, a government, and the capacity to enter
into relations with other sovereign states. It is also normally understood to
be a state which is neither dependent on nor subject to any other power or
state. The existence or disappearance of a state is a question of fact. While
according to the declaratory theory of state recognition a sovereign state can
exist without being recognised by other sovereign states, unrecognised states
will often find it hard to exercise full treaty-making powers and engage in
diplomatic relations with other sovereign states. The word "country" is often
colloquially used to refer to sovereign states, although it means, originally,
only a geographic region, and subsequently its meaning became extended to the
sovereign polity which controls the geographic region. Westphalian sovereignty.
Westphalian sovereignty is the concept of nation-state sovereignty based on
territoriality and the absence of a role for external agents in domestic
structures. It is an international system of states, multinational
corporations, and organizations that began with the Peace of Westphalia in
1648. Sovereignty is a term that is frequently misused. Up until the 19th
century, the radicalised concept of a "standard of civilisation" was routinely
deployed to determine that certain peoples in the world were "uncivilised", and
lacking organised societies. That position was reflected and constituted in the
notion that their "sovereignty" was either completely lacking, or at least of
an inferior character when compared to that of "civilised" people." Lassa
Oppenheim said "There exists perhaps no conception the meaning of which is more
controversial than that of sovereignty. It is an indisputable fact that this
conception, from the moment when it was introduced into political science until
the present day, has never had a meaning which was universally agreed upon." In
the opinion of H. V. Evatt of the High Court of Australia "sovereignty is
neither a question of fact, nor a question of law, but a question that does not
arise at all." Sovereignty has taken on a different meaning with the
development of the principle of self-determination and the prohibition against
the threat or use of force as "jus cogens" norms of modern international law.
The United Nations Charter, the Declaration on Rights and Duties of States, and
the charters of regional international organisations express the view that all
states are juridically equal and enjoy the same rights and duties based upon
the mere fact of their existence as persons under international law. The right
of nations to determine their own political status and exercise permanent
sovereignty within the limits of their territorial jurisdictions is widely
recognised. In political science, sovereignty is usually defined as the most
essential attribute of the state in the form of its complete self-sufficiency
in the frames of a certain territory, that is its supremacy in the domestic
policy and independence in the foreign one. Recognition. State recognition
signifies the decision of a sovereign state to treat another entity as also
being a sovereign state. Recognition can be either express or implied and is
usually retroactive in its effects. It doesn't necessarily signify a desire to
establish or maintain diplomatic relations. There is no definition that is
binding on all the members of the community of nations on the criteria for
statehood. In actual practice, the criteria are mainly political, not legal. In
international law, however, there are several theories of when a state should
be recognized as sovereign. Constitutive theory. The constitutive theory of
statehood defines a state as a person of international law if, and only if, it
is recognized as sovereign by other states. This theory of recognition was
developed in the 19th century. Under it, a state was sovereign if another
sovereign state recognized it as such. Because of this, new states could not
immediately become part of the international community or be bound by
international law, and recognized nations did not have to respect international
law in their dealings with them. In 1815 at the Congress of Vienna the Final
Act recognised only 39 sovereign states in the European diplomatic system, and
as a result it was firmly established that in future new states would have to
be recognized by other states, and that meant in practice recognition by one or
more of the great powers. One of the major criticisms of this law is the
confusion caused when some states recognize a new entity, but other states do
not. Hersch Lauterpacht, one of the theory's main proponents, suggested that it
is a state's duty to grant recognition as a possible solution. However, a state
may use any criteria when judging if they should give recognition and they have
no obligation to use such criteria. Many states may only recognize another
state if it is to their advantage.  Declarative theory. By contrast, the
"declarative" theory defines a state as a person in international law if it
meets the following criteria: 1) a defined territory; 2) a permanent
population; 3) a government and 4) a capacity to enter into relations with
other states. According to declarative theory, an entity's statehood is
independent of its recognition by other states. The declarative model was most
famously expressed in the 1933 Montevideo Convention. Article 3 of the
Montevideo Convention declares that statehood is independent of recognition by
other states. In contrast, recognition is considered a requirement for
statehood by the constitutive theory of statehood. A similar opinion about "the
conditions on which an entity constitutes a state" is expressed by the European
Economic Community "Opinions of the Badinter Arbitration Committee", which
found that a state was defined by having a territory, a population, and a
political authority. State practice. State practice relating the recognition
states typically falls somewhere between the declaratory and constitutive
approaches. International law does not require a state to recognise other
states. Recognition is often withheld when a new state is seen as illegitimate
or has come about in breach of international law. Almost universal non-
recognition by the international community of Rhodesia and Northern Cyprus are
good examples of this. In the former case, recognition was widely withheld when
the white minority seized power and attempted to form a state along the lines
of Apartheid South Africa, a move that the United Nations Security Council
described as the creation of an "illegal racist minority r√©gime". In the
latter case, recognition was widely withheld from a state created in Northern
Cyprus on land illegally invaded by Turkey in 1974. De facto and de jure
states. Most sovereign states are states de jure and de facto (i.e. they exist
both in law and in reality). However, sometimes states exist only as de jure
states in that an organisation is recognised as having sovereignty over and
being the legitimate government of a territory over which they have no actual
control. Many continental European states maintained governments-in-exile
during the Second World War which continued to enjoy diplomatic relations with
the Allies, notwithstanding that their countries were under Nazi occupation. A
present day example is the State of Palestine, which is recognized by multiple
states, but doesn't have control over any of its claimed territory in Palestine
and possess only extraterritorial areas (i.e. embassies and consulates). Other
states may have sovereignty over a territory but lack international
recognition; these are considered by the international community to be only de
facto states (they are considered de jure states only according to their own
Law and by states that recognize them). Somaliland is commonly considered to be
such a state. For a list of entities that wish to be universally recognized as
sovereign states, but do not have complete worldwide diplomatic recognition,
see the list of states with limited recognition.
