Administrative division An administrative division, subnational entity, or
country subdivision is a portion of a country or other political division,
established for the purpose of government. Administrative divisions are each
granted a certain degree of autonomy, and are required to manage themselves
through their own local governments. Countries are divided up into these
smaller units to make managing their land and the affairs of their people
easier. For example, a country may be divided into provinces, which in turn are
divided into counties, which in turn may be divided in whole or in part into
municipalities. These are only a few of the names given to administrative
subdivisions; more examples are provided below. Administrative divisions are
conceptually separate from dependent territories, with the former being an
integral part of the state and the other being only under some lesser form of
control. However, the term "administrative division" can include dependent
territories as well as accepted administrative divisions (for example, in
geographical databases). Examples of administrative divisions. English terms.
In many of the following terms corresponding to British cultural influence,
areas of relatively low mean population density might bear a title of an entity
one would expect to be either larger or smaller. There is no fixed rule, for
"all politics is local" as is perhaps well demonstrated by their relative lack
of systemic order. In the realm of self-government, any of these can and does
occur along a stretch of roadâ€”which for the most part is passing through
rural unsettled countryside. Since the terms are administrative political
subdivisions of the local regional government their exact relationship and
definitions are subject to home rule considerations, tradition, as well as
state statute law and local governmental (administrative) definition and
control. In the British cultural legacy, most regional entities begin with
fairly expansive counties which encompass an appreciable territorial area and
proceed down in size to smaller entities. Within those entities are the large
and small cities or towns, which may or may not be the county seat. Some of the
world's larger cities culturally, if not officially, span into multiple
counties and those crossing state or provincial boundaries culturally are quite
common as well, but are rarely incorporated within the same municipal
government. Many sister cities share a water boundary which quite often serves
as a border of both cities and counties. For example, Cambridge and Boston,
Massachusetts appear to the casual traveler as one large city, while locally
they each are quite culturally different and occupy different counties. Native
terms. See: List of terms for administrative divisions Consistent translation
from original language is sometimes difficult.
