State socialism State socialism is a variant of socialism which advocates
public ownership of major industries, remedial measures to benefit the working
class, and a gradual process of developing socialism through government policy.
"State socialism" may also be used to classify any variety of socialist
philosophies that advocates the ownership of the means of production by the
state apparatus, either as a transitional stage between capitalism and
socialism, or as an end-goal in itself. In "Statism and Anarchy", Mikhail
Bakunin identified a "statist" tendency within the socialist movement and
contrasted it with anarchist socialism, arguing that Karl Marx's theory of
transition from capitalism to socialism in which the working class seized state
power in a Dictatorship of the proletariat would eventually lead to a
usurpation of power by the state apparatus acting in its own self-interest.
Benjamin Tucker, an American individualist anarcho-socialist author, wrote of
"state socialism" in his 1886 essay entitled "State Socialism and Anarchism",
defining it as a tendency that advocated for governmental control over the
means of production as a necessary strategy in order to transition from
capitalism to socialism. As a political ideology, state socialism rose to
prominence during the 20th century Bolshevik, Leninist and later Marxist-
Leninist revolutions where single-party control over the state, and by
extension, over the political and economic spheres of society was justified as
a means to safeguard the revolution against counter-revolutionary insurrection
and foreign invasion. The Stalinist theory of Socialism in one country further
legitimized state-directed activity in an effort to rapidly mobilize the Soviet
Union's resources to industrialize its internal economy. Proponents of state
socialism claim the state, through practical considerations of governing, must
play at least a temporary part in building socialism. It is possible to
conceive of a democratic state that owns the means of production but is
internally organized in a participatory, cooperative fashion, thereby achieving
both common ownership of productive property and workplace democracy in day-to-
day operations. State socialism is one of the dividing lines within the broader
socialist movement, and is often contrasted non-state or anti-state forms of
socialism, such as those that advocate direct self-management, adhocracy and
direct cooperative ownership and management of the means of production, and
political philosophies such as libertarian socialism, anarchist socialism,
anarchist communism, syndicalism, free-market socialism, De Leonism and
economic democracy. These forms of socialism are opposed to hierarchical
technocratic socialism, scientific management, and state-directed economic
planning. Description and theory. State socialism was traditionally advocated
as a means to achieving public ownership of the means of production through
nationalization of industry was advocated as a method for transitioning to a
socialist economy. The goals of nationalization are to dispossess large
capitalists and consolidate industry so that profit would go toward public
finance rather than private fortune. Nationalization would be the first step in
a long-term process of socializing production: introducing employee management
and reorganizing production to directly produce for use rather than profit.
Traditional social democrats and non-revolutionary democratic socialists argue
for a gradual, peaceful transition from capitalism to socialism. They wish to
abolish capitalism, but through political reform rather than revolution. This
method of gradualism implies utilization of the existing state apparatus and
machinery of government to gradually move society toward socialism, and is
sometimes derided by other socialists as a form of "socialism from above" or
political "elitism" for relying on electoral means to achieve socialism. In
contrast, Marxist socialism and revolutionary socialism holds that a socialist
revolution is the only practical way to implement fundamental changes in the
structure of society. Marxists maintain that after a certain period of time
under socialism, the state will "wither away" because class distinctions cease
to exist and representative democracy would be replaced by direct democracy in
the remaining public associations comprising the former state. Political power
would be decentralized and distributed evenly among the population, producing a
communist society. Today, many political parties on the political center-left
advocate a mild version of what may be considered "mixed economies" or
"regulated capitalism" in the form of modern social democracy, in which
regulation is used in place of ownership. These social reformers do not
advocate the overthrow of capitalism in a social revolution, and they support
the continuing existence of the government, private property and the capitalist
economic system, only turned to more social purposes. Modern social democracy
can also be considered "state capitalism" because the means of production are
almost universally the private property of business owners, and production is
carried out for exchange rather than directly for use. The role of the state in
socialism. Many Socialists, such as Fredrick Engels and Saint-Simon, take the
position that the state will change in nature and function in a socialist
society; specifically, the nature of the state would change from one of
political rule over people into a scientific administration of the processes of
production; specifically the state would become a coordinating economic entity
of inclusive associations rather than a mechanism of class and political
control, and in the process, cease to be a state by some definitions. State
socialism in Communist states. The economic model adopted in the former Soviet
Union, Eastern Europe and other Communist states is often described as a form
of state socialism, and in some cases, state capitalism. The ideology was based
on Socialism in One Country; this system was based on state ownership of the
means of production, and bureaucratic management over production and the
workplace by state officials ultimately subordinate to an all-encompassing
communist party. Rather than the producers controlling or managing production,
the party controlled the government machinery which directed the national
economy on behalf of the communist party and planned production and
distribution of capital goods. In the 20th century's so-called "communist
states", the state did not in fact wither away. Some Marxists defend them and
contend that the transitional period simply wasn't finished. Other Marxists
denounce those "Communist" states as Stalinist, arguing that their leadership
was corrupt and that it abandoned Marxism in all but name. In particular, some
Trotskyist schools call those countries degenerated workers' states to contrast
them with proper socialism (i.e. workers' states); other Trotskyist schools
call them "state capitalist", to emphasise the lack of true socialism and
presence of defining capitalist characteristics (wage labor, commodity
production, bureaucratic control over workers). In the former Yugoslavia, the
successor political parties to the League of Communists in Serbia and
Montenegro, the Socialist Party of Serbia and the Democratic Party of
Socialists of Montenegro have advocated progression towards a free-market
economy but also advocated state economic planning of elements of the economy,
maintaining social welfare and have advocated significant state influence in
the media. Bismarck's social policy. Otto von Bismarck implemented a set of
social programs between 1883â€“1889, following his anti-socialist laws, partly
as remedial measures to appease the working class and detract support for the
Social Democratic Party of Germany. Bismarck's biographer A. J. P. Taylor said:
"It would be unfair to say that Bismarck took up social welfare solely to
weaken the Social Democrats; he had had it in mind for a long time, and
believed in it deeply. But as usual he acted on his beliefs at the exact moment
when they served a practical need". When a reference was made to his friendship
with Ferdinand Lassalle (a nationalist and state-oriented socialist), Bismarck
said that he was a more practical "socialist" than the Social Democrats. These
policies were informally referred to as "State Socialism" by liberal and
conservative opponents; the term was later adopted by supporters of the
programs in a further attempt to detract the working class from the SPD, with
the goal of making the working class content with a nationalist-oriented
capitalist welfare state. A. J. P. Taylor, "Bismarck. The Man and the
Statesman" (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1955), p. 203. Criticisms. Many
libertarian socialists, Syndicalists, Mutualists and anarchists go further in
their critique, deriding even Marxism as "state socialism" for its support of a
temporary, proletarian state instead of abolishing the state apparatus
outright. They use the term in contrast with their own form of socialism, which
involves either collective ownership (in the form of worker cooperatives) or
common ownership of the means of production without state economic planning.
Libertarian socialists and anarchists believe there is no need for a state in a
socialist system because there would be no class to suppress and no need for an
institution based on coercion, and thus regard the state being a remnant of
capitalism. Most also hold that statism is itself antithetical to true
socialism, the goal of which is the eyes of libertarian socialists such as
William Morris; "to destroy the state and put free society in its place". State
socialism is often referred to by detractors simply as "socialism". Austrian
economists such as Ludwig Von Mises and Friedrich Hayek for example continually
used the word "socialism" as a synonym for state socialism and central
planning. The attributive "state" is usually added by socialists with a non-
state based method for achieving socialism to criticize "state" socialism. Some
socialists may deny that it even "is" socialism, calling it instead "state
capitalism". Those socialists who oppose any system of state control whatsoever
believe in a more decentralized approach which puts the means of production
directly into the hands of the workers rather than indirectly through state
bureaucraciesâ€”which they claim represent a new elite. Trotskyists believe
that central planners, regardless of their intellectual capacity, operate
without the input and participation of the millions of people who participate
in the economy who understand/respond to local conditions and changes in the
economy, and because of this criticize central state planning as being unable
to effectively coordinate all economic activity. Orthodox Marxists view state
socialism as an oxymoron; while an association for managing production and
economic affairs would exist in socialism, it would no longer be a state in the
Marxist definition (which is based on domination by one class). This leads some
socialists to consider "state socialism" a form of state capitalism (an economy
based on wage labor and capital accumulation but with the state owning the
means of production) - which Fredrick Engels states would be the final form of
capitalism.
