Steven Lukes Steven Michael Lukes (born 1941) is a political and social
theorist. Currently he is a professor of politics and sociology at New York
University. He was formerly a professor at the University of Siena, the
European University Institute (Florence) and the London School of Economics.
Life and career. Lukes attended the Royal Grammar School in Newcastle upon
Tyne, completing his studies there in 1958. Lukes completed his B.A. in 1962 at
Balliol College, Oxford. He worked as a research fellow at Nuffield College and
as a lecturer in politics at Worcester College and completed his M.A. in 1967.
In 1968, he completed his Ph.D. on the work of Ã‰mile Durkheim. From 1966 to
1987 he was fellow and tutor in politics at Balliol College. He is a Fellow of
the British Academy (FBA) and a visiting professor at the University of Paris,
New York University, University of California, San Diego, and Hebrew
University. From 1974 to 1983 he was President of the Committee for the History
of Sociology of the International Sociological Association. He was the co-
director of the European Forum on Citizenship at the European University
Institute from 1995 to 1996. In April 2006, Lukes married the political
commentator and author Katha Pollitt; this being his third marriage. Lukes was
previously a widower. He has three children from his previous marriage to the
English barrister Nina Stanger: freelance journalist Daniel (born 1977),
musician Michael (born 1979) and NYU professor Alexandra (born 1981). Academic
interests. His main interests are political and social theory, the sociology of
Durkheim and his followers, individualism, rationality, the category of the
person, Marxism and ethics, sociology of morality and new forms of liberalism,
varieties of conceptions of power, the notion of the "good society",
rationality and relativism, moral conflict and politics. Lukes's most famous
academic theory is that of the "three faces of power". This theory claims that
governments control people in three ways: through decision-making power, non
decision-making power and ideological power. Decision-making power is the most
public of the three faces, and is the manner in which governments want to be
seen: the power of governments to make policy decisions after widespread
consultation with opposition parties and the wider public. Non decision-making
power is the power that governments have to control the agenda in debates and
make certain issues (such as the possible merits of Communism in the United
States) unacceptable for discussion in moderate public forums. The third and
most important face of power is ideological power, which is the power to
influence people's wishes and thoughts, even making them want things opposed to
their own self-interest (such as women supporting a patriarchal society). He is
a member of the editorial board of the "European Journal of Sociology" and
directs a research project on what is left of the socialist idea in Western and
Eastern Europe. The Three Dimensions of Power. The three views of Power
previously mentioned are discussed by Lukes in his book, "Power: A Radical
View". The idea is that the effectiveness and level of power for a given group
or individual can be measured by considering certain criteria. The focuses of
these views are discussed at length in Lukes' work, and he offers the Third
Dimension as his own view of the shortcomings of the other views previously
postulated by others, as well as being a more appropriate way to assess power.
The One Dimensional View of Power focuses only on behavior in decision making,
specifically on key issues and essentially only in blatantly observable
situations. These often take the form of subjective interests: policy
preferences demonstrated through political action. The Two Dimensional View of
Power qualifies the First Dimension's critique of behavior and focuses on
decision-making and nondecision-making. It also looks at current "and"
potential issues and expands the focus on observable conflict to those types
that might be observed overtly or covertly. But the Two Dimensional View still
focuses on subjective interests, though those seen as policy preferences or
even grievances. The Three Dimensional View of Power, offered by Lukes in his
work, is a "thoroughgoing critique" of the behavioral focus. It concentrates on
the decision-making in a political agenda and the control over that agenda. As
in the Two Dimensional View, both current issues and potential issues are
considered. But Lukes expands the critique to include both overt and covert
observable conflicts, and those that might be latent. Also, Lukes illustrates
that a full critique of power should include both subjective interests and
those "real" interests that might be held by those excluded by the political
process.
