Store of value A recognized form of exchange can be a form of money or
currency, a commodity like gold, or financial capital. To act as a store of
value, these forms must be able to be saved and retrieved at a later time, and
be predictably useful when retrieved. Storage of value is one of several
distinct functions of money. The other functions are the standard of deferred
payment, which requires acceptability to parties a debt is owed to, and the
unit of account, which requires fungibility so accounts in any amount can be
readily settled. It is also distinct from the medium of exchange function which
requires durability when used in trade and to minimize fraud opportunities. See
functions of money. With money being a storage of value was the start of
monetary inflation cycles where the Federal Reserve bank creates new money to
dilute the value of money currently in the system, creating an over abundance
of money causing market goods and services to rise in price by 4% to 8% per
year. Alternative stores of value. While these items may be inconvenient to
trade daily or store, and may vary in value quite significantly, they rarely or
never lose all value. This is the point of any store of value, to impose a
natural risk management simply due to inherent stable demand for the underlying
asset. It need not be a capital asset at all, merely have economic value that
is not known to disappear even in the worst situation. In principle, this could
be true of any industrial commodity, but gold and precious metals are generally
favored because of their demand and rarity in nature, which reduces the risk of
devaluation associated with increased production and supply.
