Student Stop AIDS Campaign The Student Stop AIDS Campaign is made up of young
people who believe the worldâ€™s response to the HIV/AIDS pandemic is
insufficient and unacceptable. They work to ensure there are zero new
infections, zero discrimination, and zero AIDS related deaths. Student Stop
AIDS' University Societies across the country work to bring about change
through raising awareness, political lobbying, public engagement and corporate
action. They target those who have the power to make a difference, engage
people and communities who can leverage change, and work for the adoption of
innovative solutions. They confront governments, institutions and corporations
to bring an end to the injustice surrounding HIV/AIDS by ensuring that they
live up to the promise of delivering zero new infections, zero discrimination,
and zero AIDS related deaths. Key dates in the Stop AIDS calendar are World
AIDS Day on 1 December each year, the Day of Action, the AGM and the annual
speaker tour, where young HIV activists from around the world visit British
universities to discuss the crisis. Access to Treatment. In 2012 students are
campaigning for better access to treatment through the use of the Medicines
Patent Pool (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vj0dbFgjoh4). The Medicines Patent
Pool was created in December 2009 by UNITAID in order to improve access to
treatment for people living with HIV in the developing world. Companies can
give their individual HIV patents to the pool, which then acts like a one stop
patent shop. Other companies can access these patents in return for a fair
royalty payment to the inventors. This means that many manufacturers can make
and sell these drugs and this competition will drive prices down. Researchers
can also access the patents, and can use them to create new, child friendly
drugs. Finally, because all the patents are held in one place, it is much
easier to create combination pills. The Student Stop AIDS Campaign are pushing
for pharmaceutical companies to put their patents in the Medicines Patent Pool.
Currently the Student Stop AIDS Campaign are targeting Johnson & Johnson to
encourage them to join the Medicines Patent Pool. Johnson & Johnson part own a
crucial, lifesaving HIV/AIDS drug so it is crucial for them to join the Patent
Pool. As the other half of the patent is already in the pool, they are
effectively blocking cheaper production of this drug, which would save millions
of lives. Global Fund. Student campaigners work on the global campaign to
ensure that the most effective multi-lateral institution in the global AIDS
response, the Global Fund to fight AIDS, TB and Malaria, is fully funded. The
promise to deliver universal access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and
support by 2010 has not been delivered. There are still 9 million people in
need of HIV treatment worldwide. The global recession has caused world leaders
to back out of their commitments. Student campaigners work to ensure that the
Government deliver on their promises by the Millennium Development Goal
deadline of 2015 by ensuring that the response is fully funded. Students also
campaign on various other issues and campaigns surrounding HIV and AIDS such as
The Robin Hood Tax, the EU-India Free Trade Agreement, prevention, sexual
health and rights and prejudice and discrimination. The SSAC is co-ordinated by
Restless Development, a youth-based development organization, and is part of
the larger Stop AIDS Campaign consortium.
