Restless Development Restless Development, the youth-led development agency
previously Students Partnership Worldwide (SPW), was founded in 1985 by Jim
Cogan OBE, who later established the African social enterprise Alive & Kicking.
Its aim is "To channel the indisputably positive power of young people to bring
about real progress." Young people are most affected by the persistent problems
facing the world. And yet they are frequently overlooked as being the ones to
help work these issues out. Restless Development believes that young people are
the solution. They are the largest, most energetic group of young people in the
world. When they work together with a common purpose, anything is possible.
Restless Development Restless Development specialises in training young people
to act as peer educators and agents of change in rural communities, to carry
out effective long term interventions in health, particularly in preventing the
spread of HIV/AIDS, and also in resource management contexts. Restless
Development recruits around 85% of these volunteers from the huge untapped
resource of educated young people in African and Asian countries. Restless
Development's main overseas volunteering programs are in Tanzania, Uganda,
Zambia, South Africa, India and Nepal. Youth to youth education is at the heart
of Restless Development’s methodology. Restless Development volunteer peer
educators use interactive non-formal education methods, such as music, drama
and dance to engage children and youth, and promote healthy living. Restless
Development volunteers directly reach 400,000 young people each year with
health and environmental education at a cost of just £9 per child. Restless
Development is also part of the Stop AIDS Campaign, and has responsibility for
coordinating the Student Stop AIDS Campaign. A significant number of Student
Stop AIDS campaigners are former Restless Development volunteers.
