Students for Justice in Palestine Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) is a
student group which was first established at the University of California,
Berkeley in 2001. There is no national group, just indivudal chapters. The UC
Berkeley group's mission statement says: "SJP is a diverse group of students,
faculty, staff and community members at , organized on democratic principles to
promote justice, human rights, liberation and self-determination for the
Palestinian people." In Canada the equivalent to Students for Justice in
Palestine is Solidarity for Palestinian Human Rights which has 13 campus
branches across Canada. Principles. SJP manifestly rejects attempts to equate
principled criticism of Zionism, or of the character or policies of Israel,
with anti-Semitism." Selected activities. used by Students for Justice in
Palestine include divestment and boycott campaigns and educational and creative
events designed to encourage discussion of Palestinian human, economic,
political, social, and cultural rights. It was the first campus group to launch
a divestment campaign against Israel. Activities include educational events,
film screenings, discussion forums, and demonstrations meant to promote
awareness of the plight of the Palestinian people and encourage activism in
solidarity with their struggle. In Auckland, SJP has led demonstrations against
the local weapons industry including parking a model of a bombed out ambulance
outside the shareholder AGM of Rakon, a company that sells components to the
IDF and US Military for use in guided munitions. It has also organised
demonstrations outside the offices of Oscmar International to protest its
selling of military training simulators to Israel. In July and August, 2006 the
group organised a series of five protests against Israel's invasion of Lebanon.
The first protest turned into an alleyway brawl between activists and police
after one person lowered the US flag on the US consulate to half-mast and
attempted to climb down a drainpipe and evade police. "Free Speech Fight" at UC
Berkeley. The University of California, Berkeley chapter of SJP came to
international attention in April 2002 when they chose the memorial of the Deir
Yassin massacre to occupy a campus building and disrupt a midterm in progress
for over 600 students as part of a protest against their university's
investments in Israel. The occupation was broken up by police after warning the
students of trespassing. Seventy-nine protesters were arrested, cited for
trespassing, and, in some cases, resisting arrest. All but one were released.
One protester wound up in jail, on a charge of felony battery after he bit a
police officer. Following the arrests SJP was banned from operating at UCLA
prompting SJP to begin a campaign against what they saw as the university
attacking freedom of speech, assembly and protest. Following the incident, UC
Berkeley administrators gathered information that led them to believe that
group that protesters would also try and seize a campus library. Divestment at
Hampshire College. In February 2009, Hampshire College's SJP announced that
Hampshire College had decided to cut financial ties with companies that
profited from Palestinian oppression. Some of the trustees of Hampshire College
"strenuously denied" assertions by SJP that an investment decision made
Hampshire the first United States college to sell stock in companies
specifically because they do business with Israel. Controversy remains whether
the organization's campaigning among Board and administration members resulted
in actual divestment from Israeli-incorporated and Israel-trafficking
businesses. Controversy. In April 2011, Avi Dichter, Member of Knesset and
member of Israel's centrist and Kadima party, was interrupted by protesters
from a group of the Brandeis SJP, while speaking at Brandeis University.
Several students got up out of their seats and called Dichter a war criminal,
and accused him of torture and crimes against humanity. In April 2011, 16
African-American members of the Vanguard Leadership Group published full page
ads in several U.S. university newspapers, with an "Open Letter to Students for
Justice in Palestine" saying that the SJP's use of the word "apartheid" in
regards to Israel and Israel Apartheid Week "is not only false, but offensive."
In October 2011, Jarrod Jordan, executive director of the Vanguard Leadership
Group, said that SJP's holding a conference about Israel and apartheid is like
"the Ku Klux Klan holding a conference at Morehouse College in Atlanta, a total
affront to Jewish culture and identity.‚Äù In addition, Jordan said that the
use of the word 'apartheid' in referring to Israel is "patently false and
deeply offensive to all who feel a connection to the State of Israel." The
Columbia Spectator refused to publish a full-page ad paid for by VLG because
they "judged it to be political." SJP National Conference 2011. In October
2011, several SJP chapters convened for the first National Conference at
Columbia University. The conference titled "Students Confronting Apartheid" has
four main objectives that are, Movement Building, Campaign Building, Political
Development, Skill Development.
