Summer capital A summer capital is a city used as an administrative capital
during extended periods of particularly hot summer weather. The term is mostly
of relevance in a historical context as political systems with ruling classes
that would migrate to a summer capital, making them less prevalent in modern
times. The ubiquity of air-conditioning systems also reduces the imperative to
periodically relocate to summer capitals. Summer capitals around the world.
Palanga is usually named as the summer capital of Lithuania. Estonia. Pärnu is
the fifth largest town of Estonia (third among ethnic Estonians) and is a
popular summer resort. Although the town is left in the background for most of
the year, much of Estonian life centers around Pärnu during vacation season.
Since 1996 Pärnu has been known as Estonia's Summer capital. India. In India,
the government was transferred to nainital for the summer during British rule
(up to 1947). However this practice was stopped due to the difficulty of
transporting officialdom, and the negative perceptions of the public about
politicians and public servants making such a move. Philippines. During the
American occupation in the early 20th century, Baguio, located in northern
Luzon and developed by the Americans for its cool climate became the summer
capital of the Philippines, an alternative to the de facto capital Manila.
Spain. The location of San Sebastián in the cooler, northern part of Spain
close to the French border ideally placed it as a summer capital alternative to
Madrid.
