Supermodular function In mathematics, a function is supermodular if for all
"x", "y" formula_3 "R""k", where "x" formula_4 "y" denotes the componentwise
maximum and "x" formula_5 "y" the componentwise minimum of "x" and "y". If
âˆ’"f" is supermodular then "f" is called submodular, and if the inequality is
changed to an equality the function is modular. If "f" is twice continuously
differentiable, then supermodularity is equivalent to the condition
Supermodularity in economics and game theory. The concept of supermodularity is
used in the social sciences to analyze how one agent's decision affects the
incentives of others. Consider a symmetric game with a smooth payoff function
formula_7 defined over actions formula_8 of two or more players formula_9.
Suppose the action space is continuous; for simplicity, suppose each action is
chosen from an interval: formula_10. In this context, supermodularity of
formula_7 implies that an increase in player formula_12's choice formula_8
increases the marginal payoff formula_14 of action formula_15 for all other
players formula_16. That is, if any player formula_12 chooses a higher
formula_8, all other players formula_16 have an incentive to raise their
choices formula_15 too. Following the terminology of Bulow, Geanakoplos, and
Klemperer (1985), economists call this situation strategic complementarity,
because players' strategies are complements to each other. This is the basic
property underlying examples of multiple equilibria in coordination games. The
opposite case of submodularity of formula_7 corresponds to the situation of
strategic substitutability. An increase in formula_8 lowers the marginal payoff
to all other player's choices formula_15, so strategies are substitutes. That
is, if formula_12 chooses a higher formula_8, other players have an incentive
to pick a "lower" formula_15. For example, Bulow et al. consider the
interactions of many imperfectly competitive firms. When an increase in output
by one firm raises the marginal revenues of the other firms, production
decisions are strategic complements. When an increase in output by one firm
lowers the marginal revenues of the other firms, production decisions are
strategic substitutes. A standard reference on the subject is by Topkis.
Supermodular functions of subsets. Supermodularity and submodularity are also
defined for functions defined over subsets of a larger set. Intuitively, a
submodular function over the subsets demonstrates "diminishing returns". There
are specialized techniques for optimizing submodular functions. Let "S" be a
finite set. A function formula_27 is submodular if for any formula_28 and
formula_29, formula_30. For supermodularity, the inequality is reversed. A
simple illustration example motivates this definition of submodular. Let S be a
set of different foods, formula_31 a meal, and formula_32 the "goodness" of
that meal. Then A above is one meal, and B is A but with even more options. Let
x be ice cream. Adding ice cream to a meal is always good, but it is best if
there is not already a dessert. If A and B either both have a dessert or both
do not, then adding ice cream to them is comparably good. But if A does not
have dessert and B does, then the effect of adding ice cream is more pronounced
in A. The definition of submodularity can equivalently be formulated as for all
subsets "A" and "B" of "S".
