Superpower A superpower is a state with a dominant position in the
international system which has the ability to influence events and its own
interests and project power on a worldwide scale to protect those interests. A
superpower is traditionally considered to be a step higher than a great power.
Alice Lyman Miller (Professor of National Security Affairs at the Naval
Postgraduate School), defines a superpower as "a country that has the capacity
to project dominating power and influence anywhere in the world, and sometimes,
in more than one region of the globe at a time, and so may plausibly attain the
status of global hegemony." It was a term first applied in 1944 to the British
Empire, the Soviet Union and the United States of America. Following World War
II, as the British Empire transformed itself into the Commonwealth and its
territories became independent, the Soviet Union and the United States
generally came to be regarded as the only two superpowers, and confronted each
other in the Cold War. After the Cold War, only the United States appeared to
fulfill the criteria to be considered a world superpower. The term "second
superpower" has been applied by scholars to the possibility that the People's
Republic of China could soon emerge as a superpower on par with the United
States. Brazil, the European Union, and India are also thought to have the
potential of achieving superpower status within the 21st century. A few heads
of states, politicians and news analysts claim that Russia may have already
reclaimed that status. Some people doubt the existence of superpowers in the
post Cold War era altogether, stating that today's complex global marketplace
and the rising interdependency between the world's nations has made the concept
of a superpower an idea of the past and that the world is now multipolar.
Terminology. The term "superpower" was used to describe nations with greater
than great power status as early as 1944, but only gained its specific meaning
with regard to the United States, the British Empire and the Soviet Union after
World War II. This was because the United Kingdom, the United States and the
Soviet Union had proved themselves to be capable of casting great influence in
global politics and military dominance. There have been attempts to apply the
term superpower retrospectively, and sometimes very loosely, to a variety of
past entities such as Ancient Egypt, Ancient Greece, China, India, the Persian
Empire, the Ottoman Empire, the Roman Empire, the Mongol Empire, Portuguese
Empire, the Spanish Empire, France, and the British Empire. Recognition by
historians of these older states as superpowers may focus on various
superlative traits exhibited by them. For example, at its peak the British
Empire was the largest in history with 1 in every 4 people in the world living
under its flag. Origin. The term in its current political meaning was coined by
Dutch-American geostrategist Nicholas Spykman in a series of lectures in 1943
about the potential shape of a new post-war world order. This formed the
foundation for the book "The Geography of the Peace", which referred primarily
to the unmatched maritime global supremacy of the United Kingdom and United
States as essential for peace and prosperity in the world. A year later,
William T.R. Fox, an American foreign policy professor, elaborated on the
concept in the book "The Superpowers: The United States, Britain and the Soviet
Union — Their Responsibility for Peace" (1944), which spoke of the global
reach of a super-empowered nation. Fox used the word Superpower to identify a
new category of power able to occupy the highest status in a world in which, as
the war then raging demonstrated, states could challenge and fight each other
on a global scale. According to him, there were (at that moment) three states
that were superpowers: Britain, the United States, and the Soviet Union. The
British Empire was the most extensive empire in world history and considered
the foremost great power, holding sway over 25% of the world's population and
controlling about 25% of the Earth's total land area, while the United States
and the Soviet Union grew in power in World War II. Characteristics. The
criteria of a superpower are not clearly defined and as a consequence they may
differ between sources. According to Lyman Miller, "The basic components of
superpower stature may be measured along four axes of power: military,
economic, political, and cultural (or what political scientist Joseph Nye has
termed “soft power”). In the opinion of Kim Richard Nossal of Queen's
University, "generally this term was used to signify a political community that
occupied a continental-sized landmass, had a sizable population (relative at
least to other major powers); a superordinate economic capacity, including
ample indigenous supplies of food and natural resources; enjoyed a high degree
of non-dependence on international intercourse; and, most importantly, had a
well-developed nuclear capacity (eventually normally defined as second-strike
capability)." In the opinion of Professor Paul Dukes, "a superpower must be
able to conduct a global strategy including the possibility of destroying the
world; to command vast economic potential and influence; and to present a
universal ideology". Although, "many modifications may be made to this basic
definition". According to Professor June Teufel Dreyer, "A superpower must be
able to project its power, soft and hard, globally." Cold War. The 1956 Suez
Crisis suggested that Britain, financially weakened by two world wars, could
not then pursue its foreign policy objectives on an equal footing with the new
superpowers without sacrificing convertibility of its reserve currency as a
central goal of policy. As the majority of World War II had been fought far
from its national boundaries, the United States had not suffered the industrial
destruction nor massive civilian casualties that marked the wartime situation
of the countries in Europe or Asia. The war had reinforced the position of the
United States as the world's largest long-term creditor nation Despite attempts
to create multinational coalitions or legislative bodies (such as the United
Nations), it became increasingly clear that the superpowers had very different
visions about what the post-war world ought to look like, and after the
withdrawal of British aid to Greece in 1947 the United States took the lead in
containing Soviet expansion in the Cold War. The two countries opposed each
other ideologically, politically, militarily, and economically. The Soviet
Union promoted the ideology of communism: planned economy and a one-party
state, whilst the United States promoted the ideologies of liberal democracy
and the free market. This was reflected in the Warsaw Pact and NATO military
alliances, respectively, as most of Europe became aligned with either the
United States or the Soviet Union. These alliances implied that these two
nations were part of an emerging bipolar world, in contrast with a previously
multipolar world. The idea that the Cold War period revolved around only two
blocs, or even only two nations, has been challenged by some scholars in the
post–Cold War era, who have noted that the bipolar world only exists if one
ignores all of the various movements and conflicts that occurred without
influence from either of the two superpowers. Additionally, much of the
conflict between the superpowers was fought in "proxy wars", which more often
than not involved issues more complex than the standard Cold War oppositions.
After the Soviet Union disintegrated in the early 1990s, the term hyperpower
began to be applied to the United States, as the sole remaining superpower of
the Cold War era. This term, coined by French foreign minister Hubert Védrine
in the 1990s, is controversial and the validity of classifying the United
States in this way is disputed. One notable opponent to this theory, Samuel P.
Huntington, rejects this theory in favor of a multipolar balance of power.
Other International Relations theorists, such as Henry Kissinger, theorize that
because the threat of the Soviet Union no longer exists to formerly American-
dominated regions such as Japan and Western Europe, American influence is only
declining since the end of the Cold War, because such regions no longer need
protection or have necessarily similar foreign policies as the United States.
Post Cold War. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 that ended the
Cold War, the post–Cold War world was sometimes considered as a unipolar
world, with the United States as the world's sole remaining superpower but
within the 21st century some analysts believe Russia has risen back to
superpower status. In the opinion of Samuel P. Huntington, "The United States,
of course, is the sole state with preeminence in every domain of power –
economic, military, diplomatic, ideological, technological, and cultural –
with the reach and capabilities to promote its interests in virtually every
part of the world." Experts argue that this older assessment of global politics
was too simplified, in part because of the difficulty in classifying the
European Union at its current stage of development. Others argue that the
notion of a superpower is outdated, considering complex global economic
interdependencies, and propose that the world is multipolar. According to
Samuel P. Huntington, "There is now only one superpower. But that does not mean
that the world is unipolar. A unipolar system would have one superpower, no
significant major powers, and many minor powers." Huntington thinks,
"Contemporary international politics" ... "is instead a strange hybrid, a uni-
multipolar system with one superpower and several major powers." Additionally,
there has been some recent speculation that the United States is declining in
relative power as the rest of the world rises to match its levels of economic
and technological development. Citing economic hardships, Cold War allies
becoming less dependent on the United States, a declining dollar, and the rise
of other great powers around the world, some experts have suggested the
possibility of the United States losing its superpower status in the future.
Potential superpowers. [[File:Potential
Superpowers.svg|400px|thumb|left|Present day states that currently are or have
the potential to become a superpower within the 21st century. ]] Academics,
institutions and other qualified commentators sometimes identify potential
superpowers thought to have a strong likelihood of being recognized as
superpowers in the 21st century. The record of such predictions has not been
perfect. For example in the 1980s some commentators thought Japan would become
a superpower, due to its large GDP and high economic growth at the time.
Japan's economy would also crash in 1991, creating of a long period of economic
slump in the country known the "The Lost Years." As of August 2012, Japan has
not fully recovered from the 1991 crash. Due to their large markets, growing
military strength, and economic potential and influence in international
affairs, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the People's Republic of China, the
European Union, Republic of India and the Russian Federation, are among the
powers which are most often cited as having the ability to influence future
world politics and reach the status of superpower in the 21st century.
