Supranational union A supranational union is a type of multi-national
confederation or federation where negotiated power is delegated to an authority
by governments of member states. The concept of "supranational union" is
sometimes used to describe the European Union, as a new type of political
entity. The EU is the only entity which provides for international popular
elections, going beyond the level of political integration normally afforded by
international treaty. The term "supranational" is sometimes used in a loose,
undefined sense in other contexts, sometimes as a substitute for international,
transnational or global. Another method of decision-making in international
organizations is intergovernmentalism, in which state governments play a more
prominent role. Origin as a legal concept. The Council of Europe created a
system based on human rights in its founding Statute and its Convention of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Robert Schuman, French Foreign minister,
initiated the debate on supranational democracy in his speeches at the United
Nations, at the signing of the Council's Statutes and at a series of other
speeches across Europe and North America. The term "supranational" occurs in an
international treaty for the first time (twice) in the Treaty of Paris, 18
April 1951. This new legal term defined the Community method in creating the
European Coal and Steel Community and the beginning of the democratic re-
organization of Europe. It defines the relationship between the High Authority
or European Commission and the other four institutions. In the treaty it
relates to a new democratic and legal concept. The Founding Fathers of the
European Community and the present European Union said that supranationalism
was the cornerstone of the governmental system. This is enshrined in the
"Europe Declaration" made on 18 April 1951, the same day as the European
Founding Fathers signed the Treaty of Paris. ' "By the signature of this
Treaty, the participating Parties give proof of their determination to create
the first supranational institution and that thus they are laying the true
foundation of an organised Europe. This Europe remains open to all nations. We
profoundly hope that other nations will join us in our common endeavour." '
This declaration of principles that included their judgement for the necessary
future developments was signed by Konrad Adenauer (West Germany), Paul van
Zeeland, Joseph Meurice (Belgium) Robert Schuman (France) Count Sforza (Italy)
Joseph Bech (Luxembourg) and Dirk Stikker, Jan van den Brink (The Netherlands).
It was made to recall future generations to their historic duty of uniting
Europe based on liberty and democracy under the rule of law. Thus they viewed
the creation of a wider and deeper Europe as intimately bound to the healthy
development of the supranational or Community system. This Europe was open to
all nations who were free to decide â€” a reference, or rather an invitation
and encouragement of liberty to the Iron Curtain countries. The term
supranational does not occur in succeeding treatings such as the Treaties of
Rome, the Maastricht Treaty, the Treaty of Nice or the Constitutional Treaty or
the very similar Treaty of Lisbon. Distinguishing features of a supranational
union. A supranational union is a supranational polity which lies somewhere
between a confederation that is an association of States and a federation that
is a state. The European Economic Community was described by its founder Robert
Schuman as midway between confederalism which recognizes the complete
independence of States in an association and federalism which seeks to fuse
them in a super-state. The EU has supranational competences, but it possesses
these competences only to the extent that they are conferred on it by its
member states. {Komptenz-Komptenz} Within the scope of these competences, the
union exercises its powers in a sovereign manner, having its own legislative,
executive, and judicial authorities. The supranational Community also has a
chamber for organized civil society including economic and social associations
and regional bodies. Unlike states in a federal super-state, member states
retain ultimate sovereignty, although some sovereignty is shared with, or ceded
to, the supranational body. Supranational agreements encourage stability and
trust, because governments cannot break international accords at a whim. The
supranational action may be time-limited. This was the case with the European
Coal and Steel Community, which was agreed for 50 years with the possibility of
renewal. Supranational accords may be permanent, such as an agreement to outlaw
war between the partners. Full sovereignty can be reclaimed by withdrawing from
the supranational arrangements but the member state would also lose the great
advantages offered by mutualities, economies of scale, common external tariffs
and other commonly agreed standards such as improved international trust and
democracy and common external positions. A supranational union, because it is
an agreement between sovereign states, is based on international treaties. The
European treaties in general are different from classical treaties as they are
constitutionalizing treaties, that is they provide the basis for a European
level of democracy and European rule of law. They have something in the nature
of a constitution and like the British constitution, not necessarily a single
document. They are based on treaties between its member governments but have
normally to undergo a closer democratic scrutiny than other treaties because
they are more far-ranging, affecting many areas of citizens' lives and
livelihoods. This is why citizens often demand referendums. Decision-making is
partly intergovernmental and partly supranational within the Community areas.
The latter provides a higher degree of institutional scrutiny both via the
Parliament and through the Consultative Committees. Intergovernmentalism
provides for less democratic oversight, especially where the institution such
as the Council of Ministers or the European Council takes place behind closed
doors, rather than in a parliamentary chamber. A supranational authority can
have some independence from member state governments in specific areas,
although not as much independence as with a federal government. Supranational
institutions, like federal governments, imply the possibility of pursuing
agendas in ways that the delegating states did not initially envision.
Democratic supranational Communities, however, are defined by treaty and by
law. Their activity is controlled by a Court, democratic institutions and the
rule of law. The union has legal supremacy over its member states (only) to the
extent that its member state governments have conferred competences on the
union. It is up to the individual governments to assure that they have full
democratic backing in each of the member states. The citizens of the member
states, though retaining their nationality and national citizenship,
additionally become citizens of the union. The European Union, the only clear
example of a supranational union, has a parliament with legislative oversight,
elected by its citizens. To this extent, a supranational union like the
European Union has characteristics that are not entirely dissimilar to the
characteristics of a federal state like the United States of America. However,
the differences in scale become apparent if one compares the United States
federal budget with the budget of the European Union (which amounts only to
about one percent of combined GDP) or the size of the federal civil service of
the United States with the Civil Service of the European Union. Because
decisions in some EU structures are taken by majority votes, it is possible for
a member state to be obliged by the other members to implement a decision. The
states retain the competence for adding this additional supranational
competence. Supranationalism in the European Union. Historically the concept
was introduced and made a concrete reality by Robert Schuman when the French
Government agreed to the principle in the Schuman Declaration and accepted the
Schuman Plan confined to specific sectors of vital interest of peace and war.
Thus commenced the European Community system beginning with the European Coal
and Steel Community. The six founder States, (France, Italy, Germany, The
Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg) agreed on the goal; making 'war not only
unthinkable but materially impossible'. They agreed about the means: putting
the vital interests, namely coal and steel production, under a common High
Authority, subject to common democratic and legal institutions. They agreed on
the European rule of law and a new democratic procedure. The five institutions
(besides the High Authority) were a Consultative Committee (a chamber
representing civil society interests of enterprises, workers and consumers), a
parliament, and a Council of government ministers. A Court of Justice would
decide disputes coming from governments, public or private enterprises,
consumer groups, any other group interests or even an individual. A complaint
could be lodged in a local tribunal or national courts, where appropriate.
Member States have yet to fulfill and develop the articles in the Paris and
Rome treaties for full democracy in the European Parliament and other
institutions such as the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of
Regions. Schuman described supranational unions as a new stage in human
development. It contrasted with destructive nationalisms of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries that began in a glorious patriotism and ended in wars. He
traced the beginning concept of supranationality back to the nineteenth
century, such as the Postal Union, and the term supranational is used around
the time of the first world war. Democracy, which he defined as 'in the service
of the people and acting in agreement with it,' was a fundamental part of a
supranational community. However, governments only began to hold direct
elections to the European Parliament in 1979, and then not according to the
treaties. A single electoral statute was specified in the treaty for Europe's
first community of coal and steel in 1951. Civil society (largely non-
political) was to have its own elected chamber in the Consultative Committees
specific to each Community as democratically agreed, but the process was frozen
(as were Europe's parliamentary elections) by Charles de Gaulle and other
politicians who opposed the Community method. Today supranationalism only
exists in the two European Communities inside the EU: the Economic Community
(often called the European Community although it does not legally cover all
State activities) and Euratom (the European Atomic Energy Community, a non-
proliferation community, in which certain potentialities have been frozen or
blocked.) Supranational Communities provide powerful but generally unexploited
and innovatory means for democratic foreign policy, by mobilizing civil society
to the democratically agreed goals of the Community. The first Community of
Coal and Steel was agreed only for fifty years. Opposition, mainly by
enterprises which had to pay a small European tax of less than one percent and
government ministers in the Council, led to its democratic mandate not being
renewed. Its jurisprudence and heritage remains part of the European Community
system. De Gaulle attempted to turn the European Commission into a political
secretariat under his control in the Fouchet Plan but this move was thwarted by
such democrats in the Benelux countries as Paul-Henri Spaak, Joseph Luns and
Joseph Bech as well as a large wave of other pro-Europeans in all the Community
countries. The supranational Community method came under attack not only by de
Gaulle but other nationalists and Communists. In the post-de Gaulle period,
rather than holding pan-European elections under a single statute as specified
in all the treaties, governments held and continue to hold separate national
elections for the European Parliament. These often favor the major parties and
discriminate against smaller, regional parties. Rather than granting elections
to organized civil society in the consultative committees, governments created
a three pillar system under the Amsterdam Treaty and Maastricht Treaty, mixing
intergovernmental and supranational systems. Two pillars governing External
policy and Justice and Home affairs are not subject to the same democratic
controls as the Community system. In the Lisbon Treaty and the earlier nearly
identical Constitutional Treaty, the democratic independence of the five key
institutions is further breached and blurred. This moves the project from a
full democratic supranationalism into the direction, not only of
intergovernmentalism but the politicization of the institutions and control by
two or three major party political organizations. The Commission defines key
legal aspects of the supranational system because its members are to be
independent not only of commercial, labour, consumer, political or lobby
interests (Article 9 of the Paris Treaty). The Commission was to be composed of
a small number of experienced personalities, whose impartiality was beyond
question. As such the early presidents of the Commission and the High Authority
were strong defenders of European democracy against national, autocratic
practice or the rule of the strong over the weak. The idea in the
Constitutional and Lisbon Treaties is to run the European Commission as a
political office. Governments would prefer to have a "national" member in the
Commission, although this is against the principle of supranational democracy.
(The original concept was that the Commission should act as a single impartial
college of independent, experienced personalities having public confidence. One
of the Communities was defined in the treaty with a Commission with less
members than the number of its Member States.) Thus the members of the
Commission are becoming predominantly party political, and composed of
sometimes rejected, disgraced or unwanted national politicians. The first
president of the High Authority was Jean Monnet who never joined a political
party, as was the case with most of the other members of the Commissions. They
came from diverse liberal professions, having made recognized European
contributions. Governments also wish to retain the secrecy of their
deliberations in the Council of Ministers or the European Council, which
discusses matters of the most vital interest to European citizens. While some
institutions such as the European Parliament have their debates open to the
public, others such as the Council of Ministers and numerous committees are
not. Schuman wrote in his book, 'Pour l'Europe' (For Europe) that in a
democratic supranational Community "the Councils, committees and other organs
should be placed under the control of public opinion that was effectual without
paralyzing their activity nor useful initiatives." Categorising European
supranationalism. In many ways, the split sees the separation of powers
confined to merely two branches. Comparing the European Union and the United
States. In the Lisbon Treaty, the distribution of competences in various policy
areas between Member States and the European union is redistributed in three
categories. In 19th century USA, it had exclusive competences only (changed
somewhat since then, but the basic design remains to this day). Competences not
explicitly listed belong to lower levels of governance. "Democratic deficit".
In a supranational union, the problem of how to reconcile the principle of
equality among nation states, which applies to international
(intergovernmental) organizations, and the principle of equality among
citizens, which applies within nation states is resolved by taking a sectoal
approach. This allows an innovatory, democratic broadening the number of actors
to be included. These are present not only in the classical Parliament which
has slightly different functions but also in the Consultative Committees such
as the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions
which the treaties give powers equivalent to parliaments in their own areas but
which are at present still developing their potential. In the European Union,
the Lisbon Treaty mixes two principles (classical parliamentary government with
a politically elected government) and a supranational community with a totally
independent European Commission. Governments are also trying to treat the
Lisbon Treaty as a simple classical treaty, or even an amendment to one, which
does not require a full measure of citizens' support and formal approval. The
proposed Lisbon Treaty and the earlier Constitutional draft still retain in the
European Union elements of a supranational union, as distinct from a federal
state on the lines of the United States of America. But this is at the expense
of the democratic potentialities of a full supranational union as conceived in
the first Community. Other international organizations with some degree of
integration. The only union generally recognized as having achieved the status
of a supranational union is the European Union. There are a number of other
regional organisations that, while not supranational unions, have adopted or
intend to adopt policies that may lead to a similar sort of integration in some
respects.
