Supremacism Supremacism is the belief that a particular race, species, ethnic
group, religion, gender, sexual orientation, class, belief system or culture is
superior to others and entitles those who identify with it to dominate, control
or rule those who do not. Sexual. Many anthropologists consider male
supremacism, also known as ‚Äúmale dominance‚Äù or ‚Äúpatriarchy‚Äù, to exist
in all cultures throughout human history. Under it special rights or status is
granted to men, i.e. "male privilege." Such supremacy is enforced through a
variety of cultural, political and interpersonal strategies. Others note that
this often has been balanced by various forms of female authority. Since the
19th century there have been a number of feminist movements opposed to male
supremacism and working for equal legal rights and protections for women in all
cultural, political and interpersonal relations. Racial. Centuries of European
colonialism of the Americas, Africa, Australia, Oceania and Asia were justified
by white supremacist attitudes. During the 19th century, the phrase "The White
Man's Burden" was widely used to justify imperialist policy as a noble
enterprise. Following the American Civil War, a secret society, the Ku Klux
Klan, was formed in the South. Its purpose was to restore white supremacy after
the Reconstruction period. They preached supremacy over all other races, as
well as over Jews, Catholics and other minorities. Cornel West writes that
Black Muslim supremacy arose in America as a counter to white supremacism.
Groups advocating some version of it include Nation of Islam, the New Black
Panther Party, the Black Hebrew Israelites and the Bobo Shanti section of the
Rastafari movement. During the early 20th century until the end of World War II
- the Sh≈çwa era - the propaganda of the Empire of Japan used the old concept
of hakko ichiu to support the idea that the Yamato was a superior race,
destined to rule Asia and the Pacific. Many documents such as "Kokutai no
Hongi", "Shinmin no Michi" and "An Investigation of Global Policy with the
Yamato Race as Nucleus" referred to this concept of racial supremacy. During
the 1930s and 1940s, Adolf Hitler's German Nazi Party preached the existence of
an Aryan master race and attempted to establish through conquest such an empire
throughout Europe. They were World War II "Axis powers" allies of the Japanese
empire. In Africa, black Southern Sudanese allege that they are subjected to a
racist form of Arab supremacism, which they equate with the historic white
supremacism of South African apartheid. The alleged genocide in the ongoing War
in Darfur has been described as an example of Arab racism. Religious. Some
academics and writers have alleged Christian supremacism as a motivation for
the Crusades to the ‚ÄúHoly Land,‚Äù as well as for crusades against Muslims
and pagans throughout Europe. The Atlantic slave trade has been attributed in
part to it as well. The Ku Klux Klan has been described as a Christian, as well
as a white, supremacist group. So are many white supremacist groups in the
United States today. President George W. Bush‚Äôs support for fundamentalist
Christianity has been linked to his having a ‚ÄúChristian supremacist vision‚Äù
in his policies in the Middle East. Some academics and writers have alleged
Muslim or Islamic supremacism. The Qur'an and other Islamic documents always
speak of tolerant and protective beliefs which have been misused, misquoted and
misinterpreted by supremacists and anti Islamic elements. Specific examples of
how supremacists have exploited the name of Islam includes Muslim participation
in the African slave trade, the early 20th century pan-Islamism promoted by
Abdul Hamid II, the jizya and rules of marriage in Muslim countries being
imposed on non-Muslims, the majority Muslim interpretations of the rules of
pluralism in Malaysia, and "defensive" supremacism practised by some Muslim
immigrants in Europe. Other writers posit a ‚Äúpoisonous, violent, Islamic
supremacist creed‚Äù and that supremacism is inherent in a few Muslims as it is
in all other religions as Supremacist emotion is human. Bruce Bawer alleges
that Saudi Arabian princes have funded institutions to paint accusations of
Islamic supremacism as ‚ÄúIslamophobic lies.‚Äù -‚Ä Needs to be verfied in what
context this has been quoted. Some academics and writers allege Jewish
supremacism, often in relation to Israel and Zionism. Author Minna Rozen
describes the 17th century Jews of Jerusalems‚Äô view of themselves as an elite
group among Jews as supremacism. Ilan Papp√© writes that the First Aliyah to
Israel "established a society based on Jewish supremacy." Joseph Massad holds
that "Jewish supremacism" always has been a "dominating principle" of religious
and secular Zionism. The Anti-Defamation League condemns as "antisemitic"
writings about ‚ÄúJewish Supremacism‚Äù by authors David Duke and Kevin B.
MacDonald. Zoroastrianism, an early monotheistic faith that influenced Judaism,
Christianity and Islam, was originated among a people who called themselves
Aryans, including Persians. Friedrich Nietzsche's writings like "Thus Spoke
Zarathustra" (another name for Zoroaster) were interpreted by Nazis as being a
foundation for their ideas of the Aryan superman and white supremacism. Nazis
also appropriated the symbol of the faravahar of Zoroastrianism.
