Synonym Note that synonyms are defined with respect to certain senses of words;
for instance, "pupil" as the ""aperture in the iris of the eye"" is not
synonymous with "student". Similarly, "he expired" means the same as "he died",
yet "my passport has expired" cannot be replaced by "my passport has died". In
English, many synonyms evolved from the parallel use, in the early medieval
period, of Norman French (from Latin) and Old English (Anglo-Saxon) words,
often with some words being used principally by the Saxon peasantry (""folk"",
""freedom"", ""bowman"") and their synonyms by the Norman nobility (""people"",
""liberty"", ""archer""). Some lexicographers claim that no synonyms have
exactly the same meaning (in all contexts or social levels of language) because
etymology, orthography, phonic qualities, ambiguous meanings, usage, etc. make
them unique. Different words that are similar in meaning usually differ for a
reason: "feline" is more formal than "cat"; "long" and "extended" are only
synonyms in one usage and not in others (for example, a "long arm" is not the
same as an "extended arm"). Synonyms are also a source of euphemisms. The
purpose of a thesaurus is to offer the user a listing of similar or related
words; these are often, but not always, synonyms. Related terms. Antonyms are
words with opposite or nearly opposite meanings. For example: 'hot' => 'cold',
'large' => 'small', 'fresh' => 'stale' Hypernyms and hyponyms are words that
refer to, respectively, a general category and a specific instance of that
category. For example, "vehicle" is a hypernym of "car", and "car" is a hyponym
of "vehicle". Homonyms are words that sound the same OR are spelled the same,
but have different meanings. For example, witch and which are homonyms (because
they sound the same). Also, one can 'record' a song or keep a 'record' of
documents. In this example 'record' is a homonym because it's spelled the same,
despite the different meanings.
