Tactical media Tactical media is a term coined in 1996, to denote a form of
media activism that privileges temporary, hit-and-run interventions in the
media sphere over the creation of permanent and alternative media outlets.
Tactical media describes interventionist media art practices that engage and
critique the dominant political and economic order. They were first popularized
in Europe and the United States by media theorists and practitioners such as
David Garcia, Geert Lovink, Joanne Richardson, and the Critical Art Ensemble.
Since then, it has been used to describe the practices of a vast array of art
and activist groups such as RTMark, The Yes Men, Electronic Disturbance
Theater, Carbon Defense League, Institute for Applied Autonomy,
0100101110101101.ORG, Bureau of Inverse Technology, Ubermorgen, Irrational,
subRosa, and I/O/D, among others. Roots. Although tactical media borrows from a
number of artistic and political movements, it has been suggested that much of
its techniques are rooted in the Situationist idea of detournement, that is, in
the critical appropriation and transformation of a preexisting work—be it an
artwork, a commercial billboard, or a political campaign. In the case of
tactical media, it is the media themselves to be the subject of a detournement.
The dada movement has also been credited as an influence on tactical media, the
two often used within activist campaigns. Much like it, tactical media often
aims to do the opposite of the media it penetrates: it shocks and reveals an
antithesis. Tactical media also draws from surrealism, borrowing the idea that
a "truer" experience than the present one is present. Much like surrealism,
tactical media also criticizes social, political and cultural elements of a
given society through its domain's techniques. As for media-related roots,
tactical media partly stem from the alternative media created by the
counterculture of the 1960s. However, due do their temporary nature, tactical
media do not tend to construct alternative media outlets, but rather
appropriate existing media channels and technology to transform their usage
and/or the popular understanding of their messages. In this respect, tactical
media are more akin to other temporary forms of cultural and political
intervention, such as guerrilla communication and culture jamming. Origins.
Tactical media is said to have risen following the fall of the Berlin Wall,
where a certain rebirth of social, political, economical and media activism
occurred. This activist spirit soon reached both media specialists and artists,
creating the groundwork of tactical media. In many ways, it was made possible
by the availability of cheaper technology and by open forms of distribution,
such as public-access television and the Internet. Through tactical media,
participants are able to attract attention to an issue they feel strongly about
and want society to be aware of or get involved in. Most who have written about
tactical media would agree that its current form and meaning come from French
philosopher Michel de Certeau, more specifically in his 1984 essay "The
Practice of Everyday Life". As part of this essay, De Certeau debated that
consumers actually act as producers within our society, moving in a
technocratically constructed space and using an already established vocabulary.
The importance to De Certeau is that these practices "determines the elements
used, but not the 'phrasing' produced by the bricolage (the artisan-like
inventiveness) and the discursiveness that combine these elements, which are
all in general circulation." This distinction between the elements used within
a society and the system under which they are used is critical to the study of
tactical media. In his essay, De Certeau appeared to suggest that one could
easily use these social elements in a creative manner that would fall outside
of the system under which they are to be used. Once this distinction was made,
De Certeau also pushed forward the idea of how the elements found within a
society could be used. One of these was to use them as a "tactic", which he
believed to " itself into the other's place, fragmentarily, without taking it
over in its entirety, without being able to keep it at a distance. It has at
its disposal no base where it can capitalize on its advantages, prepare its
expansions, and secure independence with respect to circumstances". Due to its
lack of space, he also characterized a tactic to be dependent on time, needing
to be constantly on the watch for opportunities that must be quickly seized or
needing to manipulate events in order to turn them into opportunities. By
mixing the nature of tactics with the use of media, a new type of activism was
created. It used elements of a particular system in a creative manner that fell
outside its practices, creating resistance through difference. De Certeau's
concept of a tactic also explains why most tactical media campaigns are quick,
effective and current. However successful a particular campaign or a particular
group may be, its ultimate goal is not to replace a certain media outlet, for
tactical media discourages branding because of the probable outcome that a
similar cycle as the one attacked would be created once again. It must
therefore be understood that tactical media never reaches a state of
perfection; it is constantly changing, because it constantly needs to question
the system under which it operates. Although it is possible for tactical media
to be representative of the local views of a specific area, it is usually
present on a global level. There are plenty of tactical media projects that
operate on a physical space, but it most often uses networked space and the
Internet, making its span stretch over the entire planet. The virtual nature of
the space it occupies also allows it to create new channels towards the
hierarchies of power it fights against. A certain tactic does not need to
attack in person or on a physical level, but it can attack virtual and free
space where the dominant have little control. This important element makes a
tactical media project not the work of certain identifiable individuals but an
entity in itself, which most likely helps convey the message it attempts to
communicate. Examples. Tactical media projects are often a mix between art and
activism, which explains why many of its roots can be traced to various art
movements. It has been suggested by tactical media theorist Geert Lovink that
"discourse plus art equals spectacle", reflecting its striking and memorable
nature. Although there are no strict mediums through which it operates,
tactical media can often have very high aesthetic value, adding to its
"spectacle" and reinforcing some of its artistic roots. GWbush.com. In 1998,
computer programmer and political activist Zack Exley purchased a domain and
created a website titled GWbush.com. He invited the group RTMark (pronounced
Art Mark) to build a copy of George W. Bush's official website, as they had
done for some corporate websites. Later, Zack Exley changed the website to be a
more mainstream satire (drawing criticism from RTMark), posting a fake press
release from the Bush campaign announcing a promise to "pardon all drug
prisoners as long as they've learned from their past mistakes"—a reference to
Bush's past use of cocaine. In the midst of Bush's campaign for office, the
website not only received millions of hits, but also received coverage from
such organizations as ABC News, "USA Today" and "Newsweek". This phenomenon can
be classified as tactical media because of its conformance to its corresponding
criteria. Tactical air force. In 2000, Mexico's Zapatista Army of National
Liberation social movement decided to launch a "tactical air force". The
Zapatistas' air force consisted of hundreds of paper airplanes. After throwing
the planes over the fence of a federal barrack, confused troops were quick to
point their rifles at the paper intruders, creating an image that conveyed a
very strong message of peace versus war—the target ultimately being the
government. The Yes Men. The Yes Men are an organization who mimic their
subject through certain mediums: examples include counterfeiting sites and
creating fake videos. They will mimic their criticized subject, designed to
fool the general public into believing their alternate identity. Examples of
organizations and corporations that The Yes Men have successfully impersonated
(and criticized) are Dow Chemicals, ExxonMobil, McDonald's, World Trade
Organization, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), "The New
York Times" and Heritage. All of The Yes Men's media operate in a similar
fashion: they will impersonate a powerful entity, and publicize or make
decisions based on their own personal viewpoint. One of the most controversial
but widely known works that The Yes Men have produced is a humorous video spoof
where they impersonated a World Trade Organization representative, asking
corporations to buy votes directly from the general public. Some other ideas
that they publicized in this video spoof include the present-day influence
dating from the Civil War, encouraging the idea of reviving slavery. These
video spoofs are meant to evoke emotions of outrage and absurdity. They were
once successful enough to fool the public to the extent where they were able to
be interviewed by CNN—however, CNN was unaware of the true identity of The
Yes Men. "An example of Yes Men:" Revolution Islam. In April 2010, a radical
Islamic group, Revolution Muslim, made threats to South Park creators, Matt
Stone and Trey Parker, after they were offended of the show depicting their
prophet Mohammed. As a tactical media rebuttal, unknown agents created a site
with a similar URL to Revolution Muslim's website showing images of a
controversial comic of Mohammed (The comic shows Mohammed with a bomb as his
turban and sparked a huge controversy in 2006.), as well as a highly regarded
Islamic leader kissing an Islamic child on the mouth. This website was intended
to draw visitors who incorrectly typed in the URL to the Islamic website. This
tactic was aiming to mock Islamic radicals who use violent tactics to get their
way and then get offended that they are stereotyped as violent. RiP: A Remix
Manifesto. Brett Gaylor, an avid Web activist, created a documentary entitled
"RiP: A Remix Manifesto", which was dedicated to defending deejay Girl Talk,
who had been accused by top record labels with copyright infringement. Although
Girl Talk samples songs from other artists, Gaylor suggests that copyrights
should be distributed according to the creator of the music as a whole, rather
than who holds the ownership for specific songs. Moreover, he argues that Girl
Talk should be the owner of his own mash-ups that he created, despite ownership
conflicts. This represents tactical media well, because an ordinary person with
a mindset can create a temporary power of reversal with Girl Talk's
adversaries. Tactical media in video games. Video games have opened a whole new
approach and canvas for tactical media artists. This form of media allows for a
wide range of audiences to be informed on a specific issue or idea. Some
examples of games that touch on Tactical Media are "Darfur is Dying" and
"September 12". One example of a game design studio that works in tactical
media is TAKE ACTION games(TAG). The video game website www.newsgaming.com
greatly embodies the idea of tactical media in video games. Newsgaming coins
this name as a new genre that brings awareness to current news-related issues
based on true world events, as opposed to fantasy worlds that other video games
are based upon. This team of game developers contributes to the emerging
culture that is largely aimed at raising awareness on important matters in a
new and brilliant approach. Another examples of tactical media within video
games is "The McDonald's Game"; the author of this game takes power away from
the executive officers of McDonald's and gives it back to the public by
informing then, through rhetoric, on how McDonald's does its business and what
means they use to accomplish it. Chris Crawford's "Balance of the Planet", made
in 1990, is another example of tactical media, in which the game describes
environmental issues. Tactical media artists. Best known for his homeless
vehicle project. Wodiczko designed a sleeping quarters for the homeless using a
device that resembled a shopping cart and inside was a designed sleeping area.
He dispersed the vehicles to homeless people around New York City, envisioning
a goal that raised homelessness awareness. New York City officials confiscated
the vehicles so the message would not further spread. Best known for Couple in
a Cage, performances where people pretending to be extinct natives are
displayed in a caged area in public. This work of art is intended to challenge
the idea of preconceptions that many hold regarding other cultures. Bustamante
performs art that challenges stereotypes and constructions of identity,
bringing attention to issues about personal classification and character. She
is a strong proponent of individualism and personal growth: the only entity
capable of forging an identity being the person him or herself. Kaprow's work
attempts to integrate art and life. Through "Happenings", the separation
between life, art, artist, and audience becomes vague and open to
interpretation. The "Happening" allows the artist to experiment with human
senses, deploying the involvement of sight, sound, and smell. Key elements of
happenings are planned, but occasionally, artists retain room for
improvisation. Mandiberg produces websites and Firefox plug-ins that provide
information about environmental aspects of our world, such as the cost of oil.
His plug-ins reshape and modify the displayed information on other websites to
display an alarming point. De Certeau helped invent the idea and methodology
that is tactical media and stressed the important roles of consumers vs.
producers in society. Geert Lovink is a very influential person and has played
a large role in the evolution and presence of tactical media. Lovink in a sense
believes the idea of tactical media has been greatly miscued and that what this
idea and title once stood for has been misinterpreted and drawn off course by
falsified groups and causes that claim the title of tactical media. In 2009,
Rita Raley, Associate Professor of English at UC Santa Barbara authored a book
titled "Tactical Media" published by the University of Minnesota Press in its
“Electronic Mediations” series. Raley provides a critical exploration of
the new media art activism that has emerged out of, and in direct response to,
postindustrialism and neoliberal globalization. Throughout the book Raley
analyzes projects by tactical media groups such as the DoEAT group, the
Critical Art Ensemble, Electronic Civil Disobedience to name a few. Raley
argues that contemporary models of resistance and dissent in fact mimic the
decentralized and virtual operations of global capital in our "post-9/11
security state" to exploit and undermine the system from within. The Yes Men
are an activist duo who perform "identity correction", in which they pose as
representatives of large corporations and fake moral actions (in contrast to
the actual ideology of such groups). Using mass media outlets, the duo draw
attention to corporate crime and often create situations in which corporations
must publicly acknowledge their lack of responsibility towards disastrous
events. Andujar turns free and ope- source software into a progressive tool to
reprogram the use and understanding of computers as well as social culture at
large. Comparisons. It has often been compared to culture jamming, as both use
many of the same techniques in an attempt to occupy the public space controlled
by mass media. Where the two practices differ is in their way to obtain this
public space; while culture jamming consists of a response to the dominant
practices within it, tactical media uses the dominant practices in order to
penetrate it and become part of it. "Don't hate the media, become the media"
(as coined by Jello Biafra, spoken word artist and lead singer songwriter of
the Dead Kennedys) is a slogan often adopted by tactical activists and reflects
this important distinction. Tactical media has also been compared to
alternative media. It differs from the latter by its manner in dealing with
mass media where alternative media does not seek to infiltrate the dominant by
a quick tactic; it attempts to oppose it by proposing what its name suggests:
an alternative to the dominant. Tactical media versus strategic media. Tactical
media is described as the rebellious user—examples of media tacticians
include hackers, street rappers, or an innocent bystander filming an incident.
An important factor in tactical media is the idea of "ground level" work,
meaning that a power struggle exists: ordinary people who do not possess status
or capital utilize technology to create a temporary reversal of power. Certain
aspects that strengthen the magnitude of tactical media can include crisis,
criticism, critique, or absurdity—in order to convey a social message.
Tactical media's counterpart is strategic media: a common analogy used to
describe this phenomenon is an overseer controlling the masses. They are people
who are the supplier of information: examples include producers, authors, and
educators. They promote ideas that typically only benefit them, whereas
tactical media tends to broadcast a message that criticizes a powerful entity,
such as a corporation or strong organization. There is some debate that
tactical media resembles a strategy more than a tactic. Criticism. Although a
crucial element of tactical media states that ordinary citizens of society are
performing the criticism, some say that even everyday people may have skewed
intentions or opinions that do not represent the societal ideals as a whole.
Much of the tactical media projects are fueled by information warfare and has
also been accused to be closely linked to propaganda. The high value of
aesthetics placed within a project is said to be the element that enables the
transfer of this information, parallel to how propaganda functions.
