Political strategy Political strategy deals with politics from a strategic
perspective. Basically, it is the study of how politics are invented, and used
to obtain some given objective. This article covers some of these techniques as
seen in history and the present day. Politics and the related tactics can be
found in nearly every corner of our civilization. Types. Compromise. Two groups
may compromise with each other to each attain partial success. Discrediting.
Voters will make decisions partially based on how they view the proponents and
opponents of an issue. By discrediting the proponents of an issue, the issue
can be defeated, despite sufficient support for the issue itself. Similarly,
but to a lesser extent, an unpopular issue can be given a boost by discrediting
the opponents of the issue. Also known as an ad hominem argument. Heroism. Just
as products can be sold with celebrities, politics can be maneuvered with
ideals and celebrities. One motivation to use such a tactic is the sheer
success rate, and this tactic is common to both sides of many contests. Another
motivation, is that success is based on the merits of the ideal, or the
celebrity, not upon the issue. Hence, obscure and even unpopular objectives can
thus be achieved. Religion. Historical examples include the Divine Right of
Kings, used in the early modern era as a means of reinforcing allegiance to the
monarch; the establishment of the Church of England by King Henry VIII in order
to be able to divorce his wife and produce a male heir; the support given by
some lords to the Protestant Reformation for the purpose of obtaining
independence from the Holy Roman Empire; and the formation of government-run
churches by Nazi Germany and Communist China in an attempt to control religious
adherents. Such examples illustrate the use of religion for the advancement of
political objectives. Placating. This creates instant allegiance to the
speaker, while creating hostility toward the speaker's opponent.
