Take Pride in America Take Pride in America is a United States Department of
the Interior partnership program that enables individuals, civic groups,
corporations and others to volunteer in caring for the lands that Americans as
a whole share. Its goal is to instill an active sense of ownership and
responsibility for natural, cultural, and historic resources in its citizenry.
Description. The program provides volunteer opportunities that are available
nationwide including spending the summer as a tour guide at a national park or
working on a wildlife habitat restoration project. Projects can also be found
or created in local communities. Mission Origins. In 1997, President Bill
Clinton called for an increase in volunteer service in the U.S. The Boy Scouts
of America developed their Service to America program with a commitment to
provide 200 million hours of service by youth members by the end of the year
2000. As part of Service to America, the BSA provided service projects in
conjunction with the National Park Service (NPS). In October 2003, the
Department of the Interior expanded the program with the creation of Take Pride
in America, opening service to all Americans. Take Pride Schools. The Take
Pride Schools program was launched in the fall of 2005 to introduce a new
generation to volunteerism and create future stewards of our public lands. To
be designated as a Take Pride School, a school must commit to participating in
two Take Pride volunteer events each year benefiting public lands.
Participation can be by an entire school, a class, or even an after-school
club. Projects must be on public lands (public schools included!), promote Take
Pride's message, and benefit public use of public land. Awards. Throughout the
year, Take Pride in America gives many different awards to recognize
outstanding volunteer efforts of the individuals and groups that make Take
Pride a success.
