Tariff A tariff is either (1) a tax imposed on imports or exports (trade
tariff) in and out of a country, or (2) a list or schedule of prices for such
things as rail service, bus routes, and electrical usage (electrical tariff,
etc.). Etymology. The word comes from the Italian word "tariffa" "list of
prices, book of rates," which is derived from the Arabic "ta'rif" "to notify or
announce." Trade tariffs in the United States. Tariffs, often called customs,
were by far the largest source of United States federal revenue from the 1790s
to the eve of World War I, when they were surpassed by income taxes. Economic
analysis. Neoclassical economic theorists tend to view tariffs as distortions
to the free market. Typical analyses find that tariffs tend to benefit domestic
producers and government at the expense of consumers, and that the net welfare
effects of a tariff on the importing country are negative. Normative judgements
often follow from these findings, namely that it may be disadvantageous for a
country to artificially shield an industry from world markets, and that it
might be better to allow a collapse to take place. Opposition to all tariffs is
part of the free trade principle; the World Trade Organization aims to reduce
tariffs and to avoid countries discriminating between differing countries when
applying tariffs. The diagram to the right shows the costs and benefits of
imposing a tariff on a good in the domestic economy, Home. When incorporating
free international trade into the model we use a supply curve denoted as Pw.
This curve makes the assumption that the international supply of the good or
service is perfectly elastic and that the world can produce at a near infinite
quantity at the given price. Obviously, in real world conditions this is
somewhat unrealistic, but making such assumptions is unlikely to have a
material impact on the outcome of the model. At world equilibrium, Pw, Home
produced only S amount of the good, but had a demand of D. The difference
between S and D, SD was filled by importing from abroad. After the imposition
of tariff, domestic price rises from Pw to Pt but foreign export prices fall
from Pw to Pt* due to the difference in tax incidence on the consumers (at
home) and producers (abroad). At the new price level at Home, Pt, which is
higher than the previous Pw, more of the good is produced at Home â€“ it now
makes S* of the good. Due to the higher price, only D* of the good is demanded
by Home. The difference between S* and D*, S*D* is filled by importing from
abroad. Thus, imposition of tariffs reduce the quantity of imports from SD to
S*D*. Domestic producers enjoy a gain in their surplus. Producer surplus,
defined as the difference between what the producers were willing to receive by
selling a good and the actual price of the good, expands from the region below
Pw to the region below Pt. Therefore, the domestic producers gain an amount
shown by the area A. Domestic consumers face a higher price, reducing their
welfare. Consumer surplus is the area between the price line and the demand
curve. Therefore, the consumer surplus shrinks from the area above Pw to the
area above Pt, i.e. it shrinks by the areas A, B, C and D. The government gains
from the tariffs. It charges an amount PtPt* of tariff for every good imported.
Since S*D* goods are imported, the government gains an area of C and E. that
is, tariffs are beneficial to the society if the area given by the rectangle E
more than offsets the losses shown by triangles B and D. Rectangle E is called
the terms of trade gain whereas the two triangles B and D are also called
efficiency loss, as this cost is incurred because tariffs reduce the incentives
for the society to consume and produce. The model above is only completely
accurate in the extreme case where none of the consumers belong to the
producers group and the cost of the product is a fraction of their wages. If
instead, we take the opposite extreme, and assume all consumers come from the
producers' group, and also assume their only purchasing power comes from the
wages earned in production and the product costs their whole wage, then the
graph looks radically different. Without tariffs, only those producers/
consumers able to produce the product at the world price will have the money to
purchase it at that price. Note also, that with or without tariffs, there is no
incentive to buy the imported goods over the domestic, as the price of each is
the same. Only by altering available purchasing power through debt, selling off
assets, or new wages from new forms of domestic production, will the imported
goods be purchased. Or, of course, if its price were only a fraction of wages.
In the real world, as more imports replace domestic goods, they consume a
larger fraction of available domestic wages, moving the graph towards this view
of the model. If new forms of production are not found in time, the nation will
go bankrupt, and internal political pressures will lead to debt default,
extreme tariffs, or worse. Establishing tariffs inefficiently slows down this
process at the expense of the consumer's real wages, allowing more time for new
forms of production to be developed, but also buttresses industries which may
never regain competitive prices. Political analysis. The tariff has been used
as a political tool to establish an independent nation; for example, the United
States Tariff Act of 1789, signed specifically on July 4, was called the
"Second Declaration of Independence" by newspapers because it was intended to
be the economic means to achieve the political goal of a sovereign and
independent United States. In modern times, the political impact of tariffs has
been seen in a positive and negative sense. The 2002 United States steel tariff
imposed a 30% tariff on a variety of imported steel products for a period of
three years. American steel producers supported the tariff, but the move was
criticised by the Cato Institute. Tariffs can occasionally emerge as a
political issue prior to an election. In the leadup to the 2007 Australian
Federal election, the Australian Labor Party announced it would undertake a
review of Australian car tariffs if elected. The Liberal Party made a similar
commitment, while independent candidate Nick Xenophon announced his intention
to introduce tariff-based legislation as "a matter of urgency". Tariffs within
technology strategies. When tariffs are an integral element of a country's
technology strategy, the tariffs can be highly effective in helping to increase
and maintain the country's economic health. As an integral part of the
technology strategy, tariffs are effective in supporting the technology
strategy's function of enabling the country to outmaneuver the competition in
the acquisition and utilization of technology in order to produce products and
provide services that excel at satisfying the customer needs for a competitive
advantage in domestic and foreign markets. In contrast, in economic theory
tariffs are viewed as a primary element in international trade with the
function of the tariff being to influence the flow of trade by lowering or
raising the price of targeted goods to create what amounts to an artificial
competitive advantage. When tariffs are viewed and used in this fashion, they
are addressing the country's and the competitors' respective economic healths
in terms of maximizing or minimizing revenue flow rather than in terms of the
ability to generate and maintain a competitive advantage which is the source of
the revenue. As a result, the impact of the tariffs on the economic health of
the country are at best minimal but often are counter-productive. A program
within the US intelligence community, Project Socrates, that was tasked with
addressing America's declining economic competitiveness, determined that
countries like China and India were using tariffs as an integral element of
their respective technology strategies to rapidly build their countries into
economic superpowers. It was also determined that the US, in its early years,
had also used tariffs as an integral part of amounted to technology strategies
to transform the country into a superpower.
