Tax Justice Network The Tax Justice Network (TJN) is a coalition of researchers
and activists with a shared concern about what they argue are the harmful
impacts of tax avoidance, tax competition and tax havens, which "corrupt
national tax regimes and onshore regulation, and distort markets by rewarding
economic free-riders and mis-directing investment." The use of "justice" in the
name illustrates its philosophies towards taxation, including a belief that
taxes can be a tool for social justice. According to its 2009 accounts, The Tax
Justice Network International Secretariat Limited is a UK company controlled by
Tax Justice Network asbl, a Belgian charity. TJN publishes the Financial
Secrecy Index, ranking 73 secrecy jurisdictions according to both their
secrecy, and the scale of their activities. The Tax Justice Network was founded
by several dozen people, mostly from Europe, who met at the Porto Alegre
meeting of the World Social Forum in January 2003. It has its headquarters in
London. Its executive director is John Christensen. Philosophy. Key ideals
promoted by the TJN include tax co-operation, level playing fields, democratic
taxation and transparency. Transparency. In relation to transparency, the TJN's
philosophy supports: The TJN is fundamentally opposed to: Organisation.
According to its website, the TJN is directed by an International Steering
Committee elected from their global membership. They claim to have legal,
economic and tax specialists to advise on policy issues, and an expert group to
assist with publication of briefing papers. The group has an International
Secretariat based at the New Economics Foundation in London. It is constituted
as a not for profit association. The managing body is Council of Members and
Supporters which meets annually. Founding objectives. The cornerstone of the
organisation's objectives is the belief that tax havens cause poverty.
Campaigns and campaign objectives. The campaign objectives of the organization
are explained in part 2 of the Declaration "A Manifesto for Tax Justice", and
some broad policy proposals are outlined in the annex to the Manifesto. The TJN
campaigns to identify and remedy the deficiencies of national and international
tax policy frameworks and to support the activities of existing campaigns in
different countries by connecting them to a worldwide movement. The TJN assets
that the purpose of trying to operate at this level is to counteract the
activities of legal, business and accounting lobbying organisations which they
claim devote considerable time and money to securing favourable tax treatment
on behalf of wealthy individuals and powerful corporations. Publications. The
network offers a free publication called "Tax us if you can", which offers a
guide to the language of international tax policy and shows how professionals
profit from 'abusive tax practices'. It also outlines the numerous policy
failures that have encouraged the creation of the 'shadow economy' of tax
havens and proposes a range of practical solutions to this global crisis. In
March 2005 the network published a briefing paper called "The Price of
Offshore" which estimated that the amount of funds held by individuals in
offshore tax havens, is about 11.5 trillion US dollars. Using this estimate
they calculated the worldwide tax revenue lost on the income from these assets
at 255 billion US dollars annually. This amount, if correct, would more than
plug the financing gap to achieve the United Nations' Millennium Development
Goal of halving world poverty by 2015 assuming that it could be collected by
national governments and was then diverted to that purpose. In June 2000, Oxfam
published a report called "Releasing the Hidden Billions for Poverty
Eradication", which drew attention to the supposed harmful impacts of tax
havens on developing countries and proposed to identify why such impacts are
felt more forcefully there. In July 2012, following a 'major study' into
wealthy individuals with offshore accounts, the Tax Justice Network published
claims regarding deposits worth at least $21 trillion (Â£13 trillion),
potentially even $32 trillion, in secretive tax havens. As a result governments
suffer a lack of income taxes of up to $280 billion.
