Taylor rule In economics, a Taylor rule is a monetary-policy rule that
stipulates how much the central bank should change the nominal interest rate in
response to changes in inflation, output, or other economic conditions. In
particular, the rule stipulates that for each one-percent increase in
inflation, the central bank should raise the nominal interest rate by more than
one percentage point. This aspect of the rule is often called the Taylor
principle. The rule was first proposed by the U.S. economist John B. Taylor and
simultaneously by Dale W. Henderson and Warwick McKibbin in 1993. It is
intended to foster price stability and full employment by systematically
reducing uncertainty and increasing the credibility of future actions by the
central bank. It may also avoid the inefficiencies of time inconsistency from
the exercise of discretionary policy. The Taylor rule synthesized, and provided
a compromise between, competing schools of economics thought in a language
devoid of rhetorical passion. Although many issues remain unresolved and views
still differ about how the Taylor rule can best be applied in practice,
research shows that the rule has advanced the practice of central banking. As
an equation. According to Taylor's original version of the rule, the nominal
interest rate should respond to In this equation, formula_2 is the target
short-term nominal interest rate (e.g. the federal funds rate in the US),
formula_3 is the rate of inflation as measured by the GDP deflator, formula_4
is the desired rate of inflation, formula_5 is the assumed equilibrium real
interest rate, formula_6 is the logarithm of real GDP, and formula_7 is the
logarithm of potential output, as determined by a linear trend. In this
equation, both formula_8 and formula_9 should be positive (as a rough rule of
thumb, Taylor's 1993 paper proposed setting formula_10). That is, the rule
"recommends" a relatively high interest rate (a "tight" monetary policy) when
inflation is above its target or when output is above its full-employment
level, in order to reduce inflationary pressure. It recommends a relatively low
interest rate ("easy" monetary policy) in the opposite situation, to stimulate
output. Sometimes monetary policy goals may conflict, as in the case of
stagflation, when inflation is above its target while output is below full
employment. In such a situation, a Taylor rule specifies the relative weights
given to reducing inflation versus increasing output. The Taylor principle. By
specifying formula_11, the Taylor rule says that an increase in inflation by
one percentage point should prompt the central bank to raise the nominal
interest rate by more than one percentage point (specifically, by formula_12,
the sum of the two coefficients on formula_13 in the equation above). Since the
real interest rate is (approximately) the nominal interest rate minus
inflation, stipulating formula_11 implies that when inflation rises, the real
interest rate should be increased. The idea that the real interest rate should
be raised to cool the economy when inflation increases (requiring the nominal
interest rate to increase more than inflation does) has sometimes been called
the Taylor principle. During an EconTalk podcast Taylor explained the rule in
simple terms using three variables: inflation rate, GDP growth, and the
interest rate. If inflation were to rise by 1%, the proper response would be to
raise the interest rate by 1.5% (Taylor explains that it doesn't always need to
be exactly 1.5%, but being larger than 1% is essential). If GDP falls by 1%
relative to its growth path, then the proper response is to cut the interest
rate by .5%. Alternative versions of the rule. While the Taylor principle has
proved very influential, there is more debate about the other terms that should
enter into the rule. According to some simple New Keynesian macroeconomic
models, insofar as the central bank keeps inflation stable, the degree of
fluctuation in output will be optimized (Blanchard and Gali call this property
the 'divine coincidence'). In this case, the central bank need not take
fluctuations in the output gap into account when setting interest rates (that
is, it may optimally set formula_15.) On the other hand, other economists have
proposed including additional terms in the Taylor rule to take into account
financial conditions: for example, the interest rate might be raised when stock
prices, housing prices, or interest rate spreads increase. Empirical relevance.
Although the Federal Reserve does not explicitly follow the Taylor rule, many
analysts have argued that the rule provides a fairly accurate summary of US
monetary policy under Paul Volcker and Alan Greenspan. Similar observations
have been made about central banks in other developed economies, both in
countries like Canada and New Zealand that have officially adopted inflation
targeting rules, and in others like Germany where the Bundesbank's policy did
not officially target the inflation rate. This observation has been cited by
Clarida, Gal√≠, and Gertler as a reason why inflation had remained under
control and the economy had been relatively stable (the so-called 'Great
Moderation') in most developed countries from the 1980s through the 2000s.
However, according to Taylor, the rule was not followed in part of the 2000s,
possibly leading to the housing bubble. Certain research has determined that
some households form their expectations about the future path of interest
rates, inflation, and unemployment in a way that is consistent with Taylor-type
rules. Criticisms. Athanasios Orphanides (2003) claims that the Taylor rule can
misguide policy makers since they face real-time data. He shows that the Taylor
rule matches the US funds rate less perfectly when accounting for these
informational limitations and that an activist policy following the Taylor rule
would have resulted in an inferior macroeconomic performance during the Great
Inflation of the seventies.
