Technology and society Pre-historical. The importance of stone tools, circa 2.5
million years ago, is considered fundamental in human development in the
hunting hypothesis. It has been suggested, in "," that the control of fire by
early humans and the associated development of cooking was the spark that
radically changed human evolution. All these little changes in mobile phones,
like Internet access, are further examples of the cycle of co-production.
Society's need for being able to call on people and be available everywhere
resulted in the research and development of mobile phones. They in turn
influenced the way we live our lives. As the populace relies more and more on
mobile phones, additional features were requested. This is also true with
today's modern media player. Society also influenced changes to previous
generation media players. In the first personal music players, cassettes stored
music. However, that method seemed fragile and relatively low fidelity when
compact disks came along. Later, availability of MP3 and other compact file
formats made compact disks seem too large and limited, so manufactures created
MP3 players which are small and hold large amount of data. Societal preferences
helped determined the course of events through predictable preferences.
Economics and technological development. In ancient history, economics began
when occasional, spontaneous exchange of goods and services was replaced over
time by deliberate trade structures. Makers of arrowheads, for example, might
have realized they could do better by concentrating on making arrowheads and
barter for other needs. Clearly, regardless of goods and services bartered,
some amount of technology was involvedâ€”if no more than in the making of shell
and bead jewelry. Even the shaman's potions and sacred objects can be said to
have involved some technology. So, from the very beginnings, technology can be
said to have spurred the development of more elaborate economies. In the modern
world, superior technologies, resources, geography, and history give rise to
robust economies; and in a well-functioning, robust economy, economic excess
naturally flows into greater use of technology. Moreover, because technology is
such an inseparable part of human society, especially in its economic aspects,
funding sources for (new) technological endeavors are virtually illimitable.
However, while in the beginning, technological investment involved little more
than the time, efforts, and skills of one or a few men, today, such investment
may involve the collective labor and skills of many millions. Funding.
Consequently, the sources of funding for large technological efforts have
dramatically narrowed, since few have ready access to the collective labor of a
whole society, or even a large part. It is conventional to divide up funding
sources into governmental (involving whole, or nearly whole, social
enterprises) and private (involving more limited, but generally more sharply
focused) business or individual enterprises. Government funding for new
technology. The government is a major contributor to the development of new
technology in many ways. In the United States alone, many government agencies
specifically invest billions of dollars in new technology. 1980, the UK
government invested just over 6-million pounds in a four-year program, later
extended to six years, called the Microelectronics Education Programme (MEP),
which was intended to give every school in Britain at least one computer,
software, training materials, and extensive teacher training. Similar programs
have been instituted by governments around the world. Technology has frequently
been driven by the military, with many modern applications developed for the
military before they were adapted for civilian use. However, this has always
been a two-way flow, with industry often developing and adopting a technology
only later adopted by the military. Entire government agencies are specifically
dedicated to research, such as America's National Science Foundation, the
United Kingdom's scientific research institutes, America's Small Business
Innovative Research effort. Many other government agencies dedicate a major
portion of their budget to research and development. Private funding. Research
and development is one of the smallest areas of investments made by
corporations toward new and innovative technology. Many foundations and other
nonprofit organizations contribute to the development of technology. In the
OECD, about two-thirds of research and development in scientific and technical
fields is carried out by industry, and 98 percent and 10 percent respectively
by universities and government. But in poorer countries such as Portugal and
Mexico the industry contribution is significantly less. The U.S. government
spends more than other countries on military research and development, although
the proportion has fallen from about 30 percent in the 1980s to less than 10
percent. The 2009 founding of Kickstarter allows individuals to receive funding
via crowdsourcing for many technology related products including both new
physical creations as well as documentaries, films, and webseries that focus on
technology management. This circumvents the corporate or government oversight
most inventors and artists struggle against but leaves the accountability of
the project completely with the individual receiving the funds. Environment.
Technology provides an understanding, and an appreciation for the world around
us. Most modern technological processes produce unwanted byproducts in addition
to the desired products, which is known as industrial waste and pollution.
While most material waste is re-used in the industrial process, many forms are
released into the environment, with negative environmental side effects, such
as pollution and lack of sustainability. Different social and political systems
establish different balances between the value they place on additional goods
versus the disvalues of waste products and pollution. Some technologies are
designed specifically with the environment in mind, but most are designed first
for economic or ergonomic effects. Historically, the value of a clean
environment and more efficient productive processes has been the result of an
increase in the wealth of society, because once people are able to provide for
their basic needs, they are able to focus on less-tangible goods such as clean
air and water. The effects of technology on the environment are both obvious
and subtle. The more obvious effects include the depletion of nonrenewable
natural resources (such as petroleum, coal, ores), and the added pollution of
air, water, and land. The more subtle effects include debates over long-term
effects (e.g., global warming, deforestation, natural habitat destruction,
coastal wetland loss.) Each wave of technology creates a set of waste
previously unknown by humans: toxic waste, radioactive waste, electronic waste.
One of the main problems is the lack of an effective way to remove these
pollutants on a large scale expediently. In nature, organisms "recycle" the
wastes of other organisms, for example, plants produce oxygen as a by-product
of photosynthesis, oxygen-breathing organisms use oxygen to metabolize food,
producing carbon dioxide as a by-product, which plants use in a process to make
sugar, with oxygen as a waste in the first place. No such mechanism exists for
the removal of technological wastes. Humanity at the moment may be compared to
a colony of bacteria in a Petri dish with a constant food supply: with no way
to remove the wastes of their metabolism, the bacteria eventually poison
themselves. Construction and shaping. Choice. According to Williams and Edge,
the construction and shaping of technology includes the concept of choice (and
not necessarily conscious choice). Choice is inherent in both the design of
individual artifacts and systems, and in the making of those artifacts and
systems. The idea here is that a single technology may not emerge from the
unfolding of a predetermined logic or a single determinant, technology could be
a garden of forking paths, with different paths potentially leading to
different technological outcomes. This is a position that has been developed in
detail by Judy Wajcman Therefore, choices could have differing implications for
society and for particular social groups.hh Autonomous technology. In one line
of thought, technology develops autonomously, in other words, technology seems
to feed on itself, moving forward with a force irresistible by humans. To these
individuals, technology is "inherently dynamic and self-augmenting." Jacques
Ellul is one proponent of the irresistibleness of technology to humans. He
espouses the idea that humanity cannot resist the temptation of expanding our
knowledge and our technological abilities. However, he does not believe that
this seeming autonomy of technology is inherent. But the perceived autonomy is
because humans do not adequately consider the responsibility that is inherent
in technological processes. Another proponent of these ideas is Langdon Winner
who believes that technological evolution is essentially beyond the control of
individuals or society. Government. Individuals rely on governmental assistance
to control the side effects and negative consequences of technology. Recently,
the social shaping of technology has had new influence in the fields of e-
science and e-social science in the United Kingdom, which has made centers
focusing on the social shaping of science and technology a central part of
their funding programs.
