The Soul of Man under Socialism "The Soul of Man under Socialism" is an 1891
essay by Oscar Wilde in which he expounds an anarchist worldview. The creation
of "The Soul of Man" followed Wilde's conversion to anarchist philosophy,
following his reading of the works of Peter Kropotkin. In "The Soul of Man",
Wilde argues that, under capitalism, "the majority of people spoil their lives
by an unhealthy and exaggerated altruismâ€”are forced, indeed, so to spoil
them": instead of realising their true talents, they waste their time solving
the social problems caused by capitalism, without taking their common cause
away. Thus, caring people "seriously and very sentimentally set themselves to
the task of remedying the evils that they see in poverty but their remedies do
not cure the disease: they merely prolong it" because, as Wilde puts it, "the
proper aim is to try and reconstruct society on such a basis that poverty will
be impossible." Wilde did not see kindness or altruism "per se" as a problem;
what worried him was its misapplication in a way which leaves unaddressed the
roots of the problem: "the altruistic virtues have really prevented the
carrying out of this aim. Just as the worst slave-owners were those who were
kind to their slaves, and so prevented the horror of the system being realised
by those who suffered from it, and understood by those who contemplated it, so,
in the present state of things in England, the people who do most harm are the
people who try to do most good" while preserving the system. Wilde's deepest
concern was with man's soul; when he analysed poverty and its causes and
effects in "The Soul of Man Under Socialism" it was not simply the material
well-being of the poor that distressed him, but how society does not allow them
to reach a form of self-understanding and enlightenment. He adopted Jesus of
Nazareth as a symbol of the supreme individualist. Wilde advocated socialism,
which, he argued, "will be of value simply because it will lead to
individualism" and "substituting cooperation for competition will restore
society to its proper condition ... and ensure material well being for each
member of the community." Wilde examined the political conditions necessary for
full self-development and devotion to art, arguing, "Art is individualism, and
individualism is a disturbing and disintegrating force. There lies its immense
value. For what it seeks to disturb is monotony of type, slavery of custom,
tyranny of habit, and the reduction of man to the level of a machine." In a
socialist society, people will have the possibility to realise their talents;
"each member of the society will share in the general prosperity and happiness
of the society." Wilde added that "upon the other hand, Socialism itself will
be of value simply because it will lead to individualism" since individuals
will no longer need to fear poverty or starvation. This individualism would, in
turn, protect against governments "armed with economic power as they are now
with political power" over their citizens. However, Wilde advocated non-
capitalist individualism: "of course, it might be said that the Individualism
generated under conditions of private property is not always, or even as a
rule, of a fine or wonderful type" a critique which is "quite true." In this
way socialism, in Wilde's imagination, would free men from manual labour and
allow them to devote their time to creative pursuits, thus developing their
soul. He ended by declaring "The new individualism is the new hellenism". He
had a strong libertarian streak as shown in his poem "Sonnet to Liberty" and,
subsequent to reading the works of the anarchist communist Peter Kropotkin
(whom he described as "a man with a soul of that beautiful white Christ which
seems coming out of Russia") he declared himself an anarchist. For anarchist
historian George Woodcock "Wilde's aim in "The Soul of Man Under Socialism" is
to seek the society most favorable to the artist...for Wilde art is the supreme
end, containing within itself enlightenment and regeneration, to which all else
in society must be subordinated...Wilde represents the anarchist as aesthete."
Woodcock called the essay, "The most ambitious contribution to literary
anarchism during the 1890's" and finds that it is influenced mainly by the
thought of William Godwin. Political philosopher Slavoj Zizek shares Wildean
sentiments and intellectual contempt for charity, noting that the problem of
poverty will never be solved simply by keeping poor people alive, quoting the
relevant passages from Wilde's essay in his lectures and book.
