The Masque of Anarchy The Masque of Anarchy is a political poem written in 1819
(see 1819 in poetry) by Percy Bysshe Shelley following the Peterloo Massacre of
that year. In his call for freedom, it is perhaps the first modern statement of
the principle of nonviolent resistance. The poem was not published during
Shelley's lifetime and did not appear in print until 1832 (see 1832 in poetry),
when published by Edward Moxon in London with a preface by Leigh Hunt. Shelley
had sent the manuscript in 1819 for publication in The Examiner. Leigh Hunt
withheld it from publication because he "thought that the public at large had
not become sufficiently discerning to do justice to the sincerity and kind-
heartedness of the spirit that walked in this flaming robe of verse." The
epigraph on the cover of the first edition is from "The Revolt of Islam"
(1818): "Hope is strong; Justice and Truth their winged child have found."
Synopsis. Shelley elaborates on the psychological consequences of violence met
with pacifism. The guilty soldiers he says, will return shamefully to society,
where "blood thus shed will speak/In hot blushes on their cheek". Women will
point out the murderers on the streets, their former friends will shun them,
and honorable soldiers will turn away from those responsible for the massacre,
"ashamed of such base company". A version was taken up by Henry David Thoreau
in his essay "Civil Disobedience", and later by Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi in
his doctrine of "Satyagraha". Gandhi's passive resistance was influenced and
inspired by Shelley's nonviolence in protest and political action. It is known
that Gandhi would often quote Shelley's "Masque of Anarchy" to vast audiences
during the campaign for a free India. Political authors and campaigners such as
Richard Holmes, Paul Foot among others describe it as "the greatest political
poem ever written in English".
