Third-worldism Third-worldism is a tendency within left-wing political thought
to regard the division between developed countries, and developing countries or
"Third World" nations against the background of primary political importance.
Third-worldism tends to offer support to Third World nations and national
liberation movements against Western nations or their proxies. Key figures in
the Third Worldist movement include Michel Aflaq, Salah al-Din al-Bitar, Frantz
Fanon, Ahmed Ben Bella, Gamal Abdel Nasser, Jawaharlal Nehru, Ali Shariati,
Andre Gunder Frank, Samir Amin and Simon Malley. The Bandung Conference, which
was held in 1955 in Indonesia, and the resultant formation of the Non-Aligned
Movement represented a significant venue for Third World politics during the
twentieth century. Third worldism is also closely connected with movements such
as Ba'athism, Pan-Africanism, Pan-Arabism, Maoism, African socialism, Arab
socialism and Communism. The New Left led to an explosion of support for Third-
worldism, especially after the failure of revolutionary movements in the First
World, such as Paris 1968. Among the New Left groups and movements associated
with Third Worldism were "Monthly Review" and the "New Communist Movement".
From the 1970s, National liberation movements such as the Palestine Liberation
Organization, and African National Congress have been "causes célèbres" of
the movement. More recently, Third-worldism has become a powerful force in the
World Social Forum, (particularly since the Mumbai WSF in 2004) and in the
Cairo Anti-War Conference.
