Timocracy The more extreme forms of timocracy, where power derives from wealth
rather than honor, may shift in their form and become a plutocracy where the
wealthy and powerful use their power to entrench their wealth. Etymology. The
word derives from the Greek words "timē / τιμή", meaning "honor" or
"worth", and "-kratia" meaning "rule" (as in government). Timocracy and
property. N.G.L. Hammond supposes that Solon instituted a graduated tax upon
the upper classes, levied in a ratio of 6:3:1, with the lowest class of thetes
paying nothing in taxes but remaining ineligible for elected office. Aristotle
later wrote in his "Nicomachean Ethics" (Book 8, Chapter 10) about three "true
political forms" for a state, each of which could appear in corrupt form,
becoming one of three negative forms. Aristotle describes timocracy in the
sense of rule by property-owners: it comprised one of his true political forms.
Aristotelian timocracy approximated to the constitution of Athens, although
Athens exemplified the corrupted version of this form, described as democracy.
Timocracy and honor. Plato produced the earliest surviving text using the term
in the rule-by-honor sense. In "The Republic", he describes four forms of
unjust state, with timocracy as the second-most preferable of the four and
closest to the ideal society. The city-state of Sparta provided Plato with a
real-world model for this form of government. Modern observers might describe
Sparta as a totalitarian or one-party state, although the details we know of
its society come almost exclusively from Sparta's enemies. The idea of
militarism often attaches to the honor-oriented timocracy. This form of
timocracy is very similar to meritocracy, in the sense that individuals of
outstanding character or faculty are placed in the seat of power. References.
3. Websters New world Dictionary of the American Language... by Fotios
Evangelopoulos
