Traffic light coalition Traffic light coalition () is a term originating in
German politics where it describes a coalition of the Social Democratic Party
(SPD), the Free Democratic Party (FDP), and The Greens. It arises from the fact
that the parties' traditional colours, respectively red, yellow, and green,
resemble the normal colour sequence of a traffic light. It has subsequently
been used to describe similar coalitions between social democrats, liberals,
and greens in other countries. History. The phrase "traffic light coalition" is
a direct translation of the German word "Ampelkoalition". At a state level,
there have been two traffic light coalitions in Germany: in Brandenburg between
1990 and 1994 and in Bremen between 1991 and 1995. Negotiations to form such a
coalition in Berlin in 2001 were not successful. At a federal level, however,
to date no government has been formed on this basis. Historically, there have
been 'red-green' coalitions in the Bundestag between the SPD and the Greens,
and social-liberal coalitions between the SPD and the FDP. However, whilst
there may be common ground in terms of social progressivism between the three
parties, the FDP's economic liberalism and long association at the federal
level with the conservative Christian Democratic Union make such a coalition
problematic at present and the FDP had specifically ruled out this option for
the 2009 election The term became more widely used outside Germany when the
inconclusive 2005 federal election led to its use in the international media.
The term Jamaica coalition was formed in a similar way. Traffic light
coalitions in other countries. Austria. In Austria the term "Ampelkoalition"
has been borrowed from Germany to describe a theoretical coalition of the
Social Democratic Party (SPÃ–), the Liberal Forum (LiF) and The Greens.
However, as at this time the Liberal Forum's party colour was light blue, this
is a reference to the political similarity between this coalition and a German
traffic light coalition rather than to the party's actual symbolic colours. As
the Liberal Forum lost its parliamentary representation in the 1999 Austrian
elections such a coalition remains highly theoretical; nowadays its party
colour "is" yellow, however. United Kingdom. In the United Kingdom the term has
been used to describe a coalition between the Labour Party, the Liberal
Democrats and the Green Party of England and Wales, notably that which
currently runs the City of Lancaster district council. In Scotland, a similar
coalition in the Scottish Parliament involving the Labour and Liberal Democrat
Parties with the Scottish Green Party was mooted following the Scottish
parliamentary election, 2003. In that year Labour and the Liberal Democrats
continued their coalition with a slender majority, and it was again the stated
position of the Scottish Greens to aim for such a coalition in 2007, despite
possible tension between the Unionist Labour and the Liberal Democrats and the
pro independence Scottish Greens. However, Green support collapsed in the 2007
Scottish Parliament election rendering the Greens non-viable as a coalition
partner, although they supported Alex Salmond's election as First Minister. As
with their German counterparts, the colours of Labour, the Liberal Democrats,
and the Greens are respectively red, yellow, and green. In terms of the party's
political positions, a red-yellow-green coalition may be more likely in the
United Kingdom than in Germany, as the Liberal Democrats fit the social-
democratic, or at least social-liberal, mould of their precursor party the
Social Democratic Party and have worked with Labour in the last two Scottish
Executives. However, the first past the post electoral system that applies for
general elections and many local elections in the United Kingdom, coupled with
the Greens only having one MP, means that a traffic light coalition is highly
unlikely at Westminster in the foreseeable future. Although the three parties
continue to govern Lancaster, a similar coalition was suggested by some in
Brighton and Hove after a By-election caused the Conservatives to lose their
majority control. However this was rejected as doomed to fail due the slim
margin over the Tories and concerns over the coalition's stability.
