Transaction cost In economics and related disciplines, a transaction cost is a
cost incurred in making an economic exchange (restated: the cost of
participating in a market). For example, most people, when buying or selling a
stock, must pay a commission to their stockbroker; that commission is a
transaction cost of doing the stock deal. Or consider buying a spatula from a
store; to purchase the spatula, your costs will be not only the price of the
spatula itself, but also the energy and effort it requires to find out which of
the various spatula products you prefer, where to get them and at what price,
the cost of traveling from your house to the store and back, the time waiting
in line, and the effort of the paying itself; the costs above and beyond the
cost of the spatula are the transaction costs. When rationally evaluating a
potential transaction, it is important to consider transaction costs that might
prove significant. History of development. The idea that transactions form the
basis of an economic thinking was introduced by the institutional economist
John R. Commons (1931). He says that, The term "transaction cost" is frequently
thought to have been coined by Ronald Coase, who used it to develop a
theoretical framework for predicting when certain economic tasks would be
performed by firms, and when they would be performed on the market. However,
the term is actually absent from his early work up to the 1970s. While he did
not coin the specific term, Coase indeed discussed "costs of using the price
mechanism" in his 1937 paper "The Nature of the Firm", where he first discusses
the concept of transaction costs, and refers to the "Costs of Market
Transactions" in his seminal work, "The Problem of Social Cost" (1960). The
term "Transaction Costs" itself can instead be traced back to the monetary
economics literature of the 1950s, and does not appear to have been consciously
'coined' by any particular individual. Arguably, transaction cost reasoning
became most widely known through Oliver E. Williamson's "Transaction Cost
Economics". Today, transaction cost economics is used to explain a number of
different behaviours. Often this involves considering as "transactions" not
only the obvious cases of buying and selling, but also day-to-day emotional
interactions, informal gift exchanges, etc. Oliver E. Williamson was awarded
the 2009 Nobel Prize in Economics According to Williamson, the determinants of
transaction costs are frequency, specificity, uncertainty, limited rationality,
and opportunistic behavior. At least two definitions of the phrase "transaction
cost" are commonly used in literature. Transaction costs have been broadly
defined by Steven N. S. Cheung as any costs that are not conceivable in a
"Robinson Crusoe economy"â€”in other words, any costs that arise due to the
existence of institutions. To Cheung, "transaction costs", if the term is not
so popular in economics literatures, should be called "institutional costs".
But many economists seem to restrict the definition to exclude costs internal
to an organization. The latter definition parallels Coase's early analysis of
"costs of the price mechanism" and the origins of the term as a market trading
fee. Starting with the broad definition, many economists then ask what kind of
institutions (firms, markets, franchises, etc.) minimize the transaction costs
of producing and distributing a particular good or service. Often these
relationships are categorized by the kind of contract involved. This approach
sometimes goes under the rubric of New Institutional Economics. Examples. A
supplier may bid in a competitive environment with a customer to build a
widget. However, to make the widget, the supplier will be required to build
specialized machinery which cannot be easily redeployed to make other products.
Once the contract is awarded to the supplier, the relationship between customer
and supplier changes from a competitive environment to a monopoly/monopsony
relationship, known as a bilateral monopoly. This means that the customer has
greater leverage over the supplier such as when price cuts occur. To avoid
these potential costs, "hostages" may be swapped to avoid this event. These
hostages could include partial ownership in the widget factory; revenue sharing
might be another way. Car companies and their suppliers often fit into this
category, with the car companies forcing price cuts on their suppliers. Defense
suppliers and the military appear to have the opposite problem, with cost
overruns occurring quite often. Technologies like enterprise resource planning
(ERP) can provide technical support for these strategies.
