Transparency (market) There are two types of price transparency: 1) I know what
price will be charged to me, and 2) I know what price will be charged to you.
The two types of price transparency have different implications for
differential pricing. This is a special case of the topic at transparency
(humanities). A high degree of market transparency can result in
disintermediation due to the buyer's increased knowledge of supply pricing.
Transparency is important since it is one of the theoretical conditions
required for a free market to be efficient. Price transparency can, however,
lead to higher prices, if it makes sellers reluctant to give steep discounts to
certain buyers, or if it facilitates collusion. While the stock market is
relatively transparent, hedge funds are notoriously secretive. Some financial
professionals, including Wall Street veteran Jeremy Frommer are pioneering the
application of transparency to hedge funds by broadcasting live from trading
desks and posting detailed portfolios online. Transparency in the Forex market.
There are few markets that require the level of privacy, honesty, and trust
between its participants as the FX market. This creates a great obstacles for
traders, investors, and institutions to overcome as there is a lack of
transparency. With little to no transparency traders ability to verify
transactions becomes virtually impossible. Without transparency there is no
trust between the client and the broker. Companies such as Fair Trading
Technology and their T3 Integration Bridge allows traders to trade with
transparency and the ability to verify that each trade makes it to the market.
The company uses the bridge to connect traders to the world's largest ECN,
Dukascopy Bank SA, by using MetaTrader 4 platform.
