Tricameralism Tricameralism is the practice of having three legislative or
parliamentary chambers. It is contrasted to unicameralism and bicameralism,
both of which are far more common. The term was used in South Africa to
describe the Parliament established under the apartheid regime's new South
African Constitution of 1983. Other instances of tricameral legislatures in
history include Sim√≥n Bol√≠var's model state. The word could also describe the
French Estates-General, which had three 'estates'. South African tricameralism.
In 1983, South Africa's apartheid government put forward a constitution
providing for a tricameral legislature. On 2 November, around seventy percent
of the country's white population voted in favour of the changes ‚Äî black
South Africans were not consulted, and under the proposal they continued to be
denied representation since in theory they were citizens of independent or
autonomous bantustans. The creation of the tricameral parliament was
controversial on two fronts. On the one hand, many white conservatives disliked
the idea of non-whites participating in Parliament at all. The dispute was a
factor in the creation of the Conservative Party, a breakaway from the dominant
National Party. On the other hand, many coloureds and Asians rejected the
system as a sham, saying that the chambers reserved for them were powerless.
The tricameral parliament was not particularly strong. The 1983 constitution
significantly weakened the powers of parliament, and abolished the position of
Prime Minister. Most authority was transferred to the State President,
including the ability to appoint the Cabinet. This was seen by many as an
attempt to limit the power of coloureds and Indians¬ ‚Äî not only were the
'non-white' Houses of Parliament less powerful than the 'white' one, but
parliament itself was subordinate to a white President. Bol√≠var's
tricameralism. Bol√≠var intended his model government to have a presidential
system, and so the tricameral parliament was not expected to govern. Bol√≠var
was explicit that the legislature should not have an active role in
administration ‚Äî it merely made law and supervised other branches of
government. Despite Bol√≠var's huge influence in South America, no country
employs his tricameral parliament. Early attempts to implement the model, such
as in Bolivia, were not successful, although the chaos of the period was likely
a factor in this outcome. French tricameralism. Ancien R√©gime. Some historians
view the French States-General as an example of a tricameral legislature. The
States-General evolved gradually over time, and provided advice on various
matters (including legislative issues) to the King. The three Estates were the
simply labeled First (consisting of clergy), Second (consisting of nobility),
and Third (consisting of commoners). (The term "fourth estate", referring to
the press, derives from this system, but was coined long after the revolution
that abolished it.) There are problems with regarding the States-General as a
tricameral legislature, however. Firstly, the States-General never had any
formal powers to legislate, although at times, it played a major role in the
King's legislative activity. Secondly, the division between the three estates
was not always maintained ‚Äî the estates sometime deliberated separately, but
at other times, they deliberated as a single body, undermining the idea of
tricameralism. Consulate. Whether the S√©nat was part of legislature, however,
is open to doubt, because Siey√®s (the main instigator of the Consulate's
Constitution and later president of this Senate) described it as belonging to
an altogether different power beyond the executive, legislative and judiciary:
the "conservative" power. In effect, Napol√©on made the S√©nat into a political
√©lite to back his power as Consul and later as Emperor, whereas the other two
chambers were subdued into submission. In 1807, the Tribunat was definitely
abolished. Republic of China tricameralism. According to the original
Constitution of the Republic of China (which is drafted according to the idea
of Dr. Sun Yat-sen), under the National Assembly, there are five branches of
government, named Yuan(Èô¢), which are: the Executive Yuan, Legislative Yuan,
Judicial Yuan, Examination Yuan, and Control Yuan. The National Assembly
represent the sovereignty and all citizens, the Legislative Yuan is responsible
to do the technical job of legislation and the Control Yuan is the watchdog
which monitors the government. However, the constitution did not mention which
is the parliament of the country. Finally the Judicial Yuan decided that the
National Assembly, Legislative Yuan, and Control Yuan resembled the parliament.
Originally, the Control Yuan was elected, but later become nominated by the
President. After the suspension of the National Assembly, the Legislative Yuan
became the current unicameral parliament. Other examples. Former Yugoslavia.
The Socialist Republic of Croatia had three houses in Parlament (Sabor
Socijalistiƒçke republike Hrvatske, now Hrvatski Sabor): Socio-Political
Council (Dru≈°tveno-politiƒçko vijeƒáe), Council of Municipalities (Vijeƒáe
opƒáina) and Council of United Labor (Vijeƒáe udru≈æenog rada). This was
abolished with new constitution in 1990. Isle of Man. The parliament of the
Isle of Man, Tynwald, is sometimes called tricameral, but this description is
not universally accepted. The two commonly accepted houses of Tynwald are the
House of Keys and the Legislative Council, but according to some, the Tynwald
Court (consisting of the members of both houses meeting together) counts as a
third house. Others disagree, saying that as there are no members of the Court
who are not also members of the other houses, the Court should not be
considered separately (by comparison, in Australia, Switzerland and India
deadlocks between the two Houses can sometimes be resolved by a joint sitting,
but experts would not classify either of those countries as "tricameral").
Church of England. The General Synod of the Church of England is sometimes
described as tricameral. It is divided into a House of Bishops, the House of
Clergy and the House of Laity. As the Church of England is the state church of
England, the Parliament of the United Kingdom has given the General Synod the
power (subject to veto) to make law relating to the Church. However, a Diocesan
Synod is not a tricameral institution. It is a bicameral institution, as it
consists of the House of Laity, who are directly elected by the parishes, and
the House of Clergy. The Bishop is not a member of either House, even though he
is constitutionally a member of Synod. Labor unions. Tricameral meeting
arrangements are a growing trend in labor unions where some members will always
be working on one of three shifts. Under such arrangements, each shift will
have its own meeting, but the action of one meeting will have to be adopted by
the other two.
