Types of socialism The word "socialism" refers to a broad range of theoretical
and historical socio-economic systems, and has also been used by many political
movements throughout history to describe themselves and their goals, generating
numerous types of socialism. Different self-described socialists have used the
term "socialism" to refer to different things, such as an economic system, a
type of society, a philosophical outlook, a collection of moral values and
ideals, or even a certain kind of human character. Some definitions of
socialism are very vague, while others are so specific that they only include a
small minority of the things that have been described as "socialism" in the
past. There have been numerous political movements which called themselves
socialist under some definition of the term; this article attempts to list them
all. Some of these interpretations are mutually exclusive, and all of them have
generated debates over the true meaning of socialism. Early interpretations.
The word "socialism" was coined in the 1830s, and it was first used to refer to
philosophical or moral beliefs rather than any specific political views. For
example, Alexandre Vinet, who claimed to have been the first person to use the
term, defined socialism simply as "the opposite of individualism". Robert Owen
also viewed socialism as a matter of ethics, though he used it with a slightly
more specific meaning, to refer to the view that human society can and should
be improved for the benefit of all. In a similar vein, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
claimed that socialism is "every aspiration towards the amelioration of
society". In the first half of the 19th century, many writers who described
themselves as socialists - and who would be later called "utopian socialists" -
wrote down descriptions of what they believed to be the ideal human society.
Some of them also created small communities that put their ideals into
practice. A constant feature of these ideal societies was social and economic
equality. Because the people who proposed the creation of such societies called
themselves socialists, the word "socialism" came to refer not only to a certain
moral doctrine, but also to a type of egalitarian society based on such a
doctrine. Other early advocates of socialism took a more scientific approach by
favouring social leveling to create a meritocratic society based upon freedom
for individual talent to prosper, such as Count Henri de Saint-Simon, who was
fascinated by the enormous potential of science and technology and believed a
socialist society would eliminate the disorderly aspects of capitalism. He
advocated the creation of a society in which each person was ranked according
to his or her capacities and rewarded according to his or her work. The key
focus of this early socialism was on administrative efficiency and
industrialism, and a belief that science was the key to progress. Simon's ideas
provided a foundation for scientific economic planning and technocratic
administration of society. Other early socialist thinkers, such as Thomas
Hodgkin and Charles Hall, based their ideas on David Ricardo's economic
theories. They reasoned that the equilibrium value of commodities approximated
to prices charged by the producer when those commodities were in elastic
supply, and that these producer prices corresponded to the embodied labor â€”
the cost of the labor (essentially the wages paid) that was required to produce
the commodities. The Ricardian socialists viewed profit, interest and rent as
deductions from this exchange-value. These ideas embodied early conceptions of
free-market socialism. After the advent of Karl Marx's theory of capitalism and
Scientific socialism, socialism came to refer to ownership and administration
of the means of production by the working class, either through the state
apparatus or through independent cooperatives. In Marxist theory, socialism
refers to a specific stage of social and economic development that will
displace capitalism, characterized by coordinated production, public or
cooperative ownership of capital, diminishing class conflict and inequalities
that spawn from such, and the end of wage-labor with a method of compensation
based on the principle of "from each according to his ability, to each
according to his contribution". Differences between various schools. Although
they share a common root (as elaborated upon in the above sections), schools of
socialism are divided on many issues, and sometimes there is a split within a
school. The following is a brief overview of the major issues which have
generated or are generating significant controversy amongst socialists in
general. Theory. Some branches of socialism arose largely as a philosophical
construct (e.g. utopian socialism); others in the heat of a revolution (e.g.
early Marxism, Leninism). A few arose merely as the product of a ruling party
(e.g. Stalinism), other as a product or various worker movements (e.g. Anarcho-
Syndicalism or a party or other group contending for political power in a
democratic society (e.g. social democracy). Some are in favour of a socialist
revolution (e.g. Marxism-Leninism, Trotskyism, Maoism, revolutionary Marxism,
Social Anarchism), whilst others tend to support reform instead (e.g.
Fabianism, social democracy, Individualist Anarchism). Others believe both are
possible (e.g. Syndicalism, various Marxisms). The first utopian socialists
even failed to address the question of how a socialist society would be
achieved. Socialists are also divided on which rights and liberties are
desirable, such as the "bourgeois liberties" (such as those guaranteed by the
U.S. First Amendment or the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union). Some hold that they are to be preserved (or even enhanced) in a
socialist society (e.g. social anarchy, Left-Communism), whilst others believe
them to be undesirable (e.g. Marxism-Leninism Maoism). Marx and Engels even
held different opinions at different times, and some schools are divided on
this issue (e.g. different strains of Trotskyism). All socialists criticize the
current system in some way. Some criticisms center on the ownership of the
means of production (e.g. Marxism), whereas others tend to focus on the nature
of mass and equitable distribution (e.g. most forms of utopian socialism). A
few are opposed to unchecked industrialism as well as capitalism (e.g.
environmental leftism) and believe that under socialism the environment must be
protected. Utopian Socialists, like Robert Owen and Saint-Simon argued, though
not from exactly the same perspective, that the injustice and widespread
poverty of the societies they lived in were a problem of distribution of the
goods created. Marxian Socialists, on the other hand, determined that the root
of the injustice is based not in the function of distribution of goods already
created, but rather in the fact that the ownership of the means of production
is in the hands of the upper class. Also, Marxian Socialists maintain, in
contrast to the Utopian Socialists, that the root of injustice is not in how
goods (commodities) are distributed, but for whose economic benefit are they
produced and sold. Practice. Most forms and derivatives of Marxism and
anarchism advocated total or near-total socialization of the economy. Less
radical schools (e.g. Bernsteinism, reformism, reformist Marxism) proposed a
mixed market economy instead. Mixed economies, in turn, can range anywhere from
those developed by the social democratic governments that have periodically
governed Northern and Western European countries, to the inclusion of small
cooperatives in the planned economy of Yugoslavia under Josip Broz Tito. A
related issue is whether it is better to reform capitalism to create a fairer
society (e.g. most social democrats) or to totally overthrow the capitalist
system (all Marxists). Some schools advocate centralized state control of the
socialized sectors of the economy (e.g. Leninism), whilst others argue for
control of those sectors by workers' councils (e.g. syndicalism, Left and
Council communism, Marxism, Anarcho-communism). This question is usually
referred to by socialists in terms of "ownership of the means of production."
None of the social democratic parties of Europe advocate total state ownership
of the means of production in their contemporary demands and popular press.
Another issue socialists are divided on is what legal and political apparatus
the workers would maintain and further develop the socialization of the means
of production. Some advocate that the power of the workers' councils should
itself constitute the basis of a socialist state (coupled with direct democracy
and the widespread use of referendums), but others hold that socialism entails
the existence of a legislative body administered by people who would be elected
in a representative democracy. Different ideologies support different
governments. For example, in the era of the Soviet Union, western socialists
were bitterly divided as to whether the Soviet Union was basically socialist,
moving toward socialism, or inherently un-socialist and, in fact, inimical to
true socialism. Similarly, today the government of the People's Republic of
China claims to be socialist and refers to its own approach as "Socialism with
Chinese characteristics," but most other socialists consider China to be
essentially capitalist. The Chinese leadership concurs with most of the usual
critiques against a command economy, and many of their actions to manage what
they call a socialist economy have been determined by this opinion. Socialist
planned economy. This form of socialism combines public ownership and
management of the means of production with centralized state planning, and can
refer to a broad range of economic systems from the centralized Soviet-style
command economy to participatory planning via workplace democracy. In a
centrally-planned economy, decisions regarding the quantity of goods and
services to be produced as well as the allocation of output (distribution of
goods and services) are planned in advanced by a planning agency. This type of
economic system was often combined with a single-party political system, and is
thus associated with the Communist states of the 20th century. State-directed
economy. A state-directed economy is a system where either the state or worker
cooperatives own the means of production, but economic activity is directed to
some degree by a government agency or planning ministry through mechanisms such
as Indicative planning or Dirigisme. This differs from a centralized planned
economy (or a command economy) in that micro-economic decision making, such as
quantity to be produced and output requirements, is left to managers and
workers in state enterprises or cooperative enterprises rather than being
mandated by a comprehensive economic plan from a centralized planning board.
However, the state will plan long-term strategic investment and some aspect of
production. It is possible for a state-directed economy to have elements of
both a market and planned economy. For example, production and investment
decisions may be semi-planned by the state, but distribution of output may be
determined by the market mechanism. State-directed socialism can also refer to
technocratic socialism; economic systems that rely on technocratic management
and technocratic planning mechanisms, along with public ownership of the means
of production. A forerunner of this concept was Henri de Saint-Simon, who
understood the state would undergo a transformation in a socialist system and
change its role from one of "political administration of men, to the
administration of things". Elements of state-directed socialist economies
include: dirigisme, technocracy, Economic planning and State socialism. De-
centralized planned economy. A de-centralized planned economy is one where
ownership of enterprises is accomplished through various forms of worker
cooperatives, autogestion and planning of production and distribution is done
from the bottom-up by local worker councils in a democratic manner. This form
of socialist economy is related to the political philosophies of Libertarian
Socialism, Syndicalism and various forms of communal Utopian socialism.
Examples of de-centralized democratic planning include: participatory
economics, industrial democracy, classic Soviet democracy, syndicalism, council
communism and individualist anarchism. Market socialism. Market socialism
refers to various economic systems that involve either public ownership and
management or worker cooperative ownership over the means of production, or a
combination of both, and the market mechanism for allocating economic output,
deciding what to produce and in what quantity. In state-oriented forms of
market socialism where state enterprises attempt to maximize profit, the
profits can fund government programs and services eliminating or greatly
diminishing the need for various forms of taxation that exist in capitalist
systems. Some forms of market socialism are based on neoclassical economic
theory, with the aim of attaining pareto efficiency by setting price to equal
marginal cost in public enterprises. This form of socialism was promoted by
Oskar Lange, Abba Lerner and Fredrick Taylor. Other forms of market socialism
are based on classical economics, such as those advocated by Thomas Hodgskin,
who viewed interest accumulation, rent and profit as deductions from exchange-
value, so that eliminating the capitalist element from the economy would lead
to a free-market and socialism. The term market socialism has also been applied
to planned economic systems that try to organize themselves partially along
market-lines while retaining centralized state ownership of capital. Other
types of market socialist systems, such as Mutualism, are related to the
political philosophy of Libertarian socialism. Examples of market socialism
include: economic democracy, the Lange Model, the New Economic Mechanism,
Ricardian socialism, Liberal socialism and Mutualism. Socialist market economy.
A socialist market economy refers to the economic systems adopted by the
People's Republic of China and Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Although there is
dispute as to whether or not these models actually constitute state capitalism,
the decisive means of production remain under state-ownership. State
enterprises are organized into corporations (corporatization) and operate like
private capitalist enterprises. A substantial private sector exists alongside
the state sector of the economy, but plays a secondary role usually relegated
to the service sector and production of consumer goods. Examples of socialist
market economies include: Socialist market economy with Chinese Characteristics
and Socialist-oriented market economy. Socialist ideologies. Marxist communism.
Marxist communism refers to classless, stateless social organization based upon
common ownership of the means of production and to a variety of movements
acting in the name of this goal which are influenced by the thought of Karl
Marx. In general, the classless forms of social organisation are not
capitalised, while movements associated with official Communist parties and
Communist states usually are. A communist economy, in the classic Marxist
definition (Pure communism), refers to a system that has achieved a
superabundance of goods and services due to an increase in technological
capability and advances in the productive forces and therefore has transcended
socialism. (See post-scarcity.) This is a hypothetical stage of social and
economic development with few speculative details known about it. The actual
goal of communism has never been attained in practice. The real idea behind it
is to abolish all leadership, and govern with a commune. That is, the people
themselves make all decisions, and everyone contributing to the wellbeing of
the state. In practice, most governments that have claimed to be communist have
been totalitarian dictatorships. The modern political marxist communist
movement was created when the social democratic parties of Europe split between
their rightist and leftist tendencies during World War I. The leftists, led
internationally by Vladimir Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht, to
distinguish their brand of socialism from the "reformist" social democrats,
were called "Communists". However, after Luxemburg's and Liebknecht's murders,
the term Communist became generally associated solely with the parties and
organisations following Lenin, along with their various derivations, such as
Stalinism or Maoism. There is a considerable variety of views among self-
identified Communists. However, Marxism and Leninism, schools of communism
associated with Karl Marx and of Vladimir Lenin respectively, have the
distinction of having been a major force in world politics since the early 20th
century. Class struggle plays a central role in Marxism. This theory views the
formation of communism as the culmination of the class struggle between the
capitalist class, the owners of most of the capital, and the working class.
Marx held that society could not be transformed from the capitalist mode of
production to the communist mode of production all at once, but required a
transitional state which Marx described as the revolutionary dictatorship of
the proletariat. Some forms of the communist society that Marx envisioned, as
emerging from capitalism, have been claimed to be achieved for limited periods,
during certain historical moments, and under certain circumstances. For
example, the Paris Commune in fact let Marx reinforce and implement his
theories, by adapting them to a real experience he could draw from. Another
similar case, though disputed by anarcho-syndicalism or even anarchism, was the
Spanish Revolution of 1936 (often missed or unmentioned by official
historiography), during which much of Spain's economy, in most of Republican
areas, some of which enjoyed a practical absence of state, was put under
workers' direct collective control. In addition to this, the term "communism"
(as well as "socialism"), is often used to refer to those political and
economical systems and states dominated by a political, bureaucratic class,
typically attached to one single Communist party, that follow Marxist-Leninist
doctrines and often claim to represent the dictatorship of the proletariat in a
non-democratic fashion, described by critics as in a totalitarian and
bureaucratic. These systems are also often called Stalinism, state capitalism,
state communism or state socialism. With the Soviet Union's creation, after the
end of Russian Civil War, that followed to initial success of Red October
Revolution in Russia, other socialist parties in other countries, and the
Bolshevik party itself became Communist parties, owing allegiance of varying
degrees to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (see Communist
International). After World War II, regimes calling themselves Communist took
power in Eastern Europe. In 1949, the Communists in China, supported by USSR
and led by Mao Zedong, came to power and established the People's Republic of
China. Among the other countries in the Third World that adopted a bureaucratic
communist state as form of government at some point were Cuba, North Korea,
Vietnam, Laos, Angola, and Mozambique. By the early 1980s, almost one third of
the world's population lived under Communist states. Communism carries a strong
social stigma in the United States, due to a history of anti-communism in the
United States. Since the early 1970s, the term "Eurocommunism" was used to
refer to the policies of Communist parties in western Europe, which sought to
break with the tradition of uncritical and unconditional support of the Soviet
Union. Such parties were politically active and electorally significant in
France and Italy. With the collapse of the statalized single-party systems, and
Marxist-Leninist governments, in eastern Europe, from the late 1980s, and the
breakup of the Soviet Union on December 8, 1991, Marxist-Leninist State
communism's influence has decreased dramatically in Europe, but around a
quarter of the world's population still lives under such a kind of 'Communist
states'. Marxism-Leninism. Vladimir Lenin never used the term "Leninism", nor
did he refer to his views as "Marxism-Leninism". However, his ideas diverged
from classical Marxist theory on several important points (see the articles on
Marxism and Leninism for more information). Bolshevik communists saw these
differences as advancements of Marxism made by Lenin. After Lenin's death, his
ideology and contributions to Marxist theory were termed "Marxism-Leninism," or
sometimes only "Leninism." Marxism-Leninism soon became the official name for
the ideology of the Comintern and of Communist parties around the world.
Stalinism. Stalinism was the theory and practice of communism practiced by
Joseph Stalin, leader of the Soviet Union from 1928â€“1953. Stalinism, strictly
speaking, refers to a style of government or political structure, rather than
an ideology "per se"; during the period of Stalin's rule in the Soviet Union,
Marxism-Leninism was proclaimed the official ideology of the state. The term
"Stalinism" is sometimes used to denote the brand of Communist theory that
dominated the Soviet Union and the countries within the Soviet sphere of
influence during and after the leadership of Stalin. Stalin was not a
theoretician, but a communicator who wrote several books in language easily
understood, and, in contrast to Marx and Lenin, made few new theoretical
contributions. The main contributions of Stalin to Communist theory were
"Socialism in One Country" and the theory of Aggravation of class struggle
under socialism, a theoretical base supporting the repression of political
opponents as necessary. The groundwork for the Soviet policy concerning
nationalities, was laid in Stalin's 1913 work "Marxism and the National
Question". The regime claims to apply those ideas in ways fitting the changing
needs of society, as with the transition from "socialism at a snail's pace" in
the mid-1920s to the rapid industrialisation of the Soviet Five-Year Plans.
Whether Stalin's practices actually followed the principles of Marx and Lenin
is still a subject of debate amongst historians and political scientists.
Stalin, in contrast to many contemporary revolutionaries, did not write a
significant body of theoretical work. Many people who profess Marxism or
Leninism view Stalinism as a perversion of their ideas. Trotskyists, in
particular, are virulently anti-Stalinist, considering Stalinism a counter-
revolutionary policy using vague Marxist-sounding rhetoric to achieve power.
Trotskyists in particular believe that Stalinism contradicted authentic Marxism
and Leninism, and they initially used the term "Bolshevik-Leninism" to define
their beliefs. From 1917 to 1924, Vladimir Lenin, Leon Trotsky and Stalin often
appeared united, but their ideological differences never disappeared. In his
dispute with Trotsky, Stalin de-emphasised the role of workers in advanced
capitalist countries. For example, he postulated that the United States working
class was a bourgeoisified labour aristocracy). Stalin also polemicised against
Trotsky on the role of peasants, as in China, whereas Trotsky was in favor of
urban insurrection and over peasant-based guerrilla warfare. Stalinism has been
described as being synonymous with totalitarianism, or a tyrannical regime. The
term has been used to describe regimes that fight political dissent through
violence, imprisonment, and killings. Maoism. A key concept that distinguishes
Maoism from other left-wing ideologies is the belief that the class struggle
continues throughout the entire socialist period, as a result of the
fundamental antagonistic contradiction between capitalism and communism. Even
when the proletariat has seized state power through a socialist revolution, the
potential remains for a bourgeoisie to restore capitalism. Indeed, Mao famously
stated that "the bourgeoisie a socialist country is right inside the Communist
Party itself", implying that corrupt Party officials would subvert socialism if
not prevented. Unlike the earlier forms of Marxism-Leninism in which the urban
proletariat was seen as the main source of revolution, and the countryside was
largely ignored, Mao focused on the peasantry as a revolutionary force which,
he said, could be mobilized by a Communist Party with their knowledge and
leadership. Unlike most other political ideologies, including other socialist
and Marxist ones, Maoism contains an integral military doctrine and explicitly
connects its political ideology with military strategy. In Maoist thought,
"political power comes from the barrel of the gun" (one of Mao's quotes), and
the peasantry can be mobilized to undertake a "people's war" of armed struggle
involving guerrilla warfare. Since the death of Mao and the reforms of Deng,
most of the parties explicitly defining themselves as "Maoist" have
disappeared, but various communist groups around the world, particularly armed
ones like the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) and the New People's Army of
the Philippines, continue to advance Maoist ideas and get press attention for
them. These groups generally have the idea that Mao's ideas were betrayed
before they could be fully or properly implemented. Trotskyism. Trotskyism is
the theory of Marxism as advocated by Leon Trotsky. Trotsky considered himself
a Bolshevik-Leninist, arguing for the establishment of a vanguard party. He
considered himself an advocate of orthodox Marxism. His politics differed
greatly from those of Stalin or Mao, most importantly in declaring the need for
an international "permanent revolution" and arguing that democracy is essential
to both socialism and communism. Numerous groups around the world continue to
describe themselves as Trotskyist and see themselves as standing in this
tradition, although they have diverse interpretations of the conclusions to be
drawn from this. Council and Left communism. Council Communism is a current of
Libertarian Marxism that emerged out of the November Revolution in the 1920s,
characterized by its opposition to State Capitalism/State Socialism as well as
its advocacy of Workers' Councils as the basis for Workers' Democracy.
Originally affiliated with the Communist Workers Party of Germany (KAPD),
Council Communism continues today as a theoretical and activist position within
the greater Libertarian Socialism movement. Chief among the tenets of Council
Communism is its opposition to the party vanguardism and democratic centralism
of Leninist Ideologies and its contention that democratic workers' councils
arising in the factories and municipalities are the natural form of working
class organization and authority. Council Communism also stands in contrast to
Social Democracy through its formal rejection of both the reformism and
Parliamentarism The historical origins of left communism can be traced to the
period before the First World War, but it only came into focus after 1918 . All
left communists were supportive of the October Revolution in Russia but
retained a critical view of its development. Some, however, would in later
years come to reject the idea that the revolution had a proletarian or
socialist nature, asserting that it had simply carried out the tasks of the
bourgeois revolution by creating a state capitalist system. Autonomism.
Autonomism refers to a set of left-wing political and social movements and
theories close to the socialist movement. As an identifiable theoretical system
it first emerged in Italy in the 1960s from workerist ("operaismo") communism.
Later, post-Marxist and anarchist tendencies became significant after influence
from the Situationists, the failure of Italian far-left movements in the 1970s,
and the emergence of a number of important theorists including Antonio Negri,
who had contributed to the 1969 founding of "Potere Operaio", Mario Tronti,
Paolo Virno, etc. Unlike other forms of Marxism, autonomist Marxism emphasises
the ability of the working class to force changes to the organization of the
capitalist system independent of the state, trade unions or political parties.
Autonomists are less concerned with party political organization than other
Marxists, focusing instead on self-organized action outside of traditional
organizational structures. Autonomist Marxism is thus a "bottom up" theory: it
draws attention to activities that autonomists see as everyday working class
resistance to capitalism, for example absenteeism, slow working, and
socialization in the workplace. Through translations made available by Danilo
Montaldi and others, the Italian autonomists drew upon previous activist
research in the United States by the Johnson-Forest Tendency and in France by
the group Socialisme ou Barbarie. It influenced the German and Dutch Autonomen,
the worldwide Social Centre movement, and today is influential in Italy,
France, and to a lesser extent the English-speaking countries. Those who
describe themselves as autonomists now vary from Marxists to post-
structuralists and anarchists. The Autonomist Marxist and "Autonomen" movements
provided inspiration to some on the revolutionary left in English speaking
countries, particularly among anarchists, many of whom have adopted autonomist
tactics. Some English-speaking anarchists even describe themselves as
"Autonomists". The Italian "operaismo" movement also influenced Marxist
academics such as Harry Cleaver, John Holloway, Steve Wright, and Nick Dyer-
Witheford. Anarchism. Anarchism is a political philosophy which considers the
state undesirable, unnecessary and harmful, and instead promotes a stateless
society, or anarchy. It seeks to diminish or even abolish authority in the
conduct of human relations. Anarchists may widely disagree on what additional
criteria are required in anarchism. "The Oxford Companion to Philosophy" says,
"there is no single defining position that all anarchists hold, and those
considered anarchists at best share a certain family resemblance." Anarchism as
a social movement has regularly endured fluctuations in popularity. Its
classical period, which scholars demarcate as from 1860 to 1939, is associated
with the working-class movements of the 19th century and the Spanish Civil War-
era struggles against fascism. In 1864 the International Workingmen's
Association (sometimes called the "First International") united diverse
revolutionary currents including French followers of Proudhon, The anti-
authoritarian sections of the First International were the precursors of the
anarcho-syndicalists, seeking to "replace the privilege and authority of the
State" with the "free and spontaneous organization of labor." In 1907, the
International Anarchist Congress of Amsterdam gathered delegates from 14
different countries, among which important figures of the anarchist movement,
including Errico Malatesta, Pierre Monatte, Luigi Fabbri, BenoÃ®t Broutchoux,
Emma Goldman, Rudolf Rocker, and Christiaan Cornelissen. Various themes were
treated during the Congress, in particular concerning the organisation of the
anarchist movement, popular education issues, the general strike or
antimilitarism. A central debate concerned the relation between anarchism and
syndicalism (or trade unionism). The Spanish Workers Federation in 1881 was the
first major anarcho-syndicalist movement; anarchist trade union federations
were of special importance in Spain. The most successful was the ConfederaciÃ³n
Nacional del Trabajo (National Confederation of Labour: CNT), founded in 1910.
Before the 1940s, the CNT was the major force in Spanish working class
politics, attracting 1.58 million members at one point and playing a major role
in the Spanish Civil War. The CNT was affiliated with the International Workers
Association, a federation of anarcho-syndicalist trade unions founded in 1922,
with delegates representing two million workers from 15 countries in Europe and
Latin America. Some anarchists, such as Johann Most, advocated publicizing
violent acts of retaliation against counter-revolutionaries because "we preach
not only action in and for itself, but also action as propaganda." Numerous
heads of state were assassinated between 1881 and 1914 by members of the
anarchist movement. For example, U.S. President McKinley's assassin Leon
Czolgosz claimed to have been influenced by anarchist and feminist Emma
Goldman. Anarchists participated alongside the Bolsheviks in both February and
October revolutions, and were initially enthusiastic about the Bolshevik coup.
However, the Bolsheviks soon turned against the anarchists and other left-wing
opposition, a conflict that culminated in the 1921 Kronstadt rebellion which
the new government repressed. Anarchists in central Russia were either
imprisoned, driven underground or joined the victorious Bolsheviks; the
anarchists from Petrograd and Moscow fled to the Ukraine. There, in the Free
Territory, they fought in the civil war against the Whites (a Western-backed
grouping of monarchists and other opponents of the October Revolution) and then
the Bolsheviks as part of the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine led
by Nestor Makhno, who established an anarchist society in the region for a
number of months. In the 1920s and 1930s, the rise of fascism in Europe
transformed anarchism's conflict with the state. In Spain, the CNT initially
refused to join a popular front electoral alliance, and abstention by CNT
supporters led to a right wing election victory. But in 1936, the CNT changed
its policy and anarchist votes helped bring the popular front back to power.
Months later, the former ruling class responded with an attempted coup causing
the Spanish Civil War (1936â€“1939). In response to the army rebellion, an
anarchist-inspired movement of peasants and workers, supported by armed
militias, took control of Barcelona and of large areas of rural Spain where
they collectivised the land. But even before the fascist victory in 1939, the
anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the Stalinists, who
controlled the distribution of military aid to the Republican cause from the
Soviet Union. Stalinist-led troops suppressed the collectives and persecuted
both dissident Marxists and anarchists. A surge of popular interest in
anarchism occurred during the 1960s and 1970s. In 1968 in Carrara, Italy the
International of Anarchist Federations was founded during an international
Anarchist conference in Carrara in 1968 by the three existing European
federations of France, the Italian and the Iberian Anarchist Federation as well
as the Bulgarian federation in French exile. In the United Kingdom this was
associated with the punk rock movement, as exemplified by bands such as Crass
and the Sex Pistols. The housing and employment crisis in most of Western
Europe led to the formation of communes and squatter movements like that of
Barcelona, Spain. In Denmark, squatters occupied a disused military base and
declared the Freetown Christiania, an autonomous haven in central Copenhagen.
Since the revival of anarchism in the mid 20th century, a number of new
movements and schools of thought emerged. Around the turn of the 21st century,
anarchism grew in popularity and influence as part of the anti-war, anti-
capitalist, and anti-globalisation movements. Anarchists became known for their
involvement in protests against the meetings of the World Trade Organization
(WTO), Group of Eight, and the World Economic Forum. International anarchist
federations in existence include the International of Anarchist Federations,
the International Workers' Association, and International Libertarian
Solidarity. Mutualism. Mutualism began in 18th century English and French labor
movements, then took an anarchist form associated with Pierre-Joseph Proudhon
in France and others in the US. This influenced individualist anarchists in the
United States such as Benjamin Tucker and William B. Greene. Josiah Warren
proposed similar ideas in 1833 after participating in a failed Owenite
experiment. In the 1840s and 1850s, Charles A. Dana, and William B. Greene
introduced Proudhon's works to the US. Greene adapted Proudhon's mutualism to
American conditions and introduced it to Benjamin R. Tucker. Mutualist
anarchism is concerned with reciprocity, free association, voluntary contract,
federation, and credit and currency reform. Many mutualists believe a market
without government intervention drives prices down to labor-costs, eliminating
profit, rent, and interest according to the labor theory of value. Firms would
be forced to compete over workers just as workers compete over firms, raising
wages. Some see mutualism as between individualist and collectivist
anarchism;Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Political Thought, Blackwell Publishing
1991 ISBN 0-631-17944-5, p.11 in "What Is Property?", Proudhon develops a
concept of "liberty", equivalent to "anarchy", which is the dialectical
"synthesis of communism and property." Greene, influenced by Pierre Leroux,
sought mutualism in the synthesis of three philosophiesÂ â€“ communism,
capitalism and socialism. Later individualist anarchists used the term
mutualism but retained little emphasis on synthesis, while social anarchists
such as the authors of An Anarchist FAQ claim mutualism as a subset of their
philosophical tradition. Collectivist anarchism. Collectivist anarchism is a
revolutionary form of anarchism most commonly associated with Mikhail Bakunin,
Johann Most and the anti-authoritarian section of the First International
(1864â€“1876). Unlike mutualists, collectivist anarchists oppose all private
ownership of the means of production, instead advocating that ownership be
collectivized. This was to be initiated by small cohesive elite group through
acts of violence, or "propaganda by the deed," which would inspire the workers
to revolt and forcibly collectivize the means of production. Workers would be
compensated for their work on the basis of the amount of time they contributed
to production, rather than goods being distributed "according to need" as in
anarcho-communism. Although Collectivist anarchism shares many similarities
with Anarchist communism there are also many key differences between them. For
example collectivist anarchists believe that the economy and most or all
property should be collectively owned by society while anarchist communists by
contrast believe that the concept of ownership should be rejected by society
and replaced with the concept of usage. Also Collectivist anarchists often
favor using a form of currency to compensate workers according to the amount of
time spent contributing to society and production while Anarcho-communists
believe that currency and wages should be abolished all together and goods
should be distributed "to each according to his or her need". Anarchist
communism. Anarchist communists propose that a society composed of a number of
self-governing communes with collective use of the means of production, with
direct democracy as the political organizational form, and related to other
communes through federation would be the freest form of social organisation.
However, some anarchist communists oppose the majoritarian nature of direct
democracy, feeling that it can impede individual liberty and favor consensus
democracy. Joseph DÃ©jacque was an early anarchist communist and the first
person to describe himself as "libertarian". Other important anarchist
communists include Peter Kropotkin, Emma Goldman, Alexander Berkman and Errico
Malatesta. In anarchist communism, individuals would not receive direct
compensation for labour (through sharing of profits or payment), but would
instead have free access to the resources and surplus of the commune.
Kropotkin, on the basis of his biological research and experimentation,
believed that humans and human society are more inclined towards efforts for
mutual benefit than toward competition and strife. Kropotkin believed that
private property was one of the causes of oppression and exploitation and
called for its abolition, but he only opposed ownership, not possession. Some
anarcho-syndicalists saw anarchist communism as their objective; for example,
the Spanish CNT adopted Isaac Puente's 1932 "El comunismo libertario" as its
manifesto for a post-revolutionary society. Anarcho-communism does not always
have a communitarian philosophy. Some forms of anarchist communism are egoist
and strongly influenced by radical individualism believing that anarcho-
communism does not require a communitarian nature at all. Forms of libertarian
communism such as Situationism are strongly Egoist in nature. Anarchist
communist Emma Goldman was influenced by both Stirner and Kropotkin and blended
their philosophies together in her own, as shown in books of hers such as
"Anarchism And Other Essays". Anarcho-syndicalism. Anarcho-syndicalism is a
branch of anarchism that focuses on the labor movement. Anarcho-syndicalists
view labor unions as a potential force for revolutionary social change,
replacing capitalism and the state with a new society democratically self-
managed by workers. . Workers' solidarity means that anarcho-syndicalists
believe all workersâ€”no matter their race, gender, or ethnic groupâ€”are in a
similar situation in regard to their (class consciousness). Furthermore, it
means that, within capitalism, any gains or losses made by some workers from or
to bosses will eventually affect all workers. Therefore, to themselves, all
workers must support one another in their class conflict. Anarcho-syndicalists
believe that only direct actionâ€”that is, action concentrated on directly
attaining a goal, as opposed to indirect action, such as electing a
representative to a government positionâ€”will allow workers to liberate
themselves. Moreover, anarcho-syndicalists believe that workers' organizations
(the organizations that struggle against the wage system, which, in anarcho-
syndicalist theory, will eventually form the basis of a new society) should be
self-managing. They should not have bosses or "business agents"; rather, the
workers should be able to make all the decisions that affect them themselves.
Rudolf Rocker was one of the most popular voices in the anarcho-syndicalist
movement. He outlined a view of the origins of the movement, what it sought,
and why it was important to the future of labor in his 1938 pamphlet "Anarcho-
Syndicalism". The International Workers Association is an international
anarcho-syndicalist federation of various labor unions from different
countries. The Spanish ConfederaciÃ³n Nacional del Trabajo played and still
plays a major role in the Spanish labor movement. It was also an important
force in the Spanish Civil War. Social democracy. Social democracy can be
divided into classic and modern strands. Classic social democracy was a
political philosophy that attempted to achieve socialism through gradual,
parliamentary means and by reforming capitalism from within. The term "social
democracy" can refer to the particular kind of society that social democrats
advocate. The Socialist International (SI) - the worldwide organization of
social democratic and democratic socialist parties - defines social democracy
as an ideal form of representative democracy, that may solve the problems found
in a liberal democracy. The SI emphasizes the following principles [http://
www.socialistinternational.org/4Principles/dofpeng2.html]: Firstly, "freedom"
not only individual liberties, but also freedom from discrimination and freedom
from dependence on either the owners of the means of production or the holders
of abusive political power. Secondly, "equality and social justice"not only
before the law but also economic and socio-cultural equality as well, and equal
opportunities for all including those with physical, mental, or social
disabilities. Finally, "solidarity"unity and a sense of compassion for the
victims of injustice and inequality. Modern social democracy has abandoned
socialism as its goal by rejecting state ownership or direct worker ownership
of the means of production and a reorganization of the economy, and instead
advocates a welfare state, regulated capitalism and some public ownership of
supporting industries. While it is still considered a socialist political
movement, modern social democracy advocates capitalist economic systems such as
the social market economy, Third-way mixed economies and relies on Keynesian
economics. The prime example of social democracy is Sweden, which prospered
considerably in the 1990s and 2000s. Sweden has produced a robust economy from
sole proprietorships up through to multinationals, while maintaining one of the
highest life expectancies in the world, low unemployment and low inflation, all
while registering sizable economic growth. Many see this as validation of the
superiority of social democracy. However, others point out that - when compared
to other developed countries - Sweden's economic growth fell behind in that
period. Also, Sweden experiences welfare dependency of around 20% of the
working age population according to the Swedish Trade Union Confederation.
Likewise, crime has been steadily rising since the 1960s [http://www.bra.se/
extra/pod/?action=pod_show&id=21&module_instance=11]. In any case, despite
these issues, Sweden continues to be viewed as a model for social-democratic
governance due to its strong economy and general social stability. Democratic
socialism. Modern democratic socialism is a broad political movement that seeks
to propagate the ideals of socialism within the context of a democratic system.
Democratic socialism is closely related to social democracy, and in some
accounts are identical, while other accounts stress differences. Many
democratic socialists support social democracy as a road to reform of the
current system, while others support more revolutionary change in society to
establish socialist goals. Generally, social democracy is considered to be more
centrist and broadly supportive of current capitalist systems (for example, the
mixed economy) and the welfare state, while many democratic socialists support
a more fully socialist system, either through evolutionary or revolutionary
means. Democratic socialists and social democrats both advocate the concept of
the welfare state, but whereas most social democrats view the welfare state as
the end itself, many democratic socialists view it as a means to an end.
Democratic socialists are also committed to the ideas of the redistribution of
wealth and power, as well as social ownership of major industries, concepts
widely abandoned by social democrats. There are no countries in the world that
would qualify as a "democratic socialist" state, although some states describe
themselves as such, for instance Venezuela, whose leader Hugo Chavez has
claimed that democratic socialism is integral to the Bolivarian form of
socialism that he is trying to promote. Liberal socialism. Liberal socialism is
a type of socialism that includes liberal principles within it. It supports a
mixed economy that includes both public and private property. Liberal socialism
opposes laissez-faire economic liberalism and state socialism. It considers
both liberty and equality as compatible with each other and mutually needed to
achieve greater economic equality that is necessary to achieve greater economic
liberty. The principles of liberal socialism have been based upon or developed
by: John Stuart Mill, Eduard Bernstein, G. D. H. Cole, John Dewey, Carlo
Rosselli, Norberto Bobbio and Chantal Mouffe. Other important liberal socialist
figures include Guido Calogero, Piero Gobetti, Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse, and
R. H. Tawney. Liberal socialism has been particularly prominent in British and
Italian politics. Liberal socialist Carlo Rosselli founded the liberal
socialist-led anti-fascist resistance movement "Giustizia e LibertÃ " that
later became an active combatant against the Fascist regime in Italy during
World War II, and included Ferruccio Parri - who later became Prime Minister of
Italy, and Sandro Pertini - who later became President of Italy who were among
"Giustizia e LibertÃ 's" leaders. Ethical socialism. Ethical socialism is a
variant of liberal socialism developed by British socialists. It became an
important ideology within the Labour Party of the United Kingdom. Ethical
socialism was founded in the 1920s by R. H. Tawney, a British Christian
socialist, and its ideals were connected to Christian socialist, Fabian, and
guild socialist ideals. Ethical socialism has been publicly supported by
British Prime Ministers Ramsay MacDonald, Clement Attlee, and Tony Blair.
Religious socialism. Religious communism is a form of communism centered on
religious principles. The term usually refers to a number of utopian religious
societies practicing the voluntary dissolution of private property, so that
society's benefits are distributed according to a person's needs, and every
person performs labor according to their abilities. The term "religious
communism" has also been used to describe the ideas of religious individuals
and groups who advocate the application of communist policies on a wider scale,
often joining secular communists in their struggle to abolish capitalism.
Christian socialism. There are individuals and groups, past and present, that
are clearly both Christian and socialist, such as Frederick Denison Maurice,
author of "The Kingdom of Christ" (1838),and the Christian Socialist Movement
(UK) (CSM), affiliated with the British Labour Party. Distributism, is a third-
way economic philosophy formulated by such Catholic thinkers as G. K.
Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc to apply the principles of social justice
articulated by the Roman Catholic Church, especially in Pope Leo XIII's
encyclical Rerum Novarum. Various Catholic clerical parties have at times
referred to themselves as "Christian Social." Two examples are the Christian
Social Party of Karl Lueger in Austria before and after World War I, and the
contemporary Christian Social Union in Bavaria. Yet these parties have never
espoused socialist policies and have always stood at the conservative side of
Christian Democracy. Hugo Chavez of Venezuela is an advocate of a form of
Christian socialism as he claims that Jesus Christ was a socialist. Christian
anarchism. Christian anarchism is a movement in political theology that
combines anarchism and Christianity. The foundation of Christian anarchism is a
rejection of violence, with Leo Tolstoy's "The Kingdom of God Is Within You"
regarded as a key text. Tolstoy sought to separate Russian Orthodox
Christianity â€” which was merged with the state â€” from what he believed was
the true message of Jesus as contained in the Gospels, specifically in the
Sermon on the Mount. Tolstoy takes the viewpoint that all governments who wage
war, and churches who in turn support those governments, are an affront to the
Christian principles of nonviolence and nonresistance. Although Tolstoy never
actually used the term "Christian anarchism" in "The Kingdom of God Is Within
You", reviews of this book following its publication in 1894 appear to have
coined the term. Christian anarchist groups have included the Doukhobors,
Catholic Worker Movement and the Brotherhood Church. Islamic socialism. Islamic
socialism is the political ideology of Libya's Muammar al-Gaddafi, former Iraqi
president Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr, Syrian President Hafez Al-Assad and of the
Pakistani leader of Pakistan Peoples Party, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. "The Green
Book" (written by Muammar al-Gaddafi) consists of three parts - "The Solution
of the Problem of Democracy: 'The Authority of the People'", "The Solution of
the Economic Problem: 'Socialism'", and "The Social Basis of the Third
Universal Theory". The book is controversial because it completely rejects
modern conceptions of liberal democracy and encourages the institution of a
form of direct democracy based on popular committees. Critics charge that
Qaddafi uses these committees as tools of autocratic political repression in
practice. Scholars have highlighted the similarities between the Islamic
economic system and socialist theory. For example, both are against unearned
income. Islam does allow private ownership of natural resources and large
industries, which are owned collectively, or at least encouraged to be so.
Regional socialism. Arab socialism. The Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party rules Syria
(and ruled Iraq under Saddam Hussein), based on a tradition of secular, non-
Marxist socialism. Ba'thist beliefs combine Arab Socialism, nationalism, and
Pan-Arabism. The mostly secular ideology often contrasts with that of other
Arab governments in the Middle East, which sometimes lean towards Islamism and
theocracy. The Ba'athists have persecuted socialists in their own countries. In
Iraq, the American Central Intelligence Agency assisted Iraq with a list of
communists to eliminate, effectively wiping them out. Socialist Lynn Walsh
argues that the Iraqi Ba'athists promoted capitalists from within the party and
outside the country. Irish republican socialism. Socialism has traditionally
been part of the Irish republican movement since the early 20th century, when
James Connolly, an Irish Marxist theorist, took part in the Easter Rising of
1916. Today, most Irish nationalist and Republican organizations located in
Northern Ireland advocate some form of socialism, both Marxist and non-Marxist.
The Social Democratic and Labour Party, which until recently was the largest
nationalist party in Northern Ireland, promotes social democracy, while
militant Republican parties such as Sinn FÃ©in, Republican Sinn FÃ©in, and the
32 County Sovereignty Movement all promote their own varieties of democratic
socialism intended to re-distribute wealth on an all-island basis once a united
Ireland has been achieved. The Irish Republican Socialist Movement,
encompassing the Irish Republican Socialist Party and Irish National Liberation
Army, has an ideology which combines Marxist-Leninism with traditional militant
Republicanism and is said to be the most direct fulfillment of Connolly's
legacy. Eco-socialism. Merging aspects of Marxism, socialism, environmentalism,
anarchism and ecology, Eco-socialists generally believe that the capitalist
system is the cause of social exclusion, inequality and environmental
degradation. Eco-socialists criticise many within the Green movement for not
going far enough in their critique of the current world system and for not
being overtly anti-capitalist. At the same time, Eco-socialists would blame the
traditional Left for overlooking or not properly addressing ecological
problems. Eco-socialists are anti-globalisation. Joel Kovel sees globalisation
as a force driven by capitalism - in turn, the rapid economic growth encouraged
by globalisation causes acute ecological crises. Eco-socialism goes beyond a
criticism of the actions of large corporations and targets the inherent
properties of capitalism. Such an analysis follows Marx's theories about the
contradiction between use values and exchange values. As Joel Kovel explains,
within a market economy, goods are not produced to meet needs but are produced
to be exchanged for money that we then use to acquire other goods. As we have
to keep selling to keep buying, we must persuade others to buy our goods just
to ensure our survival, which leads to the production of goods with no previous
use that can be sold to sustain our ability to buy other goods. Eco-socialists
like Kovel stress that this contradiction has reached a destructive extent,
where certain essential activities - such as caring for relatives full-time and
basic subsistence - are unrewarded, while unnecessary economic activities earn
certain individuals huge fortunes. Agrarian socialism is another variant of
eco-socialism. Green anarchism. Green anarchism, or ecoanarchism, is a school
of thought within anarchism which puts a particular emphasis on environmental
issues. An important early influence was the thought of the American
individualist anarchist Henry David Thoreau and his book "Walden". In the late
19th century there emerged an anarchist naturist current within individualist
anarchist circles in France, Spain and Portugal. Some contemporary green
anarchists can be described as anarcho-primitivists (or anti-civilization
anarchists), though not all green anarchists are primitivists. Likewise, there
is a strong critique of modern technology among green anarchists, though not
all reject it entirely. Important contemporary currents are anarcho-primitivism
and social ecology. Nationalist and ethnocentric socialism. Ba'athism. The Arab
Socialist Ba'ath Party (also known as the Ba'ath Party; ) is a secularist Pan-
Arabist political party that synthesizes Arab nationalism and Arab socialism.
It opposes Western imperialism and calls for the ethnic "awakening" or
"resurrection" of the Arab people into a single united state. "Ba'ath", also
spelled as "Ba'th" or "Baath", means resurrection or renaissance. The party's
motto, "Unity, Liberty, Socialism" ("wahda, hurriya, ishtirakiya"), was
inspired by the French Jacobin political doctrine linking national unity and
social equity. In the slogan, "unity" refers to Arab unity, "liberty"
emphasizes being free from foreign control and interference, and "socialism"
refers to Arab socialism, not European-style Marxism or communism. The party
was founded in Damascus, Syria in 1940 by the Syrian intellectuals Michel Aflaq
and Salah al-Bitar, and since its inception, it has established branches in
different Arab countries, although the only countries it has ever held power in
are Syria and Iraq. Aflaq and al-Bitar both studied at the Sorbonne in the
early 1930s, at a time when centre-left Positivism was still the dominant
ideology amongst France's academic elite. The Ba'ath party included a
significant number of Christian Arabs among its founding members. For them, a
resolutely nationalist and secular political framework was a suitable way to
avoid a faith-based Islamic orientation and to give non-Muslims full
acknowledgement as citizens. In 1955, a coup d'Ã©tat by the military against
the historical leadership of Aflaq and al-Bitar led the Syrian and Iraqi
parties to split into rival organizations â€” the Qotri (Regionalist) Syria-
based party and the Qawmi (Nationalist) Iraq-based party. Both Ba'ath parties
kept their names and maintained parallel structures, but became so antagonistic
that the Syrian Ba'ath regime became the only Arab government to support non-
Arab Iran against Iraq during the Iran-Iraq War. In Syria, the Ba'ath Party has
had a monopoly on political power since the party's 1963 coup. Ba'athists
seized power in Iraq in 1963, but were deposed months later. They returned to
power in a 1968 coup and remained the sole party of government until the 2003
Iraq invasion. Since then, the party has been banned in Iraq. Kuomintang and
Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang. The Kuomintang Party (Chinese National People's Party)
was founded in the Republic of China in 1912 by Dr. Sun Yatsen, a proponent of
Chinese nationalism, who founded Revive China Society in Honolulu, Hawaii in
1894. Kuomintang ideology features Three Principles of the People, which are
nationalism, democracy and socialism. The party has adopted a One-China policy,
arguing that there is only one state called China, and that the Republic of
China (not the People's Republic of China) is its legitimate government. The
party has had conflicts with the Chinese Communist Party. Since 2008, however,
in order to ease tensions with the People's Republic of China, the party has
endorsed the "three nos" policy as defined by Ma Ying-jeou - no unification, no
independence and no use of force. The Kuomintang attempted to levy taxes upon
merchants in Canton, and the merchants resisted by raising an army, the
Merchant's Volunteer Corps. The merchants were conservative and reactionary,
and their leader, Chen Lianbao, was a prominent comprador trader. Chiang Kai-
shek led his army of Whampoa Military Academy graduates to defeat the
merchant's army. He was assisted by Soviet advisors, who supplied him with
weapons, while the merchants were supplied with weapons from the Western
countries. The British led an international flotilla to support the merchants.
Chiang seized the western-supplied weapons from the merchants, and battled
against them. A Kuomintang general executed several merchants, and the
Kuomintang formed a Soviet-inspired Revolutionary Committee. The Kuomintang's
economic and military campaign against merchants continued for many years.
Chiang also enforced an anti-Japanese boycott, sending agents to sack the shops
of those who sold Japanese-made items, fining them. The Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang
(VNQDD) was based on the Chinese Kuomintang, and incorporated socialism and
nationalism as part of its ideology. The party sought independence from French
colonial rule in Vietnam during the early 20th century. Its origins lie in the
mid-1920s, when a group of young Hanoi-based intellectuals began publishing
revolutionary material. From 1928, the VNQDD attracted attention through its
assassinations of French officials and Vietnamese collaborators. During the
1930s, the party was eclipsed by Ho Chi Minh's Indochinese Communist Party
(ICP). Vietnam was occupied by Japan during World War II and, in the chaos that
followed the Japanese surrender in 1945, the VNQDD and the ICP briefly joined
forces in the fight for Vietnamese independence. After a falling out, Ho purged
the VNQDD, leaving his communist-dominated Vietminh unchallenged as the
foremost anti-colonial militant organisation. As a part of the post-war
settlement that ended the First Indochina War, Vietnam was partitioned into two
zones. The remnants of the VNQDD fled to the anti-communist south, where they
remained until the Fall of Saigon in 1975 and the reunification of Vietnam
under communist rule.
