Unicameralism In government, unicameralism (Latin , one + , chamber) is the
practice of having one legislative or parliamentary chamber. Thus, a
"unicameral parliament" or "unicameral legislature" is a legislature which
consists of one chamber or house. Unicameral legislatures typically exist in
small and homogeneous unitary states, where a second chamber is considered
unnecessary. Concept. Unicameral legislatures exist when there is no widely
perceived need for multicameralism. Many multicameral legislatures were created
to give separate voices to different sectors of society. Multiple chambers
allowed for guaranteed representation of different social classes (as in the
Parliament of the United Kingdom or the French States-General), ethnic or
regional interests, or subunits of a federation. Where these factors are
unimportant, in unitary states with weak regional identity, unicameralism often
prevails. Sometimes, as in New Zealand and Denmark, this comes about through
the abolition of one the two chambers, or, as in Sweden, through the merger of
the two chambers into a single one, while in others a second chamber has never
existed. Unicameral legislatures are also common in Communist states such as
the People's Republic of China and Cuba. Similarly, many formerly Communist
states, such as Ukraine, Moldova and Serbia, have retained their unicameral
legislatures, though others, such as Russia and Poland, adopted bicameral
legislatures after the fall of Communism. The socialist viewpoint regards upper
houses as typically conservative and representing the interests of the upper
classes. The principal advantage of a unicameral system is more efficient
lawmaking, as the legislative process is much simpler and there is no
possibility of legislative deadlock. Proponents of unicameralism have also
argued that it reduces costs, as even if the number of legislators is the same
as it would be in a multicameral system, there are fewer institutions to
maintain and support. The main weakness of a unicameral system can be seen as
the lack of restraint on the majority, particularly noticeable in parliamentary
systems where the leaders of the parliamentary majority also dominate the
executive. There is also the risk, depending on how seats are allocated in the
legislature, that important sectors of society may not be adequately
represented. List of unicameral legislatures. Approximately half of the world's
sovereign states are presently unicameral, including both the most populous
(the People's Republic of China) and the least populous (the Vatican City).
Many subnational entities have unicameral legislatures. These include Nebraska,
Guam and the Virgin Islands in the United States, Hong Kong, the Australian
states and territories of Queensland, the Northern Territory and the Australian
Capital Territory, all of the provinces and territories in Canada, all of the
German Bundesl√§nder, all of the Italian Regioni and all of the Spanish
Autonomous Communities. In the United Kingdom, the devolved Scottish
Parliament, National Assembly for Wales, Northern Ireland Assembly, and London
Assembly are also unicameral. Almost all city legislatures are also unicameral
in the sense that the city councils are not divided into two chambers. Until
the turn of the 20th century, bicameral city councils were common in the United
States. Unicameralism within the subdivisions of the United States. Within U.S.
states, Nebraska is currently the only state with a unicameral legislature.
Nebraska's state legislature is also unique in the sense that it is the only
state legislature that is entirely nonpartisan. Local government legislatures
of counties, cities, or other political subdivisions within states are usually
unicameral and have limited lawmaking powers compared to their state and
federal counterparts. In 1999, Governor Jesse Ventura proposed converting the
Minnesota Legislature into a single unicameral chamber. Although debated, the
idea was never adopted. In a non-binding referendum held on July 10, 2004,
voters in the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico approved changing its Legislative
Assembly to a unicameral body by 456,267 votes in favor (83.7%) versus 88,720
against (16.3%). If both the territory's House of Representatives and Senate
approve by a 2/3 vote the specific amendments to the Puerto Rico Constitution
that are required for the change to a unicameral legislature, another
referendum will be held in the territory to approve such amendments. If those
constitutional changes are approved, Puerto Rico could switch to a unicameral
legislature as early as 2015. On June 9, 2009, the Maine House of
Representatives voted to form a unicameral legislature, but the measure did not
pass the Senate. Because of legislative gridlock in 2009, former Congressman
Rick Lazio, a prospective candidate for governor, has proposed that New York
adopt unicameralism. Unicameralism in the Philippines. Unicameralism was
experienced in the Philippines from 1935-1940 during the Commonwealth period.
In the 1973 Constitution, the legislative system was called Batasang Pambansa
in a parliamentary system of the government until 1986. The ongoing process of
amending or revising the current constitution and form of government is
popularly known as Charter Change. A shift to a unicameral parliament is
included in the proposals of the constitutional commission created by President
Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo. Unlike in the United States, senators in the Senate of
the Philippines are elected not per district and state but nationally; the
Philippines is a unitary state. The Philippine government's decision-making
process, relative to the United States, is more rigid, highly centralized, much
slower and susceptible to political "gridlocks." As a result, the trend for
unicameralism as well as other political system reforms are more contentious in
the Philippines. While Congress is bicameral, all local legislatures are
unicameral: the ARMM Regional Legislative Assembly, the Sangguniang
Panlalawigan (Provincial Boards), Sangguniang Panlungsod (City Councils),
Sangguniang Bayan (Municipal Councils), Sangguniang Barangay (Barangay
Councils) and the Sangguniang Kabataan (Youth Councils).
