Unilateral disarmament Unilateral disarmament is a policy option, to renounce
weapons without seeking equivalent concessions from one's actual or potential
rivals. It was most commonly used in the twentieth century in the context of
"unilateral nuclear disarmament", a recurrent objective of peace movements in
countries such as the USA and the UK. Nations do not often choose to dismantle
their entire military capability. Unilateral disarmaments are usually sought in
one technical competency, such as Weapons of Mass Destruction. Non-violent
political movements from that of Mahatma Gandhi to the Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament have recommended unilateral disarmament as a simple step toward
world peace. By country. Costa Rica. The only recent candidate for having
performed an act of complete disarmament is Costa Rica, which unilaterally
disarmed itself in 1948, writing its non-military status into its constitution
in 1949. In a public ceremony to mark the occasion, the existing Commander-in-
Chief handed the keys to Army HQ to the Minister of Education, for use as a
school. Since that time, Costa Rica has been briefly invaded once, by
Nicaragua, but has maintained its territorial integrity through reliance on
diplomacy within international structures such as the OAS. Costa Rica's peace
dividend has been reinvested well, as evidenced by infant mortality rates, life
expectancy and literacy rates that are on a par or better than those of most
developed countries. USA. President Richard Nixon's unilateral discontinuation
of biological weapons development in 1972 is often characterized a 'unilateral
disarmament'.
