Unit of account A unit of account is a standard monetary unit of measurement of
value/cost of goods, services, or assets. It is one of three well-known
functions of money. It lends meaning to profits, losses, liability, or assets.
The accounting monetary unit of account suffers from the pitfall of not being a
stable unit of account over time. Inflation destroys the assumption that money
is stable which is the basis of classic accountancy. In such circumstances,
historical values registered in accountancy books become heterogeneous amounts
measured in different units. The use of such data under traditional accounting
methods without previous correction often leads to invalid results. Uses. A
standard unit of account allows meaningful interpretation of prices, costs, and
profits, so that an entity can monitor its own performance and its shareholders
can make sense of its past performance and have an idea of its future
profitability. In modern economies, money in the form of currency usually
serves the role of the standard unit of account. The use of money, under
conditions of price stability, vastly improves the efficiency of market
economies. Historic examples of units of account include the livre tournois,
used in France from 1302 to 1794 whether or not livre coins were minted. In the
14th century Naples used the grossi gigliati, and Bohemia used the Prague
groschen. At any one time there might be two or three units of account in one
region based on the local base, silver and sometimes gold coins, and each often
expressed in L.S.D units in ratio 240:12:1. The Florentine gold florin, the
French franc and the electoral rheingulden all became pounds (240 denari) of
account. Units of account would often survive over 100 years despite the
original coins changing composition and availability (e.g. the Castilian
maravedi). A modern unit of account is the European Currency Unit, used in the
European Union from 1979 to 1998; its replacement in 1999, the euro, was also
just a unit of account until the introduction of notes and coins in 2002. Unit
of account is the main way of calculating a carrier or ship ownerâ€™s liability
in relation to carriage of goods contracts in which the Hague-Visby Rules
apply. Modern finance. The use of a unit of account in financial accounting,
according to the American business model, allows investors to invest capital
into those companies that provide the highest rate of return. The use of a unit
of account in managerial accounting enables firms to choose between activities
that yield the highest profit. In economics, a standard unit of account is used
for statistical purposes to describe economic activity. Indexes such as GDP and
the CPI are so broad in their scope that compiling them would be impossible
without a standard unit of account. After being compiled, these figures are
often used to guide governmental policy; especially monetary and fiscal policy.
In calculating the opportunity cost of a policy, a standard unit of account
allows for the creation of a composite good. A composite good is a theoretical
abstraction that represents an aggregation of all other opportunities that are
not realized by the first good. It allows an economic decision's benefits to be
weighed against the costs of all other possible goods in that society, without
having to refer to any directly. Often, this is most easily accomplished with
money.
