United States public debt Public debt increases or decreases as a result of the
annual unified budget deficit or surplus. The federal government budget deficit
or surplus is the difference between government receipts and spending, ignoring
intra-governmental transfers. However, some spending that is excluded from the
deficit (supplemental appropriations) also adds to the debt. Historically, the
US has incurred debt during wars and recessions, but then debt subsequently
declined afterwards. For example, debt held by the public as a share of GDP
peaked just after World War II (113% of GDP in 1945), but then fell over the
next 30 years. In recent decades however, large budget deficits and the
resulting increases in debt have led to concern about the long-term
sustainability of the federal government's fiscal policies. At the end of
October 2012, debt held by the public was approximately $11.411 trillion or
about 72% of GDP. Intra-governmental holdings stood at $4.850 trillion, giving
a combined total public debt of $16.261 trillion. As of July 2012, $5.3
trillion or approximately 48% of the debt held by the public was owned by
foreign investors, the largest of which were China and Japan at just over $1.1
trillion each. On August 2, 2011, President Barack Obama signed into law the
Budget Control Act of 2011, averting a possible financial default. During June
2011, the Congressional Budget Office called for "...large and rapid policy
changes to put the nation on a sustainable fiscal course." History. Except for
about a year during 1835â€“1836, the United States has continuously held a
public debt since the US Constitution legally went into effect on March 4,
1789. Debts incurred during the American Revolutionary War and under the
Articles of Confederation amounted to $75,463,476.52 on January 1, 1791. From
1796 to 1811 there were 14 budget surpluses and 2 deficits. There was a sharp
increase in the debt as a result of the War of 1812. In the 20 years following
that war, there were 18 surpluses. The federal government actually paid off its
debt entirely in January 1835, only to begin accruing debt anew by 1836 (the
debt on January 1, 1836 was $37,000). Another sharp increase in the debt
occurred as a result of the Civil War. The debt was $65Â million in 1860, but
passed $1Â billion in 1863 and reached $2.7Â billion by the end of the war.
During the following 47 years, there were 36 surpluses and 11 deficits. During
this period 55% of the national debt was paid off. Debt increased again during
World War I (1914â€“1918), reaching $25.5 billion at its conclusion. This was
followed by 11 consecutive surpluses that saw the debt reduced by 36%. The next
period of major increase in the national debt took place between 1930 and 1945.
In 1930, debt held by the public stood at $15.05Â billion or 16.5% of GDP.
Decreased tax revenues and social programs enacted during the Great Depression
increased the debt, and by 1939, the debt held by the public had increased to
$39.65Â billion or 43% of GDP. The buildup and involvement in World War II
during the Roosevelt and Truman presidencies caused an even larger increase;
debt held by the public had reached $251.43Â billion or 112.% of GDP at its
conclusion in 1945. Rapid economic growth after the war reduced debt as a
percentage of GDP, and it reached a post-WWII low of 24.6% in 1974. Debt held
by the public relative to GDP rose rapidly again in the 1980s. President Ronald
Reagan's economic policies lowered tax rates and increased military spending,
while congressional Democrats blocked attempts to reverse spending on social
programs. As a result, debt as a share of GDP increased from 26.2% in 1980 to
40.9% in 1988, and continued to rise during the presidency of George H. W.
Bush, reaching 48.3% of GDP in 1992. Debt held by the public reached 49.5% of
GDP at the beginning of President Clinton's first term. However, it fell to
34.5% of GDP by the end of Clinton's presidency due in part to decreased
military spending, increased taxes (in 1990, 1993 and 1997), and increased tax
revenue resulting from the Dot-com bubble. The budget controls instituted in
the 1990s successfully restrained fiscal action by the Congress and the
President and together with economic growth contributed to the budget surpluses
at the end of the decade. In the early 21st century, debt relative to GDP rose
again due in part to the Bush tax cuts and increased military spending caused
by the wars in the Middle-East and a new entitlement Medicare D program. During
the presidency of George W. Bush, debt held by the public increased from
$3.339Â trillion in September 2001 to $6.369Â trillion by the end of 2008, In
the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, and huge increases in spending,
the debt held by the public increased to $11.12Â trillion by the end of July
2012 under the presidency of Barack Obama. Change in debt position since 2001.
The CBO has summarized the cause of change between its January 2001 estimate of
a $5.6 trillion cumulative surplus between 2002 and 2011 and the actual $6.1
trillion cumulative deficit that occurred, an unfavorable "turnaround" or debt
increase of $11.7 trillion. Tax cuts and slower-than-expected growth reduced
revenues by $6.1 trillion and spending was $5.6 trillion higher. Of this total,
the CBO attributes 72% to legislated tax cuts and spending increases and 27% to
economic and technical factors. Of the latter, 56% occurred from 2009 to 2011.
Several other sources have used CBO data to summarize the results in various
ways. Valuation and measurement. Public and government accounts. The total or
gross national debt is the sum of the "debt held by the public" and
"intragovernmental" debt. As of October 2012, the "debt held by the public" was
$11.35 trillion and the "intragovernmental debt" was $4.85 trillion, for a
total of $16.2 trillion. The national debt can also be classified into
marketable or non-marketable securities. As of March 2012, total marketable
securities were $10.34 trillion while the non-marketable securities were $5.24
trillion. Most of the marketable securities are Treasury notes, bills, and
bonds held by investors and governments globally. The non-marketable securities
are mainly the "government account series" owed to certain government trust
funds such as the Social Security Trust Fund, which represented $2.7 trillion
in 2011. The non-marketable securities represent amounts owed to program
beneficiaries. For example, in the case of the Social Security Trust Fund, the
payroll taxes dedicated to Social Security were credited to the Trust Fund upon
receipt, but spent for other purposes. If the government continues to run
deficits in other parts of the budget, the government will have to issue debt
held by the public to fund the Social Security Trust Fund, in effect exchanging
one type of debt for the other. Other large intragovernmental holders include
the Federal Housing Administration, the Federal Savings and Loan Corporation's
Resolution Fund and the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund (Medicare).
Accounting treatment. Only debt held by the public is reported as a liability
on the consolidated financial statements of the United States government. Debt
held by government accounts is an asset to those accounts but a liability to
the Treasury; they offset each other in the consolidated financial statements.
The deficit is presented on a cash rather than an accruals basis, although the
accrual basis may provide more information on the longer-term implications of
the government's annual operations. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac obligations
excluded. Although not included in the debt figures reported by the government,
the U.S. government has moved to more explicitly support the soundness of
obligations of Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, starting in July 2008 via the
Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008, and the September 7, 2008 Federal
Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) conservatorship of both government sponsored
enterprises (GSEs). The on- or off-balance sheet obligations of those two
independent GSEs was just over $5Â trillion at the time the conservatorship was
put in place, consisting mainly of mortgage payment guarantees. The extent to
which the government will be required to pay these obligations depends on a
variety of economic and housing market factors. The federal government provided
over $110Â billion to Fannie and Freddie by 2010. Guaranteed obligations
excluded. U.S. federal government guarantees are not included in the public
debt total, until such time as there is a call on the guarantees. For example,
the U.S. federal government in late-2008 guaranteed large amounts of
obligations of mutual funds, banks, and corporations under several programs
designed to deal with the problems arising from the late-2000s financial
crisis. The funding of direct investments made in response to the crisis, such
as those made under the Troubled Assets Relief Program, are included in the
debt. Unfunded obligations excluded. The U.S. government is obligated under
current law to mandatory payments for programs such as Medicare, Medicaid and
Social Security. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) projects that
payouts for these programs will significantly exceed tax revenues over the next
75 years. The Medicare Part A (hospital insurance) payouts already exceed
program tax revenues, and social security payouts exceeded payroll taxes in
fiscal 2010. These deficits require funding from other tax sources or
borrowing. The present value of these deficits or unfunded obligations is an
estimated $45.8Â trillion. This is the amount that would have had to be set
aside in 2009 in order to pay for the unfunded obligations which, under current
law, will have to be raised by the government in the future. Approximately
$7.7Â trillion relates to Social Security, while $38.2Â trillion relates to
Medicare and Medicaid. In other words, health care programs will require nearly
five times more funding than Social Security. Adding this to the national debt
and other federal obligations would bring total obligations to nearly
$62Â trillion. However, these unfunded obligations are not counted in the
national debt. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) has indicated that:
"Future growth in spending per beneficiary for Medicare and Medicaid â€“ the
federal governmentâ€™s major health care programs â€“ will be the most
important determinant of long-term trends in federal spending. Changing those
programs in ways that reduce the growth of costs â€“ which will be difficult,
in part because of the complexity of health policy choices â€“ is ultimately
the nationâ€™s central long-term challenge in setting federal fiscal policy."
Measuring debt relative to gross domestic product. GDP is a measure of the
total size and output of the economy. One measure of the debt burden is its
size relative to GDP. In the 2007 fiscal year, U.S. federal debt held by the
public was approximately $5Â trillion (36.8 percent of GDP) and total debt was
$9Â trillion (65.5 percent of GDP). Debt held by the public represents money
owed to those holding government securities such as Treasury bills and bonds.
Total debt includes intra-governmental debt, which includes amounts owed to the
Social Security Trust Funds (about $2.2Â trillion in FY 2007) and Civil Service
Retirement Funds. By August 2008, the total debt was $9.6Â trillion. Based on
the 2010 U.S. budget, total national debt will nearly double in dollar terms
between 2008 and 2015 and will grow to nearly 100% of GDP, versus a level of
approximately 80% in early 2009. Multiple government sources including the
current and previous presidents, the GAO, Treasury Department, and CBO have
said the United States is on an unsustainable fiscal path. However, ahead of
predictions, total national debt reached 100% by the third quarter of 2011. If
counted using the total public debt outstanding over the annual GDP in chained
2005 dollars, the ratio reached 115% on Feb. 2012. As the debt ratio increases,
the exchange value of the dollar may fall. Paying back debt with cheaper
currency could cause investors (including other governments) to demand higher
interest rates if they anticipate further dollar depreciation. Paying higher
interest rates could slow domestic U.S. growth. Higher debt increases interest
payments on the debt, which already exceed $430Â billion annually as discussed
below, or about 15 cents of every tax dollar for 2008. According to the CIA
Factbook, nine countries have debt to GDP ratios over 100% for 2010, the
largest of which is Japan at approximately 197.5%. Further, a high public debt
to GDP ratio may also slow economic growth. Economists Carmen Reinhart and
Kenneth Rogoff calculated that countries with public debt above 90 percent of
GDP grow by an average of 1.3 percentage points per year slower than less
indebted countries. The public debt-to-GDP ratio in March 2010 is about 60
percent of GDP; CBO projects it will reach 90 percent around 2020 under
policies in place in 2010. If growth slows, all of the economic challenges the
United States faces will worsen. Calculating the annual change in debt. The
annual change in debt is not equal to the "total deficit" typically reported in
the media. Social Security payroll taxes and benefit payments, along with the
net balance of the U.S. Postal Service, are considered "off-budget", while most
other expenditure and receipt categories are considered "on-budget." The total
federal deficit is the sum of the on-budget deficit (or surplus) and the off-
budget deficit (or surplus). Since FY1960, the federal government has run on-
budget deficits except for FY1999 and FY2000, and total federal deficits except
in FY1969 and FY1998â€“FY2001. In large part because of Social Security
surpluses, the total deficit is smaller than the on-budget deficit. The surplus
of Social Security payroll taxes over benefit payments is spent by the
government for other purposes. However, the government credits the Social
Security Trust fund for the surplus amount, adding to the "intragovernmental
debt." The total federal debt is divided into "intragovernmental debt" and
"debt held by the public." In other words, spending the "off budget" Social
Security surplus adds to the total national debt (by increasing the
intragovernmental debt) while the surplus reduces the "total" deficit reported
in the media. Certain spending called "supplemental appropriations" is outside
the budget process entirely but adds to the national debt. Funding for the Iraq
and Afghanistan wars was accounted for this way prior to the Obama
administration. Certain stimulus measures and earmarks are also outside the
budget process. For example, in FY2008 an off-budget surplus of $183Â billion
reduced the on-budget deficit of $642Â billion, resulting in a total federal
deficit of $459Â billion. Media often reported the latter figure. The national
debt increased by $1,017Â billion between the end of FY2007 and the end of
FY2008. The federal government publishes the total debt owed (public and
intragovernmental holdings) at the end of each fiscal year and since FY1957 the
amount of debt held by the federal government has increased each year. Negative
real interest rates. Since 2010, the U.S. Treasury has been obtaining negative
real interest rates on government debt. Such low rates, outpaced by the
inflation rate, occur when the market believes that there are no alternatives
with sufficiently low risk, or when popular institutional investments such as
insurance companies, pensions, or bond, money market, and balanced mutual funds
are required or choose to invest sufficiently large sums in Treasury securities
to hedge against risk. Lawrence Summers, Matthew Yglesias and other economists
state that at such low rates, government debt borrowing saves taxpayer money,
and improves creditworthiness. In the late 1940s through the early 1970s, the
US and UK both reduced their debt burden by about 30% to 40% of GDP per decade
by taking advantage of negative real interest rates, but there is no guarantee
that government debt rates will continue to stay so low. In January, 2012, the
U.S. Treasury Borrowing Advisory Committee of the Securities Industry and
Financial Markets Association unanimously recommended that government debt be
allowed to auction even lower, at negative absolute interest rates. Converting
fractional reserve to full reserve banking. The International Monetary Fund
published a working paper suggesting that the debt could be eliminated by
raising bank reserve requirements, converting from fractional reserve banking
to full reserve banking. Debt ceiling. Under Article I Section 8 of the United
States Constitution, Congress has the sole power to borrow money on the credit
of the United States. From the founding of the United States until 1917
Congress directly authorized each individual debt issuance separately. In order
to provide more flexibility to finance the United States' involvement in World
War I, Congress modified the method by which it authorizes debt in the Second
Liberty Bond Act of 1917. Under this act Congress established an aggregate
limit, or "ceiling," on the total amount of bonds that could be issued. The
current debt ceiling, in which an aggregate limit is applied to nearly all
federal debt, was substantially established by Public Debt Acts passed in 1939
and 1941. The Treasury is authorized to issue debt needed to fund government
operations (as authorized by each federal budget) up to a stated debt ceiling,
with some small exceptions. The process of setting the debt ceiling is separate
and distinct from the regular process of financing government operations, and
raising the debt ceiling does not have any direct impact on the budget deficit.
The U.S. government proposes a federal budget every year, which must be
approved by Congress. This budget details projected tax collections and outlays
and, if there is a budget deficit, the amount of borrowing the government would
have to do in that fiscal year. A vote to increase the debt ceiling is,
therefore, usually treated as a formality, needed to continue spending that has
already been approved previously by the Congress and the President. The
Government Accountability Office (GAO) explains: "The debt limit does not
control or limit the ability of the federal government to run deficits or incur
obligations. Rather, it is a limit on the ability to pay obligations already
incurred." The apparent redundancy of the debt ceiling has led to suggestions
that it should be abolished altogether. Since 1979, the House of
Representatives passed a rule to automatically raise the debt ceiling when
passing a budget, without the need for a separate vote on the debt ceiling,
except when the House votes to waive or repeal this rule. The exception to the
rule was invoked in 1995, which resulted in two government shutdowns. When the
debt ceiling is reached, Treasury can declare a debt issuance suspension period
and utilize "extraordinary measures" to acquire funds to meet federal
obligations but which do not require the issue of new debt. Treasury first used
these measures on December 16, 2009, to remain within the debt ceiling, and
avoid a government shutdown, and also used it during the debt-ceiling crisis of
2011. However, there are limits to how much can be raised by these measures.
The debt ceiling was increased on February 12, 2010, to $14.294Â trillion. On
April 15, 2011, Congress finally passed the 2011 United States federal budget,
authorizing federal government spending for the remainder of the 2011 fiscal
year, which ends on September 30, 2011, with a deficit of $1.48Â trillion,
without voting to increase the debt ceiling. The two Houses of Congress were
unable to agree on a revision of the debt ceiling in mid-2011, resulting in the
United States debt-ceiling crisis. The impasse was resolved with the passing on
August 2, 2011, the deadline for a default by the U.S. government on its debt,
of the Budget Control Act of 2011, which immediately increased the debt ceiling
to $14.694 trillion, required a vote on a Balanced Budget Amendment, and
established several complex mechanisms to further increase the debt ceiling and
reduce federal spending. On September 8, 2011, one of the complex mechanisms to
further increase the debt ceiling took place as the Senate defeated a
resolution to block a $500 billion automatic increase. The Senate's action
allowed the debt ceiling to increase to $15.194 trillion, as agreed upon in the
Budget Control Act. This was the third increase in the debt ceiling in 19
months, the fifth increase since President Obama took office, and the twelfth
increase in 10 years. The August 2 Act also created the United States Congress
Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction for the purpose of developing a set
of proposals by November 23, 2011, to reduce federal spending by $1.2 trillion.
The Act requires both houses of Congress to convene an "up-or-down" vote on the
proposals as a whole by December 23, 2011. The Joint Select Committee met for
the first time on September 8, 2011. The debt ceiling was raised once more on
January 30, 2012, to a new high of $16.394 trillion. Debt holdings. Because a
large variety of people own the notes, bills, and bonds in the "public" portion
of the debt, Treasury also publishes information that groups the types of
holders by general categories to portray who owns United States debt. In this
data set, some of the public portion is moved and combined with the total
government portion, because this amount is owned by the Federal Reserve as part
of United States monetary policy. (See Federal Reserve System.) Foreign
holdings. As of January 2011, foreigners owned $4.45Â trillion of U.S. debt, or
approximately 47% of the debt held by the public of $9.49Â trillion and 32% of
the total debt of $14.1Â trillion. The largest holders were the central banks
of China, Japan, Brazil, Taiwan, United Kingdom, Switzerland and Russia. The
share held by foreign governments has grown over time, rising from 13% of the
public debt in 1988 to 25% in 2007. As of May 2011 the largest single holder of
U.S. government debt was China, with 26 percent of all foreign-held U.S.
Treasury securities (8% of total U.S. public debt). China's holdings of
government debt, as a percentage of all foreign-held government debt, have
decreased a bit between 2010 and 2011, but are up significantly since 2000
(when China held just 6 percent of all foreign-held U.S. Treasury securities).
This exposure to potential financial or political risk should foreign banks
stop buying Treasury securities or start selling them heavily was addressed in
a June 2008 report issued by the Bank of International Settlements, which
stated, "Foreign investors in U.S. dollar assets have seen big losses measured
in dollars, and still bigger ones measured in their own currency. While
unlikely, indeed highly improbable for public sector investors, a sudden rush
for the exits cannot be ruled out completely." On May 20, 2007, Kuwait
discontinued pegging its currency exclusively to the dollar, preferring to use
the dollar in a basket of currencies. Syria made a similar announcement on June
4, 2007. In September 2009 China, India and Russia said they were interested in
buying International Monetary Fund gold to diversify their dollar-denominated
securities. However, in July 2010 China's State Administration of Foreign
Exchange "ruled out the option of dumping its vast holdings of US Treasury
securities" and said gold "cannot become a main channel for investing our
foreign exchange reserves" because the market for gold is too small and prices
are too volatile. Forecasting. Tracking current levels of debt is a cumbersome
but fairly straightforward process. Making future projections is much more
difficult for a number of reasons. For example, before the September 11 attacks
in 2001, the George W. Bush administration projected in the 2002 budget that
there would be a $1.288Â trillion surplus from 2001 through 2004. In the 2005
Mid-Session Review this had changed to a projected four-year deficit of
$851Â billion, a swing of $2.138Â trillion. The latter document states that 49%
of this swing was due to "economic and technical re-estimates", 29% was due to
"tax relief" (mainly the Bush Tax Cuts), and the remaining 22% was due to "war,
homeland, and other enacted legislation" (mainly expenditures for the War on
Terror, Iraq War, and homeland security). Projections between different groups
will sometimes differ because they make different assumptions. For example, in
August 2003, a Congressional Budget Office report projected a $1.4Â trillion
deficit from 2004 through 2013. However, a mid-term and long-term joint
analysis a month later by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, the
Committee for Economic Development, and the Concord Coalition stated that "In
projecting deficits, CBO follows mechanical 'baseline' rules that do not allow
it to account for the costs of any prospective tax or entitlement legislation,
no matter how likely the enactment of such legislation may be." The analysis
added in a proposed tax cut extension and Alternative Minimum Tax reform
(enacted by a 2005 act), prescription drug plan (Medicare Part D, enacted in a
2003 act), and further increases in defense, homeland security, international,
and domestic spending. According to the report, this "adjusts CBO's official
ten-year projections for more realistic assumptions about the costs of budget
policies", raising the projected deficit from $1.4Â trillion to $5Â trillion.
The Office of Management and Budget forecasts that, by the end of fiscal year
2012, gross federal debt will total $16.3Â trillion. Thus, the projected debt
will equal 101% of projected gross domestic product, which represents a
milestone in the U.S. economy. Public debt alone, which excludes amounts that
the government owes its citizens via various trust funds, will be 67% of GDP by
the end of fiscal 2012. Historical analysis of government spending or debt
relative to GDP can be misleading, according to the GAO, the CBO and Treasury
Department. This is because demographic shifts and per-capita spending are
causing Social Security and Medicare/Medicaid expenditures to grow
significantly faster than GDP. If this trend continues, government simulations
under various assumptions project mandatory spending for these programs will
exceed taxes dedicated to these programs by more than $40Â trillion over the
next 75 years on a present value basis. According to the GAO, this will double
debt-to-GDP ratios by 2040 and double them again by 2060, reaching 600% by
2080. A GAO simulation indicates that Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid
expenditures alone will exceed 20% of GDP by 2080, which is approximately the
historical ratio of taxes collected by the federal government. In other words,
these mandatory programs alone will take up all government revenues under this
simulation. CBO long-term scenarios. The CBO reported during June 2011 two
scenarios for how debt held by the public will change during the 2010â€“2035
time period. The "extended baseline scenario" assumes that the Bush tax cuts
(extended by Obama) will expire per current law in 2012. It also assumes the
alternative minimum tax (AMT) will be allowed to affect more middle-class
families, Medicare reimbursement rates to doctors will go down, and that
revenues will reach 23% of GDP by 2035, much higher than the historical average
of 18%. Under this scenario, government spending on everything other than the
major mandatory health care programs, Social Security, and interest on federal
debt (activities such as national defense and a wide variety of domestic
programs) would decline to the lowest percentage of GDP since before World War
II. Under this scenario, public debt rises from 69% GDP in 2011 to 84% by 2035,
with interest payments absorbing 4% of GDP vs. 1% in 2011. CBO estimated in
August 2011 that if laws currently "on the books" were enforced without
changes, meaning the "extended baseline scenario" described above is
implemented along with deficit reductions from the Budget Control Act of 2011,
the deficit would decline from 8.5% GDP in 2011 to around 1% GDP by 2021. The
"alternative fiscal scenario" more closely assumes the continuation of present
trends, such as permanently extending the Bush tax cuts, restricting the reach
of the AMT, and keeping Medicare reimbursement rates at the current level (the
so-called "Doc Fix" versus declining by one-third as mandated under current
law.) Revenues are assumed to remain around the historical average 18% GDP.
Under this scenario, public debt rises from 69% GDP in 2011 to 100% by 2021 and
approaches 190% by 2035. The CBO reported: "Many budget analysts believe that
the alternative fiscal scenario presents a more realistic picture of the
nationâ€™s underlying fiscal policies than the extended-baseline scenario does.
The explosive path of federal debt under the alternative fiscal scenario
underscores the need for large and rapid policy changes to put the nation on a
sustainable fiscal course." Risks and obstacles. A high debt level may affect
interest rates, and economic growth, or inflation if currency devaluation is
viewed as a solution to debt reduction. A variety of factors are placing
increasing pressure on the value of the U.S. dollar, increasing the risk of
devaluation or inflation and encouraging challenges to dollar's role as the
world's reserve currency. The Government Accountability Office (GAO), the
federal government's auditor, argues that the United States is on a fiscally
"unsustainable" path and that politicians and the electorate have been
unwilling to change this path. Further, the subprime mortgage crisis has
significantly increased the financial burden on the U.S. government, with over
$10Â trillion in commitments or guarantees and $2.6Â trillion in investments or
expenditures as of May 2009, only some of which are included in the budget
document. The United States also has a large trade deficit, meaning imports
exceed exports. Debt levels may also affect economic growth rates. Economists
Kenneth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart reported in 2010 that among the 20 advanced
countries studied, average annual GDP growth was 3â€“4% when debt was
relatively moderate or low (i.e. under 60% of GDP), but it dips to just 1.6%
when debt was high (i.e., above 90% of GDP). Economist Paul Krugman has argued,
however, that it is low growth which causes national debt to increase, rather
than the other way around. While there is significant debate about solutions,
the significant long-term risk posed by the increase in entitlement spending is
widely recognized, with health care costs (Medicare and Medicaid) the primary
risk category. In a June 2010 opinion piece in the "Wall Street Journal",
former chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan noted that "Only
politically toxic cuts or rationing of medical care, a marked rise in the
eligible age for health and retirement benefits, or significant inflation, can
close the deficit." If significant reforms are not undertaken, benefits under
entitlement programs will exceed government income by over $40Â trillion over
the next 75 years. Should interest rates return to historical averages, the
interest cost would increase dramatically. Historian Niall Ferguson described
the risk that foreign investors would demand higher interest rates as the U.S.
debt levels increase over time in a November 2009 interview. However, according
to Paul Krugman, "Itâ€™s true that foreigners now hold large claims on the
United States, including a fair amount of government debt. But every dollarâ€™s
worth of foreign claims on America is matched by 89 centsâ€™ worth of U.S.
claims on foreigners. And because foreigners tend to put their U.S. investments
into safe, low-yield assets, America actually earns more from its assets abroad
than it pays to foreign investors. If your image is of a nation thatâ€™s
already deep in hock to the Chinese, youâ€™ve been misinformed. Nor are we
heading rapidly in that direction." Debates. Economists continue to debate
about the level of debt relative to GDP that signals a "red line" or dangerous
level, or if any such level exists. In January 2010, Economists Kenneth Rogoff
and Carmen Reinhart stated that gross debt (i.e., debt held by the public plus
intragovernmental debt) exceeding 90% of GDP might be an indicative danger
level. Fed Chair Ben Bernanke stated in April 2010 that "Neither experience nor
economic theory clearly indicates the threshold at which government debt begins
to endanger prosperity and economic stability. But given the significant costs
and risks associated with a rapidly rising federal debt, our nation should soon
put in place a credible plan for reducing deficits to sustainable levels over
time." Economists also debate the definition of public debt. Krugman argued in
May 2010 that the debt held by the public is the right measure to use, while
Reinhart has testified to the President's Fiscal Reform Commission that gross
debt is the appropriate measure. The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
(CBPP) cited research by several economists supporting the use of the lower
debt held by the public figure as a more accurate measure of the debt burden,
disagreeing with these Commission members. There is debate regarding the
economic nature of the intragovernmental debt, which was approximately
$4.6Â trillion in February 2011. For example, the CBPP argues: that "large
increases in held by the public can also push up interest rates and increase
the amount of future interest payments the federal government must make to
lenders outside of the United States, which reduces Americansâ€™ income. By
contrast, intragovernmental debt (the other component of the gross debt) has no
such effects because it is simply money the federal government owes (and pays
interest on) to itself." However, if the U.S. government continues to run "on
budget" deficits as projected by the CBO and OMB for the foreseeable future, it
will have to issue marketable Treasury bills and bonds (i.e., debt held by the
public) to pay for the projected shortfall in the Social Security program. This
will result in "debt held by the public" replacing "intragovernmental debt".
Appendix. National debt for selected years. MeasuringWorth.com (December 14,
2010) "What was the U.S. GDP then?". MeasuringWorth.com. Retrieved January 30,
2011. Fiscal Year estimates are derived from simple linear interpolation. (a1)
Audited figure was "about $5,659Â billion." (a2) Audited figure was "about
$5,792Â billion." (a3) Audited figure was "about $6,213Â billion." (a) Audited
figure was said to be "about" the stated figure. (a4) Audited figure was "about
$7,918Â billion." (a5) Audited figure was "about $8,493Â billion." (a6) Audited
figure was "about $8,993Â billion." (a7)Audited figure was "about
$10,011Â billion." (a8) Audited figure was "about $11,898Â billion." (a9)
Audited figure was "about $13,551Â billion." Foreign holders of U.S. Treasury
securities. 1Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, Libya, Iran, Iraq, the United Arab
Emirates, Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Ecuador, Indonesia, Algeria, Gabon, and
Nigeria 2Bahamas, Bermuda, Cayman Islands, Netherlands Antilles, British Virgin
Islands and Panama Table: International debt comparisons. Sources: Eurostat,
International Monetary Fund, "World Economic Outlook" (emerging market
economies); Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, "Economic
Outlook" (advanced economies) 1China, Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Korea,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand 2Argentina, Brazil, Chile and
Mexico Recent additions to the public debt of the United States. The more
precise FY 1999â€“2010 debt figures are derived from Treasury audit results.
The variations in the FY 2009â€“2010 figures are due to double-sourced or
relatively preliminary GDP figures.
