University of Idaho The University of Idaho (officially abbreviated UI, but
commonly referred to as the U of I) is the State of Idaho's oldest public
university located in the rural city of Moscow in Latah County in the northern
portion of the state. UI is the state's primary research university, and
enrolls more national merit scholars than all other institutions in the state
combined. In January 2012, the university enrolled the highest number of
National Merit Scholars of any school in the Northwest; more than the other
flagship institutions in the region with significantly larger enrollments. The
University of Idaho was the state's sole university for 71 years, until 1963,
and hosts the University of Idaho College of Law, which was established in
1909, accredited by the ABA in 1925, and remained until 2012 the only law
school in the state. The university was formed by the territorial legislature
of Idaho on January 30, 1889, and opened its doors on October 3, 1892 with an
initial class of 40 students. The first graduating class in 1896 contained two
men and two women. The university presently has an enrollment exceeding 12,000,
with over 11,000 on the Moscow campus. The university offers 142 degree
programs, from accountancy to wildlife resources, including bachelor's,
master's, doctoral, and specialists' degrees. Certificates of completion are
offered in 30 areas of study. At 25% and 53%, its 4 and 6 year graduation rates
are the highest of any public university in Idaho, and it generates 74 percent
of all research money in the state, with research expenditures of $100 million
in 2010 alone. As a rural land-grant university, UI has the largest campus in
the state, located in the rolling hills of the Palouse region at an elevation
of above sea level. The school is home to the Idaho Vandals, who compete on the
Division I FBS (formerly I-A) level. The land-grant institution for the state
of Washington, WSU, is located eight miles (13Â km) west in Pullman. In
addition to the main campus in Moscow, the UI has branch campuses in Coeur
d'Alene, Boise, Twin Falls, and Idaho Falls. It also operates a research park
in Post Falls and dozens of extension offices statewide. Timeline. Timeline of
University of Idaho Campus. UI has one of the most scenic campuses in the
western U.S.. The master plan for the UI campus was originally designed in 1908
by the Olmsted Brothers of Massachusetts, the sons of Frederick Law Olmsted;
their landscape architecture firm designed the U.S. Capitol grounds, Central
Park in New York City, and many other notable college campuses, particularly in
the West. The Palouse region has rolling hills with rivers and lakes, with
mountains nearby, offering a wide variety of recreational opportunities.
According to the UI Facts Books, the Moscow campus is an including 253
buildings with a replacement value of $812 million, , of parking lots, of bike
paths, 22 computer labs, an 18-hole golf course on , of arboreta, and of farms.
There are several distinctive areas on campus. Administration Building. The
east-facing Administration Building, with its clock tower and Collegiate
Gothic-style structure, was built from 1907â€“09 and has become an icon of the
university. The building holds classrooms, an auditorium, and administrative
offices, including the offices of the President and Provost. Multiple
expansions were made, with the north wing added in 1912, the south wing in 1916
(extended in 1936 for the library), and the functional annex in 1950,
incorporated into the Albertson addition of 2002. The UI library was housed in
the Admin. building until 1957, when the Library building was completed. The
original Administration Building, with a single tall spire reaching to , was
constructed through the decade of the 1890s and ultimately finished in 1899.
Unfortunately, it was reduced to embers on March 30, 1906 (photo); the cause of
the fire, which began in the basement, was never precisely determined, but was
likely accidental. After the fire, there was debate whether to rebuild from the
remains or start from scratch; the remaining structure (photo) was eventually
deemed infeasible to recover and was demolished with dynamite (photo). The
original building's steps were saved and currently climb the small hill
immediately southeast of the south wing. In the meantime, classes were held at
various sites in Moscow; the Carnegie library, the Methodist church, and local
lodge halls. Insurance policies paid $135,000, but the new building cost twice
that. To appease the state legislature, the UI Regents decided to build Morrill
Hall first, use it for classrooms, and finance the new administration building
over three years. The new Admin. building was designed by prominent Boise
architect John E. Tourtellotte. He designed the state's Roman Revival capitol
building in Boise and other buildings, both public and private. Tourtellotte
modeled the new UI structure after the venerable Hampton Court Palace in
England, and construction began in 1907. The 1909 Administration Building was
added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1978, at age 69. Two years
out of office, former U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt spoke outside the main
east entrance of the new building on April 9, 1911, on a platform built of
Palouse wheat (photo). Hello Walk. "Hello Walk" is one of the best-known and
traveled pathways on the Idaho campus. But more than being surrounded by trees
and grass, it navigates through a rich history of statues, landmarks and
traditions. It includes Presidential Grove, where historical figures, such as
Teddy Roosevelt and his wife, planted trees; the Spanish War memorial statue
who had his hands cut off but reconstructed by a handless sculptor and
Administration Lawn that was designed by the same brothers who designed Central
Park in New York City. The walk was named after Alfred Upham, the president of
the university in the 1920s. Upham insisted on saying "hello" to all those he
passed on his walk from his house â€” on the site now occupied by the Campus
Christian Center â€” to his office in the Administration Building. He requested
that this act of kindness be required of all students and faculty on campus,
which is how the walk acquired its name. Hello Walk is still used, but the
hellos that used to be mandatory are now not often vocalized to strangers.
Idaho Commons. The Idaho Candlewalk Commons, completed on January 10, 2000, is
the heart of campus and contains a food court, copy center, bagel and coffee
shop (Einstein's Bagels), Credit Union, and convenience store. Additionally,
there is study space, wireless internet, laptop checkout, and many student
services such as the offices of the Associated Students of the University of
Idaho (ASUI), Academics Assistance, the University of Idaho Writing Center, and
Student Support. With the completion of the Teaching and Learning Center (TLC)
at the beginning of the fall semester of 2005, the second phase, the Commons
gained classrooms and completed the vision of a common area where students
could learn, study, relax and get university services all in one place. Student
Union Building. The Student Union Building houses Financial Aid, Admissions,
New Student Services, the Registrar's Office, the office of the Graduate &
Professional Student Association(GPSA) and student meeting rooms. There is also
wireless access, laptops available for check-out, a student computer lab, and a
movie theater. This SUB wa the primary student area until the Commons was
opened in 2000. The SUB was originally the Blue Bucket Inn, purchased by the UI
in 1936. The UI Bookstore, built in 1989 on a former parking lot, is located
directly across the street to the east, formery adjacent to the south. ASUI-
Kibbie Activity Center. UI's multi-purpose "Kibbie Dome" is the home to Vandal
athletics; it is the venue for football, basketball, tennis, and indoor track &
field. Its Trus-Dek roof system, constructed in 1975, uses natural wood arches
to span at a height of over the field's hashmarks. Built when Idaho was a
member of the Big Sky Conference, the Kibbie Dome is the smallest stadium (as
of December 2010) in Division I FBS football. Previously on this site was Neale
Stadium, which opened in 1937 as an earthen horseshoe with wooden sideline
grandstands. After 32 seasons, its bleachers were condemned for structural
inadequacies due to erosion in the summer of 1969. After an idle 1969 football
season, it was destroyed (by suspected arson) on November 22, 1969. After two
years away at nearby Rogers Field in Pullman, the new outdoor "Idaho Stadium"
opened on October 9, 1971, with concrete grandstands; the 1971 Vandals
responded with a victory over Idaho State, an 8-3 season, and the Big Sky
title. Tartan Turf, similar to AstroTurf, was installed in 1972 with the roll-
up mechanism; the arched roof and vertical end-walls were completed in time for
the 1975 football home opener on September 27, enclosing the stadium to become
the Kibbie Dome. The seating capacity is 16,000 for football games, 7,000 for
basketball games (in a configuration known as the "Cowan Spectrum" since 2001),
and 7,500 for concerts. Its innovative roof won the Outstanding Structural
Engineering Achievement award from the ASCE in 1976. The original Tartan Turf
was replaced with AstroTurf in 1990 and lasted until 2007, when it was replaced
with "Real Grass Pro," an infilled synthetic turf (similar to FieldTurf). In
2009, the Kibbie Dome began a multi-phase renovation with millions of dollars
of improvements, primarily for safety. The primary change was the entire west
wall; its aged dry plywood panels were replaced with non-flammable translucent
plastic (upper) and opaque aluminum (lower). New field-level exits were also
installed. The east wall was replaced in 2011 and a new press box was built
above the north grandstand; the former press box area above the south
grandstand was converted to premium seating (Litehouse Center). UI Golf Course.
The UI Golf Course was established in 1933 on the southwest edge of campus, and
opened as nine holes in 1937. It was expanded to 18 holes in 1970 and its
current clubhouse was built in 1969. Due to its demanding rolling terrain and
southwesterly summer winds, the par-72 course's moderate length of from the
back tees yields a challenging slope of 135 with a scratch rating of 72.4.
Arboretum and Botanical Garden. Referred to as "Tree City" or "The Arb" by UI
students, the Arboretum is a site adjacent to the golf course which features
display gardens, ponds, and a variety of trees and plants from Asia, Europe,
and North America. The original Shattuck Arboretum was conceived in 1910 by
Charles H. Shattuck, the head of the forestry department. His efforts gradually
turned a treeless slope southwest of the Administration Building into a dense
forest grove. The aboretum was named for Shattuck in 1933, two years after his
death. Until the late 1960s, this area provided the background for left &
center field of the MacLean baseball field, whose infield was displaced by the
construction of the new College of Education buildings, which were completed in
1968. The newer portion of the arboretum complex is south of the Shattuck area,
in the valley below the president's residence (1967), along the eastern edge of
the campus' 18-hole golf course. Student Recreation Center. Opened in April
2002, the Student Recreation Center boasts a freestanding climbing wall, as
well as a weight training area, cardio, of climbing area, jogging track, and
two full-size gyms. The Rec Center hours are set to meet the schedules of users
including students, faculty and staff. The Student Recreation Center offers a
number of wellness classes including zumba, TRX, cycling, gravity, belly
dancing and yoga. The planned Phase Two of the project includes adding a
swimming pool, but has been delayed due to funding problems. The recreation
center is located on the corner of Paradise Creek Street and Line Street north
of the Theophilus Tower dormitory, an area which formerly housed maintenance
buildings. UI Library. The UI Library is the state's largest, with more than
1.4 million books, periodicals, government documents, maps, videorecordings,
and special collections. Included are those for Sir Walter Scott, and many
famous Idahoans, including Ezra Pound, Vardis Fisher, Frank Bruce Robinson, and
Carol Ryrie Brink of Moscow. Directly north of the Memorial Gymnasium and built
on the former site of tennis courts, the library opened in 1957, relocating
from the south wing of the Administration Building. The UI post office station
was formerly housed in its lower northwest corner; it was moved to the new UI
bookstore in 1990. The UI Library was expanded by 50% in the early 1990s and
rededicated in 1994. Memorial Gymnasium. The Tudor Gothic-style Memorial
Gymnasium is another UI icon, known for its whimisical athletic gargoyles
perched along the brick building's ledges. The multi-purpose "Mem Gym" has a
modest seating capacity of only 1,500. Opened in 1928 to honor the Idaho
citizens who died in World War I (1917â€“18), the heavily buttressed structure
was designed by the chairman of the university's architecture department, David
C. Lang Memorial Gym was the primary venue for men's basketball until the
Kibbie Dome was enclosed in September 1975. The women's team hosted its home
games in the gym until 2001, when the Cowan Spectrum (inside the Kibbie Dome)
was completed. The gym is still in active use today as the home court for the
women's volleyball team, and several early season basketball games. It is also
used extensively for intramurals and open recreation, as well as for ROTC. The
MacLean baseball field was located directly south of the Memorial Gym, until
its infield was displaced by the construction of the College of Education
building in 1967. The catcher and batter faced southwest (towards the pitcher's
mound); the right field line was just south of the gym, running east-west. The
background of left and center field was the Shattuck Arboretum. The new
baseball field (Guy Wicks Field) was relocated northwest, to the vast
intramural fields near the Moscow-Pullman Highway, northwest of the Wallace
Complex dormitories. The batter and catcher now faced southeast, toward campus,
an unorthodox configuration resulting in a difficult sun field for the left
side of the defense (the recommended alignment is east-northeast). Due to
budget constraints, varsity baseball was dropped following the 1980 season, but
continued for a while as a club sport. MacLean was also the venue for football
until the opening of Neale Stadium in 1937. The swim center and physical
education building (formerly known as the "Women's Gym"), which both opened in
1970, are adjacent to the south side of the gym. In 1977, the Memorial
Gymnasium was added to the National Register of Historic Places after only 49
years. Under the Elms. Rare Camperdown elms line the walkway between the Music
building, Child Development Center and Administration Building. These "upside-
down" trees have been on campus for over 80 years and are among few of their
kind in the Northwest. The weeping branches and knotty trunk are formed by
being grafted upwards. Steam Plant. Built in 1926, the steam plant provides
heat to UI buildings from a single location. Originally designed to burn coal,
then oil, then natural gas, the plant was modified in 1986 to burn waste wood
chips leftover from local sawmills. The use of wood has significantly reduced
the emissions of the plant, as well as cut costs to heat the campus. The plant
is shut down twice a year for cleaning and maintenance. As a side benefit of
the heat generation, the steam pipes are routed underneath campus walkways and
provide clean (and ice free) walkways throughout the north Idaho winter.
Student housing. Student housing facilities that have students with dependent
children include South Hill Apartments and South Hill Vista Apartments. The
Moscow School District serves residents. Moscow High School is the district's
sole traditional high school. Student life. UI is a rural, residential campus,
with four residence hall communities to choose from on campus, as well as 27
housed fraternities and sororities. On campus residence is currently required
for freshmen, and many other upperclassmen choose to live on campus in the
Greek system or the residence halls. Apartments on campus are available for
families, married couples, graduate students, law students, and non-traditional
students. The "Law Cluster" is a group of apartments reserved for law students,
allowing for a community close to campus for law students, facilitating study
groups. Transportation. All students are permitted to have cars on campus,
which is also served by public transportation. The nearest airport, Pullman-
Moscow Regional, is west, east of Pullman. Other nearby airports are Lewiston
(34 miles (55Â km) south), and Spokane International, north. The nearest
passenger train station (Amtrak) is in Spokane, and the nearest bus station is
in downtown Moscow. Student organizations. Many students participate in a wide
variety of clubs and organizations. Clubs range anywhere from the sports to
faith based, and everything in between. Palousafest is a fair that brings clubs
and students together, and is a way for students to find out more about how to
get involved with extracurricular activities. The fair is usually the weekend
just before the fall semester starts. The prominent literary journal Fugue is
published at the university. Fraternity and Sorority Life. The University of
Idaho is home to 17 housed fraternities, 10 housed sororities, and 6
multicultural Greek organizations that make up more than 20% of the student
population, and over 44% of the students who live on campus (around 1,800
students). This fraternity and sorority community is unique in that it's one of
the few that allow freshmen to move in first semester as a living option, as
opposed to waiting until second semester or sophomore year. This system works
very well for the University and the students, with the Greeks having the
highest GPA for 9 consecutive semesters as of Spring 2011. Moscow. Moscow is a
college town, with 23,800 residents as of the 2010 census. It is located in the
rolling hills of the Palouse region of north central Idaho. The university is
organized into ten colleges; two are exclusively for graduate students (Law &
Graduate Studies). In July 2002, the College of Letters & Science was split
into two separate colleges: the College of Science and the College of Letters,
Arts, and Social Sciences (CLASS). Concurrently, the College of Mines and Earth
Resources was discontinued; its programs were split between the College of
Engineering and the new College of Science. Demographics. Moscow enrollment
(fall 2010) Enrollment by college Student demographics Fight song. Go, Vandals,
Go is the official fight song of the University of Idaho. The song was
originally written by J.M. "Morey" O'Donnell, a freshman at Idaho who later
became a prominent attorney in the state. He submitted it for a contest held by
the school's student government to choose a new fight song. Previously, the
Vandals had used a variation of "On, Wisconsin"' as its fight song. Most fight
songs are hard to sing because of the fast beat used to make them sound
spirited. However, O'Donnell wrote the song almost entirely with whole notes
and half notes to make it easy for a large football crowd to sing. He also
added a heavy drumbeat to carry the spirit. For many years, it has been cited
as one of the top fight songs in the United States. For example, 2002, Norm
Maves, Jr. of "The (Portland) Oregonian" described it as "the once and future
king of college fight songs, with a fanfare lead-in that could motivate a
successful infantry charge." Go Vandals Came a tribe from the North brave and
bold, Let's go!
