University of Essex The University of Essex is a British campus university
whose original and largest campus is near the town of Colchester, England. It
was established in 1963, received its Royal Charter in 1965 and is now one of
the UK's leading academic institutions with top-quality research, teaching and
an international reputation. The University is a member of the 1994 Group. It
has 18 main teaching departments and 36 centres and institutes in subjects
including biological sciences, computer science, acting, economics, business,
health/human sciences, history, language and linguistics, mathematical
sciences, human rights, law, literature, film studies, theatre studies,
philosophy, art history, psychology, psychoanalytic studies, sociology and
government. The university's main campus is located within Wivenhoe Park in the
English county of Essex, less than a mile (1.6¬ km) from the town of Wivenhoe &
from the town of Colchester. Apart from the Wivenhoe Park campus, there is a
rapidly developing campus in Southend-on-Sea (Essex's largest town), and the
East 15 Acting School is based in Loughton. The University's motto, "Thought
the harder, heart the keener", is adapted from the Anglo-Saxon poem "The Battle
of Maldon". The University exhibits diversity and a strongly international
character with 132 countries represented in its student body. The latest
Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) in 2008 ranked Essex ninth in the UK for the
quality of its research with more than 90% of research recognised
internationally for its quality, with 22% of research rated as 'world leading'.
The university enjoys collaborative partnerships with a number of institutions
across the eastern region. These are University Campus Suffolk, Colchester
Institute, Kaplan Open Learning (KOL), South Essex College and Writtle College.
History. Founding. In July 1959, Essex County Council accepted a proposal from
Alderman Leatherland that a university be established in the county. A
University Promotion Committee was formed chaired by Lord Lieutenant of Essex,
Sir John Ruggles-Brise, which submitted a formal application to the University
Grants Committee requesting that a University of Essex should be established.
Initial reports suggested that the Promotion Committee had recommended Hylands
Park in Chelmsford as the site for the new University, however in May 1961, the
foundation of the university was announced in the House of Commons with
Wivenhoe as the preferred location and in December of the same year, Wivenhoe
Park was acquired for the new university. In July 1962, Dr Albert Sloman, MA,
DPhil, Gilmour Professor of Spanish and Dean of the Faculty of Arts, University
of Liverpool, was appointed as Vice-Chancellor and the Rt. Hon. R A (later
Lord) Butler, CH, MP, was invited to be Chancellor, with Mr A Rowland-Jones
appointed as Registrar. The first Professors were appointed in May 1963: Alan
Gibson in Physics, Peter Townsend in Sociology, Donald Davie in Literature,
Richard Lipsey in Economics, Ian Proudman in Mathematics, Jean Blondel in
Government, and John Bradley in Chemistry. With its first staff appointed, a
development plan for the university was published and a ¬£1million Appeal Fund
was launched. Within six months the Appeal Fund had exceeded its ¬£1million
target with The Queen Mother and Sir Winston Churchill among contributors,
while work began on clearing the site for building work. In Autumn 1963, red
was chosen as the University colour and the first prospectus was prepared and
work began on the first permanent buildings; the science block and boiler room
next to Wivenhoe House. In January 1964, Hardy Amies designed the university's
academic robes and temporary teaching huts had to be erected close to Wivenhoe
House, while in March Sir John Ruggles-Brise was appointed the first Pro-
Chancellor and Alderman Leatherland the first Treasurer of the University. Two
months later the university's Armorial Bearings were published, with the motto
"Thought the harder, heart the keener". Expansion. In October 1964, the first
122 students arrived with 28 teaching staff in three schools: Comparative
Studies, Physical Sciences and Social Studies. Departments of Chemistry,
Physics, Government, Sociology, Literature, Mathematics and Economics open
along with the Language Centre (later the Department of Language and
Linguistics) and the Computing Centre (later the Department of Computer Science
and Electronic Engineering) with Denis Mesure elected as the first President of
the Students' Council. Work started on the first residential tower, Rayleigh in
December with The Queen approving the grant of Charter to take effect from 11
January 1965. 1965 brought 399 students enrolling for the start of the new
academic year; the number of academic staff more than doubled to 61; and the
first degrees, five MSc and five MA degrees were awarded. The Physics building
opened and the first six floors of Rayleigh tower were ready for occupation,
while work began on the Albert Sloman Library. The first female lecturer was
appointed: Dr Dorothy E. Smith in the Department of Sociology. In December,
University Court met for the first time with around 500 members. Six months
later, work started on the Lecture Theatre Building, plus the 'Topping out' of
Keynes tower. In October 1966, the Hexagon Restaurant and General Store opened,
with the number of students reaching 750. Lord Butler was installed as
Chancellor at a ceremony held in Colchester's Moot Hall in 1967 and the first
Honorary Degrees were presented, the University's Mace was carried for the
first time, while the first annual Degree Congregation saw 135 degrees
conferred in July. At the start of the next academic year, the departments of
Computer Science and Electronic Systems Engineering accepted their first
students, the SSRC Data Bank (later renamed the UK Data Archive) was
established and the Lecture Theatre Building and Library opened along with the
first phase of the Social and Comparative Studies building, while work
proceeded on Tawney and William Morris residential towers. The 1960s. Essex
University was at the forefront of 1960s student unrest. At a time of worldwide
protest against the Vietnam War, the student movement was taking off all over
the world. In March 1968, a demonstration against a visit to the University by
Enoch Powell received national publicity. Seven students were summoned to
disciplinary hearings but student sit-ins prevented these hearings taking
place. On Tuesday, 7 May 1968, Dr Inch from Porton Down came to give a lecture
at the university. In a carefully planned demonstration, an indictment was read
out as Dr Inch attempted to speak, citing chemical and biological warfare
activities at Porton Down. University authorities called in police with dogs,
probably for the first time in an English university. Students outnumbered
police and managed to prevent arrests. On Friday, 10 May, three students, Pete
Archard, Raphael Halberstadt and David Triesman (now Lord Triesman) were
suspended and ordered off the campus. No evidence or charges were notified to
the students, and no opportunity was given for the students to present their
defence. Wyvern reported that on Monday, 13 May, ‚ÄúStudents picket all
entrances to the University from early morning distributing leaflets calling
all students and staff to meeting to discuss suspension of the three students.
A huge meeting attended by nearly all the University population, voted
overwhelmingly to refuse to participate in the University ‚Äì in its place a
Free University was declared ‚Äù. The 1970s and the 1980s. Between the 1970s
and the 1980s, the University added a health Centre, day nursery, printing
centre, bookstore, exhibition gallery and expanded the current student
residences. New student residences were also constructed. The departments of
philosophy, school of law, human rights centre and the department of biological
sciences were opened. In the late 1970s, financial problems plagued the
university and threatened its existence. During this later period of the 70s to
the early 80s, the university began concentrating its teaching into large
departments. Cooperation with local companies was forged, allowing the
university to secure vital research contracts. Due to its growing international
reputation, the university began to attract a sizable number of International
Students. In 1987 Professor Martin Harris was appointed Vice-Chancellor, taking
over from the founding Vice-Chancellor, Albert Sloman. Also, in this year,
University of Essex alumnus Oscar Arias won the Nobel Peace Prize. The 1990s.
The university entered the 1990s with the expansion of its facilities, adding
new residential blocks to provide further living space for its student
population between 1991 and 1992. The Rab Butler building was opened in 1991 as
the headquarters for the British Household Panel Survey. By its 30th
anniversary in 1993, the university had built itself up into 17 key
departments, providing education and research opportunities for 5,500 students,
and employing 1,300 staff and faculty. The university also contained 5
industrial units and housed the Economic and Social Research Council's Data
Archive. Further expansion continued to take place after 1993, with the
¬£5.5¬ million expansion scheme for the provision of 234 new apartments for
1,200 students in a new student village. Developments. On 25 November 2004, Her
Majesty the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh visited the university as part of
its 40th anniversary celebrations (1964‚Äì2004). Some of the longest running
members of staff were invited to meet them at the presentation including the
University's first student, John M. Dowden. Starting postgraduate research on
fluid dynamics at the age of 23 in 1963, John later became a professor of
mathematics and was the head of the University's Mathematics Department from
2001‚Äì2005. He retired in September 2008. The university is constantly
expanding. The Network Centre building opened in May 2004 housing the
Department of Electronic Systems Engineering and parts of the Department of
Computer Science (who merged in 2007 to create Computer and Electronic
Systems). The University Quays, a student accommodation complex housing 770
students, opened in September 2003. The Ivor Crewe Lecture Hall, with a 1,000
seat capacity, opened in 2006. In Southend the ¬£26m Gateway Building opened in
2007, a former church been converted to the Clifftown Town Centre providing
East 15 students with studios and workshop spaces. University Square, a 560
bedroom development near to the Gateway building opened in September 2010. At
Wivenhoe Park, the 'Social Science Research Centre' was completed in February
2007, housing the University's Institute of Social and Economic Research and
the UK Data Archive. A new building for the School of Health and Human Sciences
was opened in 2008, as was the 'Centre for Brain Science' housing part of the
Psychology department. Work is currently underway on a multi-phase 'Knowledge
Gateway' project on the Wivenhoe campus. In 2013 three major projects are due
for completion on the Colchester campus: a new Student Centre and Library
extension, a new Business School building and The Meadows, a new 540 bedroom
student accommodation project. Also in 2013, a new building is due to be
completed providing a new library and teaching facilities in Southend. Wivenhoe
House, an 18th century manor house on Wivenhoe Park, closed in December 2009
and is due to reopen in 2012 as the Edge Hotel School, a four star country
house hotel which will also be the UKs first working hotel school dedicated to
the development of future leaders of the hotel and hospitality industry.
Departments and Research Centres. The university is organised into four
faculties, comprising 18 schools and departments, spanning the Humanities, Law
and Management, Social Sciences and Science and Engineering. In the last
national Research Assessment Exercise the University of Essex was ranked ninth
overall, with many schools and departments confirmed as amongst the best in the
country. Its departments of Economics, Government (Political Science) and
Sociology are well-known and are among the best in Europe. Essex's research in
politics, economics and sociology received top (5*) ratings in the UK
government's 2001 Research Assessment Exercise. The Sociology department is the
only in the country to have been awarded the highest rating in all six of the
national Research Assessment Exercises (RAE) that have been undertaken since
1986. In the RAE 2008, Essex has reconfirmed its position as the UK‚Äôs leading
university in the social sciences with Politics and Sociology ranked in first
position, and Economics in third position nationally. According to Times
Higher-QS world ranking exercise, Essex ranks as the 44th best in the world in
Sociology and belongs to the 51-100 best in the field of Politics and
International Studies. Also in the RAE 2008, the Essex Business School was
ranked second in the UK in the Accounting and Finance subject area, while
History was also ranked in second place, Linguistics fourth, and Art History
ninth in the UK. The results for History (second in the UK, 35 per cent of
research rated ‚Äòworld-leading‚Äô) and Philosophy (11th in the UK, 20 per cent
of research ‚Äòworld-leading‚Äô) come within months of both departments being
ranked second in the UK for overall student satisfaction in the National
Student Survey (NSS). Essex featured in the UK‚Äôs top ten in half of the 14
subject areas submitted. The Institute for Social and Economic Research (ISER)
is a research centre for the analysis of panel data in Economics and Sociology.
It opened in 1989 as the ESRC Research Centre on Micro-Social Change in Britain
and now houses the ESRC-funded Understanding Society project, a longitudinal
study of the socio-economic circumstances and attitudes of 100,000 individuals
in 40,000 British households. In September 2000 the East 15 Acting School
became part of the university. The school is based in Loughton in southwest
Essex and has a branch in Southend. The School of Computer Science and
Electronic Engineering was inaugurated on 1 August 2007. It was created by
merging two long-established departments: The Department of Computer Science
and the Department of Electronic Systems Engineering which both began in 1966.
It has particular strengths in Robotics, Telecommunications, Artificial
Intelligence and Logic and Computation. In 1999 a robotic football team from
the department came third in the RoboCup 99 - part of the Robot Wars (TV
series). Current notable academics in this school include Richard Bartle, best
known as co-creator of MUD1, Edward Tsang for his work on constraint
satisfaction and computational finance, Professor Ray Turner for his numerous
publication relating to Logic and Computation, Professor Vic Callaghan as head
of the Intelligent Environments Group (IEG) and Simon Lucas for his research
into Computational Intelligence and Computer Games namely for his research with
the UK Research Network on Artificial Intelligence and Video Game technologies.
In the Research Assessment Exercise 2008 the University of Essex scored well in
Computer Science and Informatics achieving 50% for research at level 3 of the
RAE scale and 40% at level 3 in Electrical and Electronic Engineering. The
Photonics Hyperhighway project began in 2010 and is planned to run for six
years. It was funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
(EPSRC) with an aims to focus on energy-efficient ultra high capacity ICT
infrastructure. The project plans to make broadband internet 100 times faster
including partnership with the BBC to help broadcast ultra high definition
content. The Centre for Computational Finance and Economic Agents (CCFEA) is an
interdisciplinary centre. It applies computational intelligence techniques to
computational finance and computational economics. Essex was the first UK
university to offer Master degrees in Computational Finance. The Institute of
Democracy and Conflict Resolution (IDCR), is planning a new flagship building
on the Knowledge Gateway part of the Colchester campus, having appointed world-
renowned architect Daniel Libeskind, an alumnus of the university. Partner
institutions. The university has strong regional agenda and a number of partner
institutions in the region: Colchester Institute, South Essex College (in
Southend), Writtle College (near Chelmsford), the Tavistock and Portman Trust
(in London) and University Campus Suffolk, a joint venture with the University
of East Anglia, with a central campus in Ipswich and five centres in Suffolk
and Norfolk. Its latest partner is Kaplan Open Learning, delivering on-line
foundation degrees. Reputation. Essex is among the smallest multi-faculty
universities in Britain and is a member of the 1994 Group. Despite its small
size, Essex has developed an international reputation for teaching and
research. The annual Summer School in Social Science Data Analysis and
Collection, now approaching its 41st year, attracts faculty and students from
all over the world as does the human rights centre celebrating its 25th year.
The university was known as a left-wing hotbed with respect to faculty and
students, but today is characterized, as most UK campuses, by rather less
radical student politics. The University of Essex was rated ninth in the UK in
the Research Assessment Exercise (RAE, 2008) and was in the top 20 for student
satisfaction, amongst mainstream English universities, following the National
Student Survey (NSS, 2011). The 2010 Nobel Prize for Economics was awarded to
Professor Christopher Pissarides who gained his BA and MA degrees in Economics
at the university in the early 1970s. ‚ÄúThis is an encouraging sign that
students are recognising the value of an Essex degree.‚Äù Rankings. According
to the Times Higher-QS world ranking exercise, the university ranks at 71 in
Social Sciences and Management and 272 at Arts & Humanities. The university
also performs well in the Guardian, Times and The Independent Rankings for
universities. It was placed 31st in the Guardian's 2009 League Table, 34th in
the Times 2009 Good University Guides, and 25th in The Independent's University
Guide 2009. The university confirmed its position as one of the UK‚Äôs elite
research universities when it was ranked as the 9th-best university in the UK
for the quality of its research in The Times, The Guardian, and The
Independent's 2008 Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) tables. A separate
Subject Ranking of Political Science Departments by Simon Hix of the London
School of Economics places the University's Government Department 2nd in UK and
17th worldwide, ahead of the University of Cambridge & University of Oxford in
the UK but behind the London School of Economics. According to an independent
study published in the Journal of the European Economic Association, economics
in Essex is ranked 5th in UK, 12th in Europe, and 54th in the world. Wivenhoe
Park campus. The main campus, Wivenhoe Park, was once painted by famous
landscape painter John Constable. With its concrete architecture, it is typical
of England's 1960s universities. Wivenhoe Park houses the main 1960s buildings
along with an 18th century house that also features in Constable's painting.
Wivenhoe House was, until 2010, operated as a hotel and conference centre. It
was closed in December 2010 for major refurbishment and will reopen in 2012 as
a combined four-star country house hotel and hotel school. There are 2 small
lakes on campus (in the middle of one is the Vice-Chancellor's House). The
architect of the University of Essex campus took the Tuscan town of San
Gimignano with its squares and towers as an inspiration (the university has six
residential towers mainly for undergraduates, but the original plan was to
build 29). As well as the towers, South Courts and the University Quays
residences provide enough space to guarantee every first year a place on campus
as well as all overseas students. Due to its particular form of architecture
involving the use of prefabricated concrete and glass, the university is
referred to as a Plate Glass University. The library has one of the few
remaining still operating continuous loop paternoster lifts in the country.
Student body. The university has a very large population of international
students, with over 4,235 international students in 2011. Nearly 50% of
postgraduates, and 40% undergraduates are students whose country of origin is
outside of the UK (including EU). The university boasts a large proportion of
local students from state schools, and a third of its undergraduates are from
working-class homes. Students' Union. The University of Essex Students' Union
is well regarded nationally with awards including: officially recognised as a
leading Students‚Äô Union by the Students‚Äô Union Evaluation Initiative,
awarded Investors In People status as a good employer, winner of Sound Impact
Environmental Award for ethical and environmental performance, Sub Zero was
voted ‚ÄòBest Student Venue in the UK‚Äô at the Smirnoff BEDA Awards. Some of
the major music bands to play in Sub Zero include AC/DC, Blur, Iggy Pop, The
Kinks, Can, King Crimson, Pink Floyd, Radiohead, The Smiths and The Specials.
The Students' Union runs the majority of commercial services on campus. Its
shops stock imported food products, reflecting the university's international
community. It has licensed venues including the SU bar and club-style venues:
Mondo, Level 2, and Sub Zero (formerly the Underground and before that the
Dancehall), which have hosted many bands and DJs. Sub Zero was voted best
student union venue upon its refurbishment and is one of the biggest in the
country, with a capacity of over 1,200. The Students' Union Bar underwent a
¬£400,000 refurbishment in the summer of 2010. The Students Union employs about
380 student staff and 50 permanent staff to work in its shops, venues, etc. The
University of Essex Students Union was the first SU in the UK to receive the
'Investors in people Gold' award in late 2009. The Students' Union underwent
reform in 2007-8, in which the trustee and executive functions were separated,
and greater voice was given to satellite campuses. The Executive Committee on
the main Colchester campus is composed of seven full-time officers (the
President and six vice-presidents) and six part-time officers. The Students'
Union is a member of the National Union of Students. Sports. The university has
sports clubs, including for sports such as disc golf and American Football.
Many of the university's Sports Clubs, known as the Essex Blades, achieve
national success. In 2005‚Äì06, the Pool Team became the best in Britain
winning the BUSA Championships defeating Cardiff in the final. In the 2007‚Äì08
season, the University of Essex Rugby Club won the BUSA Vase defeating Robert
Gordon University 15‚Äì10 in the final as well as achieving promotion. The
university's basketball and netball clubs reached BUSA finals in the 2007‚Äì08
season. In 2012 the male and female Handball Team won the UK Championship in
Manchester. The university has a sports centre, including a fitness suite,
squash courts, netball and tennis courts and a 9 metre climbing wall used by
the University of Essex Mountaineering Club. The university has a sailing
clubhouse and boat-park at nearby Brightlingsea. Once a year, 'Derby Day' is a
sports contest between the University of Essex clubs and the University of East
Anglia sport teams. The event is hosted alternately by Essex and UEA. Recent
buildings. The Ivor Crewe Lecture Hall, which opened in October 2006 and was
designed by the architect Patel Taylor, has attracted a mixed response, with
Prince Charles reputedly referring to it as 'like a dustbin'., while the Civic
Trust, a charity of which he is patron, have awarded it a Civic Trust award
(2008) for making 'an outstanding contribution to the quality and appearance of
the environment', The building was named after Professor Sir Ivor Crewe in
April 2007, to mark his retirement from the position of vice chancellor, a
position he had held since 1995. The university's 'Gateway' building in
Southend was opened in January 2007, housing the academic activities including
business, health and acting, as well as being home to programmes operated in
collaboration with Queen Mary Dental School, a GP practice and a business
incubation centre. New buildings have opened housing the departments of
Psychology and Health and Human Sciences. The Tony Rich Teaching Centre, built
on the site of the former central boiler house, was officially opened on 6
October 2010. Links with industry. Through the 1990s, and the influence of
policy activity in the United States stimulated by the Bayh-Dole Act, the
British Government wanted to strengthen links between universities and
industry. The University of Essex has received grants from the Higher Education
Innovation Fund (HEIF) delivered by HEFCE and other government departments to
develop such capacity. A Research and Enterprise Office has been established,
which is to be complemented with the development of a research park adjacent to
the campus. Links between the university and industry have mostly been found
within the School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering (CSEE). CSEE
has maintained a long standing relationship with the Japanese photography and
printing company, Canon, as well as links with British Telecom. Visual
identity. The graphic identity, which includes the E logo formed from five
squares, was created in 1996 by the British design consultancy, Lloyd
Northover, founded by John Lloyd (graphic designer) and Jim Northover. Notable
alumni. The former President of Costa Rica, √ìscar Arias, completed his
doctorate in Political Science at the University in 1973, and received the
Nobel Peace Prize in 1987. Ex-Vice President of Costa Rica, Kevin Casas Zamora,
also completed his studies in Essex, earning a MA in Latin American Government
& Politics in 1993. In Oct 2010, the Nobel Economics prize was jointly awarded
to Christopher A. Pissarides, who had completed his BA and MA in Economics at
the University of Essex in the early 1970s. Other political figures educated at
Essex include the foreign ministers of Slovenia (Dimitrij Rupel) & Iraq
(Hoshyar Zebari), Conservative Party MPs Virginia Bottomley and John Bercow,
now Speaker of the House of Commons, Labour Party MP Siobhain McDonagh,
Pakistani Social Activist Omar Asghar Khan, South African politician Thozamile
Botha and Singapore social activist James Gomez (MA 1994). Two of those
convicted of conspiracy to cause explosions connected to The Angry Brigade,
Hilary Creek and Anna Mendleson, had been to Essex University but left without
taking their degrees. Notable alumni in the field of the Humanities and Media
include Stephen Daldry and Mike Leigh, who both studied at the East 15 Acting
School (part of the University of Essex since 2001), the Artistic Director
William Burdett-Coutts (MA Drama), the Documentary Filmmaker Nick Broomfield,
filmmaker David Yates, the TV comedy producer Geoff Posner, the Malaysian Poet
Kee Thuan Chye, the veteran BBC Correspondent Brian Hanrahan, the novelists
Lucy Ellman, Jonathan Wilson, Tim Binding, John Lawton, as well as the Booker
Prize-winning author Ben Okri. Musicians include jazz guitarist John Etheridge
and jazz saxophonist Gilad Atzmon. In the field of architecture, world-renowned
architect Daniel Libeskind, who was commissioned to rebuild the World Trade
Center Site in New York City, attended Essex and completed an MA in the History
and Theory of Architecture in 1972. The architectural historian Alberto P√©rez-
G√≥mez, subsequently head of the History and Theory of Architecture program at
McGill University in Canada, obtained his M.A. and PhD degrees at Essex,
graduating in 1975. The architect Frank Anatole, a member of the design team of
the London Eye, graduated from Essex in 1983 with a degree in Literature. Many
of the university's graduates have gone on to staff university departments
worldwide. Examples include the late Professor Erkin Bairam (Economics, Otago),
Professor Kusuma Karunaratne (Sinhala, Dean of the Faculty of Graduate Studies,
and Vice-Chancellor, Colombo), Dr. Farish A. Noor (NTU), Professor Michael
Taylor (Politics, Washington) and Professor Jean Dr√®ze (Economics, Delhi). It
has been estimated that half of the sociology professors in UK Higher Education
have completed all or part of their education at Essex. Some graduates have
returned to Essex to hold positions within the university's academic
departments. These include the philosopher Simon Critchley, Dean of
International Development, Martin Henson and the Director of Essex's Human
Right's Centre, John Packer.
