University of California, Santa Cruz The University of California, Santa Cruz,
also known as UC Santa Cruz or UCSC, is a public, collegiate university, one of
ten campuses in the University of California. Located 80 miles (130Â km) south
of San Francisco at the edge of the coastal community of Santa Cruz, the campus
lies on of rolling, forested hills overlooking the Pacific Ocean and Monterey
Bay. Founded in 1965, UC Santa Cruz began as a showcase for progressive, cross-
disciplinary undergraduate education, innovative teaching methods and
contemporary architecture. Since then, it has evolved into a modern research
university with a wide variety of both undergraduate and graduate programs,
while retaining its reputation for strong undergraduate support and student
political activism. The residential college system, which consists of ten small
colleges, is intended to combine the student support of a small college with
the resources of a major university. History. Although some of the original
founders had already outlined plans for an institution like UCSC as early as
the 1930s, the opportunity to realize their vision did not present itself until
the City of Santa Cruz made a bid to the University of California Regents in
the mid-1950s to build a campus just outside town, in the foothills of the
Santa Cruz Mountains. The Santa Cruz site was selected over a competing
proposal to build the campus closer to the population center of San Jose. Santa
Cruz was selected for the beauty, rather than the practicality, of its
location, however, and its remoteness led to the decision to develop a
residential college system that would house most of the students on-campus. The
formal design process of the Santa Cruz campus began in the late 1950s,
culminating in the Long Range Development Plan of 1963. Construction had
started by 1964, and the University was able to accommodate its first students
(albeit living in trailers on what is now the East Field athletic area) in
1965. The campus was intended to be a showcase for contemporary architecture,
progressive teaching methods, and undergraduate research. According to founding
chancellor Dean McHenry, the purpose of the distributed college system was to
combine the benefits of a major research university with the intimacy of a
smaller college. UC President Clark Kerr shared a passion with former Stanford
roommate McHenry to build a university modeled as "several Swarthmores" (i.e.,
small liberal arts colleges) in close proximity to each other. Roads on campus
were named after UC Regents who voted in favor of building the campus. Impact
on Santa Cruz. Although the city of Santa Cruz already exhibited a strong
conservation ethic before the founding of the university, the coincidental rise
of the counterculture of the 1960s with the university's establishment
fundamentally altered its subsequent development. Early student and faculty
activism at UCSC pioneered an approach to environmentalism that greatly
impacted the industrial development of the surrounding area. The lowering of
the voting age to 18 in 1971 led to the emergence of a powerful student-voting
bloc. A large and growing population of politically liberal UCSC alumni changed
the electorate of the town from predominantly Republican to markedly left-
leaning, consistently voting against expansion measures on the part of both
town and gown. Mike Rotkin, UCSC alumnus, lecturer in Community Studies, and
self-described 'socialist-feminist,' has been elected Mayor of Santa Cruz
several times. Expansion plans. Plans for increasing enrollment over the next
14 years to 19,500 students, adding 1,500 faculty and staff, and, secondarily
the anticipated environmental impacts of such action encountered opposition
from the city, the local community, and the student body. City voters in 2006
passed two measures calling on UCSC to pay for the impacts of campus growth. A
Santa Cruz Superior Court judge invalidated the measures, ruling they were
improperly put on the ballot. In 2008, the university, city, county and
neighborhood organizations reached an agreement to set aside numerous lawsuits
and allow the expansion to occur. UCSC agreed to local government scrutiny of
its north campus expansion plans, to provide housing for 67 percent of the
additional students on campus, and to pay municipal development and water fees.
George Blumenthal, UCSC's 10th Chancellor, intends to mitigate growth
constraints in Santa Cruz by developing off-campus sites in Silicon Valley. The
NASA Ames Research Center campus is planned to ultimately hold 2,000 UCSC
students â€“ about 10% of the entire university's future student body as
envisioned for 2020. In April 2010, UC Santa Cruz opened its new $35 million
Digital Arts Research Center; a project in planning since 2004. Budget cuts. In
a Faculty Senate meeting on May 21, 2009, Chancellor George Blumenthal
described budget cuts that would be needed because of a 20 percent drop in
state funding. While he said that the ultimate amount of these cuts were
unknown, he said that they would be above the $13 million already cut.
According to the UCSC chancellor's office, UCSC is receiving a budget cut of
$52.3 million for the 2008â€“2009 and 2009â€“2010 fiscal years, as of July 23,
2009. Furthermore, UCSC will be undergo a furlough and pay cut program along
with all other UC campuses. Campus. The UCSC campus is located south of San
Francisco, in the Ben Lomond Mountain ridge of the Santa Cruz Mountains.
Elevation varies from at the campus entrance to at the northern boundary, a
difference of about . The southern portion of the campus primarily consists of
a large, open meadow, locally known as the Great Meadow. To the north of the
meadow lie most of the campus' buildings, many of them among redwood groves.
The campus is bounded on the south by the city's upper-west-side neighborhoods,
on the east by Harvey West Park and the Pogonip open space preserve, on the
north by Henry Cowell Redwoods State Park near the town of Felton, and on the
west by Gray Whale Ranch, a portion of Wilder Ranch State Park. The campus is
built on a portion of the Cowell Family ranch, which was purchased by the
University of California in 1961. The northern half of the campus property has
remained in its undeveloped, forested state apart from fire roads and hiking
and bicycle trails. The heavily-forested area has allowed UC Santa Cruz to
operate a recreational vehicle park as a form of student housing. A number of
shrines, dens and other student-built curiosities are scattered around the
northern campus. These structures, mostly assembled from branches and other
forest detritus, were formerly concentrated in the area known as Elfland, a
glen the University razed in 1992 to build colleges Nine and Ten. Students were
able to relocate and save some of the structures, however. Creeks traverse the
UCSC campus within several ravines. Footbridges span those ravines on
pedestrian paths linking various areas of campus. The footbridges make it
possible to walk to any part of campus within 20 minutes in spite of the campus
being built on a mountainside with varying elevations. At night, orange lights
illuminate the occasionally fogged-in paths. There are a number of natural
points of interest throughout the UCSC grounds. The "Porter Caves" are a
popular site among students on the west side of campus. The entrance is located
in the forest between the Porter College meadow and Empire Grade Road. The
caves wind through a set of caverns, some of which are challenging, narrow
passages. Tree Nine is another popular destination for students. A large
Douglas Fir spanning approximately tall, Tree Nine is located in the upper
campus of UCSC behind College Nine. The tree had been a popular climbing spot
for many years but due to environmental corrosion and fear of student injuries,
UC ground services sawed off the limbs to makes it nearly impossible to climb.
For specific directions, reference: directions to Tree Nine For the less
experienced tree-climber, students also frequent Sunset Tree located on the
east side of the meadow behind the UCSC Music Center. The combination of porous
limestone bedrock with torrential coastal winter rains can lead to sinkholes;
there are two such 'bottomless' pits across from the Science Hill complex. The
Jack Baskin Engineering Building, formerly known as the Applied Sciences
Building, began sinking shortly after it was built; in the late 1970s, hundreds
of tons of concrete were poured underneath its foundation to prevent it from
sinking. The UCSC campus is also one of the few homes to Mima Mounds in the
United States. They are extremely rare in the United States and in the world in
general. Academics. The university offers 63 undergraduate majors and 35
minors, with graduate programs in 33 fields. Popular undergraduate majors
include Art, Business Management Economics, Molecular and Cell Biology, and
Psychology. Interdisciplinary programs, such as Feminist Studies, American
Studies, Environmental Studies, Digital Arts and New Media, and the unique
History of Consciousness Department are also hosted alongside UCSC's more
traditional academic departments. In an effort to cut $13 million, as required
by the University of California office of the President and Board of Regents in
a decision to cut 10% from the budget of each campus, UCSC nearly eliminated
its longstanding and sometimes controversial undergraduate major Community
Studies in 2009. The interdisciplinary major continues to be offered, though
cuts to department staff raised concern by students that the curriculum has
already been seriously damaged. Community Studies and other majors within the
Social Sciences division, including some graduate programs, remain threatened
by more cuts expected in the near future. Research. Although designed as a
liberal arts-oriented university, UCSC quickly acquired a graduate-level
natural science research component with the appointment of plant physiologist
Kenneth V. Thimann as the first provost of Crown College. Thimann developed
UCSC's early Division of Natural Sciences and recruited other well-known
science faculty and graduate students to the fledgling campus. Immediately upon
its founding, UCSC was also granted administrative responsibility for the Lick
Observatory, which established the campus as a major center for astronomy
research. Founding members of the Social Science and Humanities faculty created
the unique History of Consciousness graduate program in UCSC's first year of
operation. UCSC's organic farm and garden program is the oldest in the country,
and pioneered organic horticulture techniques internationally. , UCSC's faculty
included two members of the Institute of Medicine, 21 members of the Academy of
Arts and Sciences, and eleven members of the National Academy of Sciences. The
young Baskin School of Engineering, UCSC's first professional school and home
to the Expressive Intelligence Studio, and the Center for Biomolecular Science
and Engineering are gaining recognition, as has the work that UCSC researchers
David Haussler and Jim Kent have done on the Human Genome Project, including
the widely used UCSC Genome Browser. UCSC administers the National Science
Foundation's Center for Adaptive Optics. Off-campus research facilities
maintained by UCSC include the Lick and Keck Observatories and the Long Marine
Laboratory. In September 2003, a ten-year task order contract valued at more
than $330 million was awarded by NASA Ames Research Center to the University of
California to establish and operate a University Affiliated Research System
(UARC). UCSC manages the UARC for the University of California. Rankings. UC
Santa Cruz is currently ranked No. 75 in the list of Best National Universities
in the United States by the "US News & World Reports", and 56th best by "The
Washington Monthly". According to a 2005 report by SCI-BYTES magazine, UCSC
ranked second in the United States for academic research impact in the field of
space sciences between 1999 and 2003, behind Princeton University. A report in
2002 had ranked UCSC first for research impact in the space sciences and second
in physics. In the last National Research Council rankings of graduate
programs, published in 1995, Astronomy and Astrophysics and Linguistics both
ranked in the top ten. In 2009, RePEc, an online database of research economics
articles, ranked the UCSC Economics Department sixth in the world in the field
of international finance. In 2007, High Times magazine placed UCSC as first
among US universities as a "counterculture college." In 2009, The Princeton
Review (with "Gamepro" magazine) ranked UC Santa Cruz's Game Design major among
the top 50 in the country. In 2011, The Princeton Review and Gamepro Media
ranked UC Santa Cruz's graduate programs in Game Design as seventh in the
nation. In 2012, UCSC was ranked No. 3 in the Most Beautiful Campus list of
Princeton Review. Residential colleges. The undergraduate program, with only
the partial exception of those majors run through the University's School of
Engineering, is still based on the version of the "residential college system"
outlined by Clark Kerr and Dean McHenry at the inception of their original
plans for the campus (see History, above). Upon admission, all undergraduate
students have the opportunity to choose one of ten colleges, with which they
usually stay affiliated for their entire undergraduate careers. There are cases
where some students switch college affiliations as each college holds a
different graduation ceremony. Almost all faculty members are affiliated with a
college as well. The individual colleges provide housing and dining services,
while the university as a whole offers courses and majors to the general
student community. Other universities with similar college systems include Rice
University and the University of California, San Diego. Cowell College Image:
Stevenson College.jpg|Crown College Image:Merrill_College.jpg|Merrill College
Image:Porter College, entrance, UCSC.jpg|Porter College Image:
KresgeApartmentsandLaundry.JPG|Kresge College File:Oakes College 1.jpg|Oakes
College File:UCSC College Eight.jpg|College Eight Image:College 9.jpg|College
Nine Image:College 10.jpg|College Ten  Enrollment and retention. In 2008, UCSC
offered admission to a record number of 19,138 new undergraduate students out
of 25,746 applications for the Fall term, representing an increase in
selectivity to 74.3 percent from 82.8 percent admitted in 2007. In 2009, UCSC
offered admission to 63.7% of applicants. UCSC hopes to contain the entering
class to about 3,700 students. In the Fall 2006 quarter, UCSC enrolled 13,941
undergraduates and 1,419 graduate and postgraduate students, for a student body
total of 15,360. In general, graduation and retention rates are above national
averages but below the mean among UC campuses. Among students who entered in
1999, 70% graduated within six years, ten percentage points below the UC
average. Earlier statistics show that the six-year graduation rate is above the
mean for both NCAA Division I schools and a sample of major universities
throughout the United States. About half of graduates pursue further education,
and 13 percent proceed to advanced degree programs within six months of
graduation. Grading. For most of its history, UCSC employed a unique student
evaluation system. With the exception of the choice of letter grades in science
courses the only grades assigned were "pass" and "no record", supplemented with
narrative evaluations. Beginning in 1997, UCSC allowed students the option of
selecting letter grade evaluations, but course grades were still optional until
2000, when faculty voted to require students receive letter grades. Students
were still given narrative evaluations to complement the letter grades. , the
narrative evaluations were deemed an unnecessary expenditure. Still, some
professors write evaluations for all students while some would write
evaluations for specific students upon request. Students can still elect to
receive a "pass/no pass" grade, but many academic programs limit or even forbid
pass/no pass grading. A grade of C and above would receive a grade of "pass".
Overall, students may now earn no more than 25% of their UCSC credits on a
"pass/no pass" basis. Although the default grading option for almost all
courses offered is now "graded", most course grades are still accompanied by
written evaluations. Library. The McHenry Library houses UCSC's arts and
letters collection, with most of the scientific reading at the newer Science
and Engineering Library. The McHenry Library was designed by John Carl
Warnecke. In addition, the colleges host smaller libraries, which serve as
quiet places to study. The McHenry Special Collections Library includes the
archives of Robert A. Heinlein, the largest collection of Edward Weston
photographs in the country, the mycology book collection of composer John Cage,
a large collection of works by Satyajit Ray, the Hayden White collection of
16th century Italian printing, a photography collection with nearly half a
million items, and the Mary Lea Shane Archive. The latter contains an extensive
collection of photographs, letters, and other documents related to Lick
Observatory dating back to 1870. A new addition to the library opened on March
31, 2008, including a "cyber study" room and a Global Village cafÃ©. The
original library reopened on June 22, 2011 after seismic upgrades and other
renovations. Grateful Dead archive. In 2008, UCSC agreed to house the Grateful
Dead archives at the McHenry Library. UCSC plans to devote an entire room at
the library, to be called "Dead Central," to display the collection and
encourage research. UCSC beat out petitions from Stanford and UC Berkeley to
house the archives. Grateful Dead guitarist Bob Weir said that UCSC is "a seat
of neo-Bohemian culture that we're a facet of. There could not have been a
cozier place for this collection to land." Silicon Valley entrepreneurs and
Dead fans Roger McNamee and Bill Watkins are expected to join a committee to
oversee and raise funds for the project. The archive became open to the public
July 29, 2012. Student life. UCSC students are known for political activism. In
2005, a Pentagon surveillance program deemed student opposition to military
recruiters on campus a "credible threat," the only campus antiwar action to
receive the designation. In February 2006, Chancellor Denice Denton got the
designation removed. Military recruiters declined to return to UCSC the
following year, but returned in 2008 to a more low-keyed student reception and
protests using elements of guerrilla theatre, rather than vandalism or physical
violence. Thanks to students passing a $3 quarterly tuition increase to support
buying renewable energy in 2006, UCSC is the sixth-largest buyer of renewable
energy among college campuses nationwide. UC Santa Cruz is also well known for
its cannabis culture. On April 20, 2007, approximately 2000 UCSC students
gathered at Porter Meadow to celebrate the annual "420". Students and others
openly smoked marijuana while campus police stood by. The once student-only
event has grown since the city of Santa Cruz passed Measure K in 2006, an
ordinance making marijuana use a low-priority crime for police. The 2007 event
attracted a total of 5,000 participants. The university does not condone the
gathering, but has taken steps to regulate the event and ensure security for
all participants. On April 20, 2010, the school administration shut down the
west entrance to campus and limited the amount of buses that could drive
through campus. Another well known tradition is what is known as "First Rain".
Students run around campus naked or nearly naked to celebrate the school year's
first night of heavy rain. The run begins at Porter and proceeds to travel
through all the other colleges, finishing with skinny dipping at OPERS swimming
pool. Student government. The Student Union Assembly was founded in 1985 to
better coordinate bargaining positions between students and administration on
campus-wide issues. All the residential colleges and six ethnic and gender-
based organizations send delegates to SUA. There is a total of 138 recognized
student groups . Student media. All Student media organizations are funded by a
student council referendum of $3.20 per student per quarter. Housing. Most of
the UCSC undergraduate housing is affiliated with one of the ten residential
colleges. The residence halls, which include both shared and private rooms,
typically house fifteen to twenty students per floor and have common bathrooms
and lounge areas. Some halls have coed floors where men and women share
bathroom facilities, others have separate bathroom facilities for men and
women. Single-gender, gender-neutral and substance-free floors are also
available. All of the colleges, except for Kresge, have both residence halls
and apartments. Kresge is all apartments. Apartments are typically shared by
four to eight students, have common living/dining rooms, kitchens and
bathrooms, and a combination of shared and private bedrooms. Apartments at
colleges other than Kresge are generally reserved for students above the
freshman level. In addition to the residential colleges, housing is available
at the Village on the lower quarry, populated by continuing, transfer, and
graduate students; the University Inn, a remodeled hotel in downtown Santa Cruz
that accommodates all students; Redwood Grove, formerly Kresge East, now
available to applicants from all colleges; and the University Town Center, also
located downtown, that primarily serves international students. Graduate
Student Housing is available near Science Hill, and UCSC also offers Family
Student Housing units as well as a Camper Park for student-owned trailers and
RVs. Greek life. UCSC is home to few fraternities and sororities. The first
Greek organization on campus, Theta Chi, was given colony status on January 10,
1987 and chartered on October 14, 1989 (designation: Theta Iota). In the
beginning, fraternities like Theta Chi and Sigma Alpha Epsilon were met with
strong opposition from the student body. Student groups like P.A.C. (People's
Alternative Community), S.A.G.E. (Students Against Greek Environments), and
M.A.C. (Men's Alternative Community) protested the existence of Greek life at
the UCSC campus. In 2003, the campus gained national recognition when MTV's
reality show "Fraternity Life" documented the lives of students pledging Delta
Omega Chi. During the shooting, a few of the students fished a 15-year-old koi
named Midas out of a pond at Porter College, barbecued it, and ate it. Since
the incident was captured on video, the individuals involved were charged with
misdemeanor grand theft and vandalism. However, since this time, Greek life has
flourished at UCSC, making way for fraternities like Tau Kappa Epsilon, Sigma
Pi, Lambda Phi Epsilon, Sigma Phi Zeta, Alpha Epsilon Pi, Sigma Lambda Beta,
Psi Chi Omega, and Pi Alpha Phi. Sororities on campus include alpha Kappa Delta
Phi, Gamma Phi Beta, Kappa Kappa Gamma, Sigma Pi Alpha, Sigma Lambda Gamma,
Tri-Chi, Sigma Omicron Pi, Kappa Zeta, and Alpha Psi. Aside from social
fraternities and sororities on campus, there are also a number of professional
organizations as well. There are Kappa Gamma Delta, a prehealth sorority, Alpha
Phi Omega, a coed service fraternity, Phi Alpha Delta, a pre-law fraternity,
and Delta Sigma Pi, a co-ed professional business fraternity. It also has
progressed to include Delta Lambda Psi, the nation's first gender neutral queer
Greek organization established in 2005. Sustainability. Though UCSC has been
known for its conservation efforts and environmentally minded students since it
was founded, since 2000, enthusiasm for the UCSC sustainability movement has
grown steadily among students and administrators alike. Students established
the Student Environmental Center (SEC) in 2001, have held annual Earth Summits,
and established a sustainability funding body, the Campus Sustainability
Council. In 2004, the UC Policy on Sustainable Practices was released, stating
that the University of California Office of the President was committed to
minimizing its impact on the environment and reducing its dependence on non-
renewable energy. This set the scene for huge breakthroughs in 2006, when a
Committee on Sustainability and Stewardship (CSS) was established and a campus-
wide Sustainability Assessment was completed. The following year, the pilot
Sustainability Office was created to help institutionalize sustainability,
coordinate communication and collaboration between the many entities already
engaged in campus sustainability activities at UCSC, support policy
implementation, and serve as a resource for the campus. Sustainability has
become a major part of every aspect of the campus, and students, staff, and
faculty campus-wide are working toward sustainability in a variety of different
ways. History. 2010-2011 2009-2010 2008-2009 2007-2008 2006-2007 1965-2006
Athletics. UCSC competes in Division III of the NCAA as an Independent member.
There are twelve varsity sports (men's and women's basketball, tennis, soccer,
volleyball, swimming and diving, women's golf, and women's cross country). UCSC
teams are nationally ranked in tennis, soccer, men's volleyball, and swimming.
After defeating Emory to win the 2007 National Championship in men's tennis,
UCSC has won six men's tennis team championships, and have been defending
champions in tennis for two of the past three years. The Banana Slugs were also
runners-up in men's soccer in 2004. In the 2006 season, the men's water polo
team won the Division III championship, as well as an overall ranking of 19th
in the nation. However, both the men and women's water polo teams were cut in
2008 due to budget constraints. UCSC is one of the largest but one of the least
funded NCAA Division III members. In addition to its NCAA sports, UCSC
maintains a number of successful club sides including its women's rugby team,
which won the Division II National Collegiate Championship during its '05â€“'06
season. UCSC also fields an often victorious men's lacrosse team, which
competes against other western universities in the WCLL. After a highly
successful 2008 season, the team traveled to Texas for nationals. Although UCSC
never had a track, the residential colleges regularly competed in an improvised
"Slug Run" every spring from 1967 to 1982, though the Run now is a community
event and fundraiser event hosted by the cross-country club for much needed
fund to pay for entry fees, hotel, and transportation to race. Approximately
25% of the student population participates in intramural athletics, which tend
to be better funded than the intercollegiate athletic programs. Mascot. UCSC's
mascot is the banana slug (specifically, "Ariolimax dolichophallus"). In 1981,
when the university began participating in NCAA intercollegiate sports, the
then-chancellor and some student athletes declared the mascot to be the "sea
lions." Most students disliked the new mascot and offered an alternative
mascot, the banana slug. In 1986, students voted via referendum to declare the
banana slug the official mascot of UCSC â€“ a vote the chancellor refused to
honor, arguing that only athletes should choose the mascot. When a poll of
athletes showed that they, too, wanted to be "Slugs," the chancellor relented.
The June 16, 1986, issue of "People" magazine featured a full-page spread
dedicated to the selection of the Banana Slug as the official mascot of UCSC
(see page 85). A sea lion statue can still be seen in front of the Thimann Hall
lecture building. In February 2008, ESPN Sports Travel named the UCSC Banana
Slug as one of the ten best nicknames in college basketball. The "Fiat Slug"
logo prominently featured on campus is a trademark of UCSC owned by the
Regents. It was developed by two students during the mascot controversy, who
later incorporated as "Oxford West" and licensed their design from the Regents
to produce clothing inspired by the university. The slug also is featured along
with the school's logo on Vincent Vega's T-shirt during the 1994 film "Pulp
Fiction".
