University of Sydney The University of Sydney is a public university located in
Sydney, New South Wales. The main campus spreads across the suburbs of
Camperdown and Darlington on the southwestern outskirts of the Sydney CBD.
Founded in 1850, it is the oldest university in Australia and Oceania. It has
32,393 undergraduate and 16,627 graduate students (2011). The University of
Sydney is organised into sixteen faculties and schools, through which it offers
bachelor's degrees, master's degrees, and doctoral degrees. Three Nobel
laureates have been affiliated with the University as graduate and faculty.
Sydney consistently ranks amongst the top universities in Australia and
Oceania. In 2012, it was ranked 39th in the world; 3rd in Australia, behind
Australian National University (24th) and the University of Melbourne (36th) in
the 2012 QS World University Rankings. The University of Sydney is a member of
Australia's Group of Eight, Academic Consortium 21, the Association of Pacific
Rim Universities (APRU) and the Worldwide Universities Network. The University
is also colloquially known as one of Australia's sandstone universities.
History. In 1848, in the New South Wales Legislative Council, William Wentworth
proposed a plan to expand the existing Sydney College into a larger university.
Wentworth argued that a state university was imperative for the growth of a
society aspiring towards self-government, and that it would provide the
opportunity for 'the child of every class, to become great and useful in the
destinies of his country'. It would take two attempts on Wentworth's behalf,
however, before the plan was finally adopted. The University was established
via the passage of the University of Sydney Act, on 24 September 1850 and was
assented on 1 October 1850 by Sir Charles Fitzroy. Two years later, the
University was inaugurated on 11 October 1852 in the Big Schoolroom of what is
now Sydney Grammar School. The first principal was John Woolley. On 27 February
1858 the University received its Royal Charter from Queen Victoria, giving
degrees conferred by the university rank and recognition equal to those given
by universities in the UK. By 1859, the University had moved to its current
site in the Sydney suburb of Camperdown. In 1858, the passage of the Electoral
Act provided for the University to become a constituency for the New South
Wales Legislative Assembly as soon as there were 100 graduates with higher
degrees. This seat in Parliament was first filled in 1876, but was abolished in
1880 one year after its second Member, Edmund Barton, was elected to the
Legislative Assembly. Most of the estate of John Henry Challis was bequeathed
to the University, which received a sum of Â£200,000 in 1889. This was thanks
in part due to William Montagu Manning (Chancellor 1878â€“1895) who argued
against the claims by British Tax Commissioners. The following year seven
professorships were created; anatomy, zoology, engineering, history, law, logic
& mental philosophy, and modern literature. 1950â€“2000. The New England
University College was founded as part of the University of Sydney in 1938, and
separated to become the University of New England in 1954. During the late
1960s, the University of Sydney was at the centre of rows to introduce courses
on Marxism and feminism at the major Australian universities. At one stage,
newspaper reporters descended on the University to cover brawls,
demonstrations, secret memos and a walk-out by Professor David Armstrong, a
respected philosopher who held the Challis Chair of Philosophy from 1959 to
1991, after students at one of his lectures openly demanded a course on
feminism. The philosophy department split over the issue to become the
Traditional and Modern Philosophy Department, headed by Armstrong and following
a more traditional approach to philosophy, and the General Philosophy
Department, which follows the French continental approach. Prior to 1981, the
Sydney Institute of Education was the Sydney Teachers College. The Orange
Agricultural College (OAC) was originally transferred to the University of New
England under the Act, but then transferred to the University of Sydney in
1994, as part of the reforms to the University of New England undertaken by the
University of New England Act 1993 and the Southern Cross University Act 1993.
In January 2005, the University of Sydney transferred the OAC to Charles Sturt
University. 2000â€“present. In 2001, University of Sydney Chancellor Dame
Leonie Kramer was forced to resign by the University's governing body. In 2003,
Nick Greiner, a former premier of New South Wales, resigned from his position
as chair of the University's Graduate School of Management because of academic
protests against his simultaneous chairmanship of British American Tobacco
(Australia). Subsequently, his wife, Kathryn Greiner, resigned in protest from
the two positions she held at the University as chair of the Sydney Peace
Foundation and a member of the executive council of the Research Institute for
Asia and the Pacific. In 2005, the Public Service Association of NSW and the
Community and Public Sector Union were in dispute with the University over a
proposal to privatise security at the main campus (and the Cumberland campus.)
In February 2007, the University agreed to acquire a portion of the land
granted to St John's College to develop the Sydney Institute of Health and
Medical Research. As a Roman Catholic institution, in handing over the land St
John's placed limitations on the type of medical research that could be
conducted on the premises, seeking to preserve the essence of the College
mission. This caused concern among some groups, who argued that it would
interfere with scientific medical research. However, this was rejected by the
University's administration because the building was not intended for this
purpose and there were many other facilities in close proximity where such
research could take place. At the start of 2010, the University controversially
adopted a new logo. It retains the same University Arms, however it takes on a
more modern look. There have been stylistic changes, the main one being the
Coat of Arm's mantling, the shape of the escutcheon (shield), the removal of
the motto scroll, and also others more subtle within the Arms itself such as
the mane and fur of the lion, the number of lines in the open book, and the
colouration. The original Coat of Arms from 1857 continues to be used for
ceremonial and other formal purposes, such as on testamurs. Coat of Arms. The
use of eight-pointed stars was unusual for arms at the time, although they had
been used unofficially as emblems for New South Wales since the 1820s and on
the arms of the Church of England Diocese of Australia in 1836. According to
the University, the Latin motto "Sidere mens eadem mutato" can be translated as
"Though the constellations change, the mind is universal", therefore, conveying
the aspiration that "the traditions of the older universities of the Northern
Hemisphere are continued here in the Southern." Author and university alumnus
Clive James quipped in his 1981 autobiography that the motto loosely translates
as "Sydney University is really Oxford or Cambridge laterally displaced
approximately 12,000 miles". University rankings. The Times Higher Education
World University Rankings 2011â€“2012 placed the University of Sydney 58th in
the world. QS World University Rankings 2011â€“2012 placed the University of
Sydney 38th in the world and 3rd in Australia behind the University of
Melbourne (31st), and behind the Australian National University which is ranked
26th in the world. On the Shanghai Jiaotong University's Academic Ranking of
World Universities rankings in 2010, University of Sydney is placed 92nd in the
world and 9th in the Asia Pacific and 3rd in Australia. Notable alumni.
Throughout its history, University of Sydney alumni have made significant
contributions to Australia and beyond. Australian leaders who have graduated
from the University include two governors-general, five Australian prime
ministers, four chief justices of the High Court of Australia, and twenty other
justices of the High Court, as well as the third president of the United
Nations General Assembly and three Nobel laureates. Organisation. The five
largest faculties and schools by 2011 student enrolments were (in descending
order): Arts and Social Sciences; Business; Science; Engineering and
Information Technologies; Health Sciences. Together they comprised 64.4% of the
University's students and each had a student enrolment over 4,500 (at least 9%
of students). Endowments and research grants. The University of Sydney
currently has financial endowments totalling $829Â million. A drop due to
recent downturn of the global economic situation. The University's turnover, in
turn, was A$1.3Â billion in 2008. Latest figures show that the University of
Sydney has received the highest amount of research grants, which may
demonstrate its research competitiveness and the size of its students and staff
body. The University of Sydney also has the second largest (behind Monash
University) body of students and researchers among Australian universities. The
University of Sydney secured more than $46Â million in funding in the 2007
round of National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) Project Grant,
Capacity Building and Fellowship awards, the largest allocation to any
university in the state. The James Jones foundation has announced the 2007
recipient of the bicentennial award in university research linked to applied
agricultural economics. The award includes various grant and research
opportunities that may be taken up by both staff members and senior students.
Five of the University's affiliated medical research facilities secured
$38Â million in the Australian government's 2006 budget, part of $163Â million
made available for a variety of development and expansion projects. Campus.
Main campus. The main campus is spread across two inner-city suburbs of Sydney:
Camperdown and Darlington. Originally housed in what is now Sydney Grammar
School, in 1855, the government granted the University land in Grose Farm,
three kilometres from the city, which is now the main Camperdown campus. The
architect Edmund Blacket designed the original Neogothic sandstone Quadrangle
and Great Tower buildings, which were completed in 1862. The rapid expansion of
the University in the mid-20th century resulted in the acquisition of land in
Darlington across City Road. The Camperdown/Darlington campus houses the
University's administrative headquarters, and the Faculties of Arts, Science,
Education and Social Work, Pharmacy, Veterinary Science, Economics and
Business, Architecture, and Engineering. It is also the home base of the large
Faculty of Medicine, which has numerous affiliated teaching hospitals across
the state. The main campus is also the focus of the University's student life,
with the student-run University of Sydney Union (known as 'the Union') in
possession of three buildings â€“ Wentworth, Manning and Holme Buildings. These
buildings house a large proportion of the University's catering outlets, and
provide space for recreational rooms, bars and function centres. One of the
largest activities organised by the Union is the Orientation Week (or 'O-
week'), centring on stalls set up by clubs and societies on the Front Lawns.
The University is currently undertaking a large capital works program with the
aim of revitalising the campus and providing more office, teaching and student
space. The program will see the amalgamation of the smaller science and
technical libraries into a larger library, and the construction of a central
administration and student services building along City Road. A new building
for the School of Information Technologies opened in late 2006, and has been
located on a site adjacent to the Seymour Centre. The busy Eastern Avenue
thoroughfare has been transformed into a pedestrian plaza, and a new footbridge
has been built over City Road. The new home for the Sydney Law School, located
alongside Fisher Library on the site of the old Edgeworth David and Stephen
Roberts buildings, has been completed. From 2007, the University will also use
space in the former Eveleigh railway yards, just to the south of Darlington,
for examination purposes. The campus is well served by public transport, being
a short walk from Redfern railway station and served by buses on the
neighbouring Parramatta Road and City Road. Facilities and services. University
of Sydney Library. The University of Sydney Library consists of thirteen
individual libraries located across the University's various campuses.
According to the library's publications, it is the largest academic library in
the southern hemisphere; university statistics show that in 2007 the collection
consisted of just under 5 million physical volumes and a further 300,000 e-
books, for a total of approximately 5.3Â million items. The Rare Books Library
possesses several extremely rare items, including one of the two extant copies
of the "Gospel of Barnabas" and a first edition of Isaac Newton's "Philosophiae
Naturalis Principia Mathematica". Residential colleges. The University has a
number of residential college and halls of residence, based on the college
system of Cambridge and Oxford universities, each with its own distinctive
style and facilities. All offer tutorial support and a wide range of social and
sporting activities in a supportive communal environment. Five colleges are
affiliated with religious denominations and while this gives each of these
colleges a special character, students of any denomination or religion are
eligible for admission. Unlike some residential colleges in British or American
universities, the colleges are not affiliated with any specific discipline of
study. "Intercol" refers to the six colleges which exist on campus. They are
modelled on the British system of colleges and competition for entry is high
each year. The Colleges compete in the Rawson Cup (sport for men) the Rosebowl
cup (sport for women) and the Palladian Cup (drama, debating and music for both
men and women). The University also has three other residential systems, which
are different to the colleges, and are not part of the intercol system. For a
variety of reasons, the intercol network has chosen to have no affiliation with
these "houses". There is also a university-affiliated housing cooperative,
Stucco. Student organisations. The SRC and Union are both governed by student
representatives, who are elected by students each year. Elections for the USU
Board of Directors occur in first semester; elections for the SRC President,
and for members of the Students' Representative Council itself, occur in second
semester, along with a separate election for the editorial board of the student
newspaper "Honi Soit", which is published by the SRC. The elections are usually
closely contested, and result in much of the main campus being covered with
chalk messages from the various candidates. However, some complaints have been
made in the pages of "Honi Soit" and other publications about the
organisations' claims to represent the student body, citing perennially low
voter turnouts and the general apathy of much of the university population to
student politics. The future of these organisations was believed to be under a
shadow with the passage of legislation implementing voluntary student unionism
in late 2005. The legislation prohibited the compulsory collection of fees from
students, which had been the customary means of funding student organisations,
after the beginning of Semester 2 of 2006. Although the organisations continue
to be concerned about their long-term financial viability, they have secured
significant funding from the University to partially make up for lost revenue.
