University of Ulster The University of Ulster (previously shortened to UU; ,
Ulster Scots: "Universitie o UlstÃ¨r" or "Varsitie o Ulster") is a multi-
campus, co-educational university located in Northern Ireland. It is the
largest single university in Ireland, discounting the federal National
University of Ireland. The University of Ulster was established in 1968 as the
"New University of Ulster" and can trace its roots back to 1845 when "Magee
College" was established in Derry and 1849, when the "School of Art and Design"
was inaugurated in Belfast. The university incorporated its four campuses in
1984 under the University of Ulster banner; these are located in Belfast,
Coleraine (site of the administrative headquarters), Magee College in Derry,
and Jordanstown. A fifth distance learning campus, "Campus One", delivers
online programmes; mainly at graduate level. Ulster is a member of the
Association of Commonwealth Universities, the European University Association,
Universities Ireland and Universities UK. High demand for places and a thriving
development programme contributed to a record number of applications in 2004-05
to keep the University of Ulster in the top 10 of the UK's most popular
universities. The University of Ulster was shortlisted for the Sunday Times
University of the Year award in 2001. The university has one of the highest
further study and/or employment rates in the UK, with 95% of graduates being in
work or undertaking further study six months after they have completed their
degree. In the field of biomedical sciences, the University of Ulster obtained
a 5* rating, as well as being ranked joint first in the UK, following the
Research Assessment Exercises in 1996 and 2001. In the 2008 RAE 86% of research
activity at the university was rated as being of international quality, with
20% being classified as world-leading. Of particular note are the submissions
within Biomedical Sciences, the University of Ulster Institute of Nursing
Research and Celtic Studies which were all ranked within the top three UK
universities History. The New University of Ulster (NUU) incorporated Magee
College founded in 1865 in Derry. Magee College was a college of the Royal
University of Ireland from 1880 and later became associated with the University
of Dublin (better known as Trinity College) when the Royal University was
dissolved in 1908 and replaced by the National University of Ireland. In 1953
Magee College broke its links with Dublin and became "Magee University
College". It was hoped that this university college would become Northern
Ireland's second university after The Queen's University of Belfast. However,
this did not happen and instead it was subsumed into the New University,
primarily as a result of the unwillingness of the Unionist government at
Stormont to have the second university sited in overwhelmingly nationalist
Derry, in which "The Troubles" were just beginning to break out. The decision
caused an outcry at the time . The university was built at Coleraine as part of
the UK government's expansion of higher education in the 1960s. Coleraine today
is the university's headquarters and main campus. Following a review of higher
education in Northern Ireland under the chairmanship of Sir Henry Chilver in
1982 the direct-rule government decided to merge NUU with the Ulster
Polytechnic to form the University of Ulster.The merger took effect on 1
October 1984. This was the first, and as of 2010, only merger in UK higher
education whereby what is now called a plate glass university merged with what
would now be a post-1992 university. Academic. The University's course
provision is the largest in Northern Ireland, covering arts, business,
engineering, information technology, life and health sciences, management, and
social sciences. Courses have a strong vocational element and the majority
include a period of industrial or professional placement. The University of
Ulster has a strong reputation for innovation. In order to create new pathways
into higher education the University of Ulster initiated its Online Distance
Learning (ODL) project called Campus One. The Campus One programme provides an
alternative mode of study, with a range of courses available online to students
all over the world. Campus One courses range from full postgraduate programmes,
professional development and continuing development courses; through to short
business-focused courses all offered over the Internet. The University
contributes a higher than national average to local research and development
activity and has a strategic research focus. The University of Ulster is
particularly strong in the field of biomedical sciences, and a Centre for
Molecular Biosciences (located at Coleraine) is one of the major projects
developed by the University. The Biomedical Sciences department obtained the
highest possible 5* rating as well as being joint first in the UK, following
the UK â€“ wide Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) in 1996. It was the only UK
university to retain a 5* rating for biomedical sciences in the 2001 RAE - part
of a performance that saw significant improvement and consolidation of the 1996
results. A 5* research rating was also awarded in the field of Celtic studies.
The University performed strongly in the 2008 RAE. Full details of Ulster's RAE
results are available at http://research.ulster.ac.uk/rae/rae2008.html The
University is a leading partner in the Northern Ireland Science Park
development, with Science Park sites at the Coleraine and Magee campuses, and
in Belfast. There are also Innovation Centres at Coleraine and Magee which
provide incubation support to developing spin-out and spin-in companies.
Financial Restructuring. In autumn 2011 Vice-Chancellor Barnett announced a
programme of financial restructuring with the aim of reducing the number of
staff employed by the University from 3,150 to 3,000. Staff at the University
expressed concern about the proposed means and impact of the restructuring,
citing "the use of the threat of compulsory redundancy to bully and intimidate
staff" and the belief that the University was "abdicating its responsibilities
to the wider community that funds it". In April 2012, the UU branch of the
University and College Union (UCU) declared a formal dispute with university
management over its implementation of the restructuring, stating that the
recourse to "premature deadlines and unwarranted threats of compulsory
redundancy" was "unreasonable as well as contrary to University policy and
corporate goals". Locations. The University of Ulster currently maintains 5
sites across Northern Ireland, as well as one "Online" site. In February 2009
the university announced the movement of many courses from the Jordanstown
campus to the main Belfast campus and a consolidation of student numbers at
Coleraine and the reuse of university grounds for a business park. Coleraine.
The Coleraine campus (UUC) is the administration headquarters of the University
and is the most traditional in outlook, with a focus on science and the
humanities. The traditional focus is primarily as a result of it always being a
university campus as opposed to the more vocational type courses offered at the
polytechnic at Jordanstown. The internationally acclaimed School of Biomedical
Science is based at Coleraine as is the Northern Ireland Centre for Food and
Health (NICHE).The Coleraine campus also hosts the only optometry school in
Northern Ireland and is indeed one of only two on the island of Ireland. In
2009 the University launched a new Master of Pharmacy (MPharm) course at
Coleraine. The Coleraine campus includes the Riverside Theatre, the third-
largest professional theatre in Northern Ireland. The campus is situated on the
banks of the River Bann with views to the North Coast and County Donegal hills.
Portrush Site. The Portrush site was part of the Coleraine Campus and home to
the School of Hotel, Leisure and Tourism. Portrush is a town east of Coleraine
on the North Coast of Northern Ireland. The Portrush Campus closed in 2008 and
courses were relocated to the Coleraine and the newly developed Belfast
campuses. Jordanstown. The Jordanstown campus (UUJ) is located in Jordanstown,
7 miles outside Belfast and concentrates on engineering, health and social
science, and is the home of the highly successful Ulster Business School. The
Jordanstown campus is set in a leafy suburb approximately seven miles (11Â km)
from Belfast city centre and situated at the foot of the Antrim Hills
overlooking Belfast Lough. UUJ is home to the Sports Institute for Northern
Ireland and has a range of Sports facilities including a new high performance
centre. The Buildings are mostly situated around a central Mall with on-site
stores and services. A number of high-demand undergraduate courses at UUJ have
extremely high entry requirements such as Physiotherapy, Diagnostic and
Therapeutic Radiography, Speech and Language Therapy, Occupational Therapy,
Clinical Physiology, Communication Advertising and Marketing (CAM), Law, Sport
and Exercise Science/Sports Studies. Magee. The Magee campus (UUM) in Derry
City is a mixture of historic and new buildings in a Victorian residential area
of the city. It was named after Martha Magee and opened in 1865 as a
Presbyterian Christian arts and theological college. Today, it has no religious
affiliation and provides a broad range of undergraduate and postgraduate degree
programmes in disciplines ranging from computer science, computer games and
robotics to psychology and nursing, as well as research excellence with the
Intelligent Systems Research Centre located there. The campus is within walking
distance to the shopping and entertainment districts and is serviced by
transport links. Since 1984, development of the university has focused on the
expansion of the Magee campus. Belfast. The Belfast campus (UUB) is the
Universityâ€™s home of the School of Art and Design, and completed major
redevelopment in 2008. The Building is situated in the Cathedral Quarter of the
City. This is becoming a fashionable area of the city which has been developing
rapidly in recent years. There are many social and cultural activities in
Belfast, the capital of Northern Ireland. Southern Belfast, where most student
accommodations are found, has many restaurants, pubs, theatres and shops.
Students at the Belfast campus can use the fine recreation facilities at the
larger Jordanstown campus. Transportation between the two sites is quick and
frequent. Total enrolment: 1,100 students. Ballyronan, Ballymaguigan. The
University of Ulster formerly had a base named, 'The University of Ulster
Freshwater Laboratory' in a small townland called Ballymaguigan in the village
of Ballyronan, outside the town of Magherafelt in County Londonderry. The
Freshwater Laboratory, although not a campus was a base of the University and
consisted of on-campus accommodation, classrooms and testing labs. Courses
offererd were all based on studying agriculture, wildlife in Lough Neagh, water
testing and other aquatic courses. The base closed around ten years ago, and
still remains standing, the buildings and on-site accommodation are in a run
down state. The site has been purchased by Magherafelt District Council. The
remaining site is located on the edge of Lough Neagh, along the Point Road in
Ballymaguigan. The area today has become popular with the locals for camping,
fishing and boating. Campus One. Campus One, the Virtual Campus of the
University of Ulster, was launched on 8 October 2001. It represents a
revolutionary new route to learning via the World Wide Web and was selected by
the European Commission to deliver World's First Higher Educational Programme
in Hydrogen Safety Engineering. It developed the world's first ever fully on-
line Masters programme in biomedical sciences. Campus One, a 'University at
Your Fingertips', provides an online portal through which all of the University
of Ulster's e-learning courses are made available on a global scale. The
virtual campus incorporates existing e-learning courses with new postgraduate
and undergraduate programmes, all of which can be accessed and completed via
Campus One from anywhere in the world. Campus One is the first e-learning
network of its kind in the UK and Ireland, and has been developed in
association with academic partners in the USA and Hong Kong, ensuring its e-
learning programmes have global reach and relevance. Noted academics and
alumni. Ulster has a large body of famed alumni, including MP's Kate Hoey,
Gregory Campbell, Michelle Gildernew and former deputy First Minister of
Northern Ireland Mark Durkan, MLA's Alban Maginness, Basil McCrea and Sean
Neeson, writers and authors including Anne Devlin, Colin Duriez and AodÃ¡n Mac
PÃ³ilin, poets including Gerald Dawe and Brendan Hamill, and artists including
Oliver Jeffers, Victor Sloan, Andre Stitt, John Luke and John Kindness. Other
alumni include composer Brian Irvine, musician David Lyttle, comedian Omid
Djalili, former hostage and writer Brian Keenan, historian Simon Kitson,
biomedical scientist and former vice chancellor P G (Gerry) McKenna, filmmaker
Brian Philip Davis, visual artist Willie Doherty, photographer Mary
Fitzpatrick, film producer Michael Riley, rugby player Brian Robinson, radio
and television personality Gerry Anderson and distinguished academic of nursing
Alison Kitson. Notable academics who have worked at Ulster include historian
Antony Alcock, ecologist Amyan Macfadyen, political scientist Monica
McWilliams, poets Andrew Waterman and James Simmons, literary critic Walter
Allen, physicists Robin Williams and Gareth Roberts, mathematician Ralph
Henstock, law professors Brice Dickson and Denis Moloney, Professor of Nursing
Research Brendan McCormack and former principal and theologian Edwin Ewart.
Academics who were elected to Membership of the Royal Irish Academy (Ireland's
highest ranking academic body) while based at Ulster include: Bertie Ussher
(Classics), Norman Gibson (Economics), Amyan Macfadyen (Biology), Bill Watts
(Chemistry), P G (Gerry) McKenna (Biomedical Sciences, Genetics), Sean Strain
(Biomedical Sciences, Nutrition), Marshall McCabe (Geology), Peter Flatt
(Biomedical Sciences, Diabetes), SÃ©amus MacMathÃºna (Celtic Studies), Bob
Welch (Literature), Vani Borooah (Economics), MÃ¡rÃ©aid Nic Craith (Celtic
Studies), Graham Gargett (French), Helene McNulty (Biomedical Sciences,
Nutrition), PÃ³l Ã“ Dochartaigh (German), Robert McBride (French), Ullrich
Kockel (ethnography) and John McCloskey (Geosciences). Honorary degrees have
been received by many famed individuals including former President of the
United States Bill Clinton, former President of Ireland Mary McAleese, US
Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, poet Seamus Heaney, writers Seamus
Deane, Brian Friel, Frank McGuinness and Colm TÃ³ibÃ­n, activists May Blood and
Aung San Suu Kyi, actors Amanda Burton and Ewan McGregor, racehorse trainer
Vincent O'Brien, bishops SeÃ¡n Brady, Robin Eames, James Mehaffey, Edward Daly
and Desmond Tutu, singers Enya, Van Morrison and Tommy Makem, politician John
Hume, biotechnologist Charles Hamner, politicians and writers Garrett
Fitzgerald and Conor Cruise O'Brien, US lawyer John Connorton, US diplomat Jim
Lyons, Gaelic football player Peter Canavan, rugby player David Humphreys,
golfers Darren Clarke and Graeme McDowell, last governor of Hong Kong Chris
Patten and triple jumper Jonathan Edwards. Those elected as Academicians of the
Academy of Social Sciences (AcSS)whilst at Ulster include Professor Rosalind
Pritchard (Education), Professor John Offer (Social Policy), Professor Paul
Carmichael (Public Administration), Professor Greg LLoyd (Urban Planning),and
Professor Colin Knox (Comparative Public Policy)
