Urban75 Urban75 (also sometimes referred to as u75 or urban) is a website and
messageboard based in Brixton, England. It was founded in 1995 and includes
various e-zine content, as well as bulletin boards. The site was founded and is
currently run by Mike Slocombe. History. Urban75 initially originated from a
football comic that started in 1991. Its editor claims that "the first issue
sold out in three hours and at one point became the fastest-selling small press
comic in the UK.". From here, a "Football Fans Against The Criminal Justice
Act" campaign started in 1994. The campaign received large amounts of exposure
in the media, and in May 1995 a helper on the campaign from Brighton put
together the first version of the Urban75 site, using a modem donated by The
Levellers. As the site expanded into areas other than football and protest, it
grew in popularity and was moved to a different, bigger server (becoming part
of The Head-Space Project until it moved to its own domain in 1998). Early
publicity was generated by Shockwave games in which celebrities could be
virtually "slapped" or "punched". Urban75 entered the national news when
Brixton's police chief Brian Paddick posted on the bulletin boards in order to
discuss issues with Brixton's internet users while he was conducting a cannabis
tolerance experiment. However, when the tabloid press discovered Paddick's
posting on the site, a scandal was born. In particular, the press highlighted
one post on the boards, where Paddick supposedly said "The concept of anarchy
has always appealed to me". Paddick subsequently met with the Metropolitan
Police Commissioner, Sir John Stevens, and accepted criticism of his remarks.
No disciplinary action was taken and Paddick remained in his post until his
retirement in 2007. Site content. The 'Action' section of the site contains an
events diary, information, articles, reports and photos from various protests
and marches. Urban75 features around 3,500 original photographs, mostly taken
by the site's owner. There are galleries of Brixton, London, New York, Chicago,
Brighton, and Wales, as well as various 360Â° panoramas and photography
tutorials. There is a drugs information section of the site. There is
information on most well-known drugs available. The site has stated its aim is
to give honest information about drug effects, so people can make their own
informed decision. There is a series of links to the bulletin board on drugs,
although this requires registration. The site features dozens of 'useless'
games, made by various web designers. Despite being the website's popular
feature, the "Slap a Spice Girl" game has since been removed for unknown
reasons. Football remains a solid part of the site, with articles and features
on recent cup competitions as well information as on the Criminal Justice Act
and original strips from the "Bluebird Jones" comic. The boards. The bulletin
boards have grown into a popular community, with over 40,000 registered
members. At present, there are around a quarter of a million page impressions
each day, with around 5-6,000 new posts daily. There are currently 26 sub
forums covering a range of topics. The forums are divided into "General
discussion", "Community forums", "Politics, protest and current affairs",
"Travel & places" and "Art, tech & science", in addition to an archive section.
Offline Club. The first Offline club night was held on 19 February 2004, at the
Brixton Ritzy cinema, and featured DJs only. The line-up included Dubversion of
People's Republic Of Disco, DJ Hoax of Urbanites and Hedge Party infamy, Ian of
How Does It Feel To Be Loved?, and Blagsta. Organised by the site's editor,
Offline showcases a wide range of DJs, bands, poets, videos and artists. On 30
September 2004, the club expanded to the Dogstar club in Brixton, and has been
hosted at other venues in Brixton, Crystal Palace, central London and
occasionally New York. Its growing popularity forced a move to the larger
Brixton Jamm club in 2006 before transferring back to the Dogstar on April 9,
2009, with the club now occupying three rooms and two floors in the central
Brixton venue. In line with the club's eclectic tastes, the Dogstar relaunch
party featured a large bill including samba drummers, go-go girls, punk rock
bands, poets and a hip hop vocal performance. A second, regular live music
night takes place in the Prince Albert bar on Coldharbour Lane, London SW9.
Offline has put on well known acts such as Mercury Prize nominees The Portico
Quartet, author Howard Marks, comedians Rob Newman, Stewart Lee, Josie Long,
Robin Ince, Richard Herring and new wave legend Tom Robinson, with all acts
being paid two pints of beer. Described as being "Like someone's friendly house
party, opened up for the general public...Entertaining, friendly, and free" The
Londonist, the Offline club nights are always free. Radio. On May 1, 2005 a
group of posters made a pilot radio show for the website, available to download
as an mp3. The three pilots that followed including an interview with the
manager of the site, some originally recorded music contributed by members,
documentaries, and live recordings from the Offline club night. There is now a
mainly music based radio channel which is updated as and when new shows are
recorded. Press. Posters can find themselves quoted in national papers or other
websites. An example is when Rachel North, a survivor of the London tube
bombings, posted an account on the boards of her experience, which became a
blog on the BBC website.
