Uribism Uribism ("Uribismo" in Spanish) is the right-wing political ideology
based on the ideology and government of former president of Colombia, √Ålvaro
Uribe. It supports mainly the democratic security politics of Uribe.
Background. Before 2002, Colombia was a two-party system country, the dominant
parties were the Colombian Liberal Party and the Colombian Conservative Party.
Alvaro Uribe was a member of the Liberal Party and wanted to be candidate for
the presidence of the country, but his party supported the candidature of
Horacio Serpa, another liberal. Uribe decided to make his own party, Colombia
First and the Conservative Party supported him. Uribe won in the elections,
being the new president of Colombia. He found opposition in the Liberal Party
and in the leftist Independent Democratic Pole party. Reelection. Due to
Uribe's high popularity in the country, some politicians started a campaign to
reelect Uribe. The congress approved the single reelection in the country.
Uribe called his supporters to join in a single party. This caused the
formation of the Party Of The U, a coalition of important conservative and
liberal politicians. However, many Uribist movements didn't joined the party,
such as the Conservative Party. Uribe was reelected in 2006 by the coalition of
all the Uribist movements with more votes than in the 2002 elections. In the
same year of the legislative elections, three Uribist parties (Colombian
Conservative Party, Party Of The U and Radical Change Party) along with two
opposition parties (Colombian Liberal Party and Alternative Democratic Pole)
won sufficient seats in the congress to be considered major parties, changing
the political history of Colombia. Uribe currently has a 79% popularity rating
in Colombia. On June 20, 2010, Juan Manuel Santos was elected President of
Colombia for the period 2010-2014 under the Party Of The U, thus maintaining
the ideas of the Uribism in office.
