Utility maximization problem In microeconomics, the utility maximization
problem is the problem consumers face: "how should I spend my money in order to
maximize my utility?" It is a type of optimal decision problem. Basic setup.
Suppose their consumption set, or the enumeration of all possible consumption
bundles that could be selected if there are no budget constraints, has "L"
commodities and is limited to positive amounts of consumption of each
commodity. Let "x" be the vector "x"={"xi";"i"=1..."L"} containing the amounts
of each commodity, then Suppose also that the prices ("p") of the "L"
commodities are positive and that the consumer's wealth is "w", then the set of
all affordable packages, the budget set, is The consumer would like to buy the
best package of commodities it can afford. Suppose that the consumer's utility
function ("u") is a real valued function with domain of the commodity bundles,
or Then the consumer's optimal choices "x"("p", "w") are the utility maximizing
bundle that is in the budget set, or Finding "x"("p", "w") is the utility
maximization problem. If "u" is continuous and no commodities are free of
charge, then x(p, w) exists. If there is always a unique maximizer, then it is
called the Marshallian demand function. The relationship between the utility
function and Marshallian demand in the Utility Maximization Problem mirrors the
relationship between the expenditure function and Hicksian demand in the
Expenditure Minimization Problem. In practice, a consumer may not always pick
an optimal package. For example, it may require too much thought. Bounded
rationality is a theory that explains this behaviour with satisficing - picking
packages that are suboptimal but good enough. Nonunique solution. The solution
"x"("p", "w") need not be unique. If a consumer always picks an optimal package
as defined above, then "x"("p", "w") is called the Marshallian demand
correspondence.
