Utility In economics, utility is a representation of preferences over some set
of goods and services. Preferences have a utility representation so long as
they are transitive, complete, and continuous. Utility is usually applied by
economists in such constructs as the indifference curve, which plot the
combination of commodities that an individual or a society would accept to
maintain a given level of satisfaction. Individual utility and social utility
can be construed as the value of a utility function and a social welfare
function respectively. When coupled with production or commodity constraints,
under some assumptions, these functions can be used to analyze Pareto
efficiency, such as illustrated by Edgeworth boxes in contract curves. Such
efficiency is a central concept in welfare economics. TYPES OF UTILITY There
are three types of utility Namely 1. == Form Utility 2. == Place Utility 3. ==
Time Utility In finance, utility is applied to generate an individual's price
for an asset called the indifference price. Utility functions are also related
to risk measures, with the most common example being the entropic risk measure.
Quantifying utility. It was recognized that utility could not be measured or
observed directly, so instead economists devised a way to infer underlying
relative utilities from observed choice. These 'revealed preferences', as they
were named by Paul Samuelson, were revealed e.g. in people's willingness to
pay: Alfred Marshall. 1920. Principles of Economics. An introductory Volume.
8th edition. London: Macmillan. Cardinal and ordinal utility. Economists
distinguish between cardinal utility and ordinal utility. When cardinal utility
is used, the magnitude of utility differences is treated as an ethically or
behaviorally significant quantity. On the other hand, ordinal utility captures
only ranking and not strength of preferences. Utility functions of both sorts
assign a ranking to members of a choice set. For example, suppose a cup of
orange juice has utility of 120 utils, a cup of tea has a utility of 80 utils,
and a cup of water has a utility of 40 utils. When speaking of cardinal
utility, it could be concluded that the cup of orange juice is better than the
cup of tea by exactly the same amount by which the cup of tea is better than
the cup of water. One is not entitled to conclude, however, that the cup of tea
is two thirds as good as the cup of juice, because this conclusion would depend
not only on magnitudes of utility differences, but also on the "zero" of
utility. It is tempting when dealing with cardinal utility to aggregate
utilities across persons. The argument against this is that interpersonal
comparisons of utility are meaningless because there is no good way to
interpret how different people value consumption bundles. When ordinal
utilities are used, differences in utils are treated as ethically or
behaviorally meaningless: the utility index encode a full behavioral ordering
between members of a choice set, but tells nothing about the related "strength
of preferences". In the above example, it would only be possible to say that
juice is preferred to tea to water, but no more. Neoclassical economics has
largely retreated from using cardinal utility functions as the basic objects of
economic analysis, in favor of considering agent preferences over choice sets.
However, preference relations can often be represented by utility functions
satisfying several properties. Ordinal utility functions are unique up to
positive monotone transformations, while cardinal utilities are unique up to
positive linear transformations. Although preferences are the conventional
foundation of microeconomics, it is often convenient to represent preferences
with a utility function and analyze human behavior indirectly with utility
functions. Let "X" be the consumption set, the set of all mutually-exclusive
baskets the consumer could conceivably consume. The consumer's utility function
formula_1 ranks each package in the consumption set. If the consumer strictly
prefers "x" to "y" or is indifferent between them, then formula_2. For example,
suppose a consumer's consumption set is "X" =Â {nothing, 1Â apple,1Â orange,
1Â apple and 1Â orange, 2Â apples, 2Â oranges}, and its utility function is "u"
(nothing)Â =Â 0, "u"(1Â apple)Â =Â 1, "u"(1Â orange)Â =Â 2, "u"(1Â apple and
1Â orange)Â =Â 4, "u"(2Â apples)Â =Â 2 and "u"(2Â oranges)Â =Â 3. Then this
consumer prefers 1 orange to 1 apple, but prefers one of each to 2 oranges. In
microeconomic models, there are usually a finite set of L commodities, and a
consumer may consume an arbitrary amount of each commodity. This gives a
consumption set of formula_3, and each package formula_4 is a vector containing
the amounts of each commodity. In the previous example, we might say there are
two commodities: apples and oranges. If we say apples is the first commodity,
and oranges the second, then the consumption set formula_5 and "u"
(0,Â 0)Â =Â 0, "u"(1,Â 0)Â =Â 1, "u"(0,Â 1)Â =Â 2, "u"(1,Â 1)Â =Â 4, "u"
(2,Â 0)Â =Â 2, "u"(0,Â 2)Â =Â 3 as before. Note that for "u" to be a utility
function onÂ "X", it must be defined for every package inÂ "X". A utility
function formula_6 represents a preference relation formula_7 on X iff for
every formula_8, formula_9 implies formula_10. If u represents formula_7, then
this implies formula_7 is complete and transitive, and hence rational. In order
to simplify calculations, various assumptions have been made of utility
functions. Most utility functions used in modeling or theory are well-behaved.
They are usually monotonic and quasi-concave. However, it is possible for
preferences not to be representable by a utility function. An example is
lexicographic preferences which are not continuous and cannot be represented by
a continuous utility function. Expected utility. The expected utility theory
deals with the analysis of choices among risky projects with (possibly
multidimensional) outcomes. The expected utility model was first proposed by
Nicholas Bernoulli in 1713 and solved by Daniel Bernoulli in 1738 as the St.
Petersburg paradox. Bernoulli argued that the paradox could be resolved if
decisionmakers displayed risk aversion and argued for a logarithmic cardinal
utility function. The first important use of the expected utility theory was
that of John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern who used the assumption of
expected utility maximization in their formulation of game theory. Additive von
Neumannâ€“Morgenstern utility. When comparing objects it makes sense to rank
utilities, but older conceptions of utility allowed no way to compare the sizes
of utilities - a person may say that a new shirt is preferable to a baloney
sandwich, but not that it is twenty times preferable to the sandwich. The
reason is that the utility of twenty sandwiches is not twenty times the utility
of one sandwich, by the law of diminishing returns. So it is hard to compare
the utility of the shirt with 'twenty times the utility of the sandwich'. But
Von Neumann and Morgenstern suggested an unambiguous way of making a comparison
like this. Their method of comparison involves considering probabilities. If a
person can choose between various randomized events (lotteries), then it is
possible to "additively" compare the shirt and the sandwich. It is possible to
compare "a sandwich with probability"Â 1, to "a shirt with probability p or
nothing with probability"Â 1Â âˆ’Â "p". By adjusting "p", the point at which
the sandwich becomes preferable defines the ratio of the utilities of the two
options. with the sum of the "p"Â "i"s equallingÂ 1. By making some reasonable
assumptions about the way choices behave, von Neumann and Morgenstern showed
that if an agent can choose between the lotteries, then this agent has a
utility function which can be added and multiplied by real numbers, which means
the utility of an arbitrary lottery can be calculated as a linear combination
of the utility of its parts. Repeating in category language: formula_37 is a
morphism between the category of preferences with uncertainty and the category
of reals as an additive group. Of all the axioms, independence is the most
often discarded. A variety of generalized expected utility theories have
arisen, most of which drop or relax the independence axiom. Money. One of the
most common uses of a utility function, especially in economics, is the utility
of money. The utility function for money is a nonlinear function that is
bounded and asymmetric about the origin. These properties can be derived from
reasonable assumptions that are generally accepted by economists and decision
theorists, especially proponents of rational choice theory. The utility
function is concave in the positive region, reflecting the phenomenon of
diminishing marginal utility. The boundedness reflects the fact that beyond a
certain point money ceases being useful at all, as the size of any economy at
any point in time is itself bounded. The asymmetry about the origin reflects
the fact that gaining and losing money can have radically different
implications both for individuals and businesses. The nonlinearity of the
utility function for money has profound implications in decision making
processes: in situations where outcomes of choices influence utility through
gains or losses of money, which are the norm in most business settings, the
optimal choice for a given decision depends on the possible outcomes of all
other decisions in the same time-period. Utility as probability of success.
Castagnoli and LiCalzi (1996) and Bordley and LiCalzi (2000) provided another
interpretation for Von Neumann and Morgenstern's theory. Specifically for any
utility function, there exists a hypothetical reference lottery with the
utility of a lottery being its probability of performing no worse than the
reference lottery. Suppose success is defined as getting an outcome no worse
than the outcome of the reference lottery. Then this mathematical equivalence
means that maximizing expected utility is equivalent to maximizing the
probability of success. In many contexts, this makes the concept of utility
easier to justify and to apply. For example, a firm's utility might be the
probability of meeting uncertain future customer expectations. Discussion and
criticism. Cambridge economist Joan Robinson famously criticized utility for
being a circular concept: "Utility is the quality in commodities that makes
individuals want to buy them, and the fact that individuals want to buy
commodities shows that they have utility" (Robinson 1962: 48). Another
criticism comes from the assertion that neither cardinal nor ordinary utility
is empirically observable in the real world. In the case of cardinal utility it
is impossible to measure the level of satisfaction "quantitatively" when
someone consumes or purchases an apple. In case of ordinal utility, it is
impossible to determine what choices were made when someone purchases, for
example, an orange. Any act would involve preference over a vast set of choices
(such as apple, orange juice, other vegetable, vitamin C tablets, exercise, not
purchasing, etc.). An evolutionary psychology perspective is that utility may
be better viewed as due to preferences that maximized evolutionary fitness in
the ancestral environment but not necessarily in the current one.
