VDARE VDARE.com, or VDARE, is a website that advocates reduced immigration,
especially illegal immigration, into the United States. Former "Forbes" editor
Peter Brimelow supports the site through his "VDARE" Foundation, also known as
Lexington Research Institute Limited. The viewpoints on the site range from
immigration reduction to anti-immigration to discussions of race. The name
"VDARE" and the site's symbol, the head of a white doe, refer to Virginia Dare,
the first child born to English settlers in the New World. Soon after her birth
she disappeared with the rest of the early English settlement of Roanoke, and
legend says she transformed into a white doe. The Southern Poverty Law Center
has designated VDARE as a white nationalist hate group. Contributors. Notable
"VDARE" guest contributors include: Virginia Abernethy, George J. Borjas, Paul
Gottfried, Kevin Michael Grace, Kevin B. MacDonald, J. Philippe Rushton, Jared
Taylor, John Derbyshire, Paul Belien, Sean Gabb, Robert Weissberg, R. J. Stove,
Derek Turner, Kevin Lamb, Andrew Fraser, and Ilana Mercer. "VDARE" also carries
the syndicated columns of Pat Buchanan, Paul Craig Roberts, and Michelle
Malkin. Controversy and criticism. The Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC)
called "VDARE" a hate group, that was "once a relatively mainstream anti-
immigration page," but by 2003 became "a meeting place for many on the radical
right." The group also criticized "VDARE" for publishing articles by white
nationalists Jared Taylor and Sam Francis. It has been called "white
nationalist" by the "Rocky Mountain News", a charge denied by Brimelow. In
response, "VDARE" has published several articles attacking the SPLC. In 2006,
in "Heidi Does Long Beach: The SPLC vs. Academic Freedom," Prof. Kevin B.
MacDonald discussed the SPLC's so far unsuccessful campaign to try to get him
fired from California State University, Long Beach. "VDARE" columnist James
Fulford says allegations of racism and hate are unavoidable since "the majority
of Americans are white, and the majority of immigrants are non-white." Fulford
lists others who he says have been accused of being racist by liberal
organizations and argues that the group's tactics hurt their own cause more
than they are hurting genuine racism. On September 5, 2003, "VDARE" contributor
Thomas Allen commented in an online letter that VDARE.COM has carried articles
"by Hispanics like George Borjas, American Indians, Filipina Americans,
Japanese Americans etc." Hurricane Katrina and IQ. Steve Sailer argued on
"VDARE" following Hurricane Katrina that the lower average IQ of African-
Americans found in intelligence research correlates with "poorer native
judgment than members of better-educated groups resulting in the need for
stricter moral guidance from society." He said that looting after the 1995 Kobe
earthquake was minimal because "when you get down to it, Japanese aren't
blacks." John Podhoretz called Sailer's comments racist. Sailer responded that
his accusers admitted a correlation between low IQ and poor judgment by
supporting the Supreme Court's 2002 "Atkins v. Virginia" decision "that, in
effect, banned the death penalty for killers with IQs under 70." John
Derbyshire defended Sailer, citing large variance in incarceration rates by
race and birth rates for unmarried women by race. According to Peter Brimelow,
Sailer's original article has been emailed out by readers (through the link to
"email article to a friend") at among the highest volumes seen by VDARE's
articles. Sailer also responded to John Podhoretz in "Podhoretz, Junior vs.
Steve Sailer", by quoting from a 1963 "Commentary" essay by Podhoretz's father,
Norman, "My Negro Problemâ€”and Ours", in which Norman Podhoretz made
statements on black violence in character with Sailer's.
