Victoria University of Wellington Victoria University of Wellington () was
established in 1897 by Act of Parliament, and was a former constituent college
of the University of New Zealand. It is particularly well known for its
programmes in law, the humanities, and some scientific disciplines, but offers
a broad range of other courses as well. Entry to all courses at first year is
open, although entry to second year in some programmes (e.g. law, criminology,
creative writing, architecture) is restricted. Victoria had the fourth highest
average research grade in the New Zealand Government's Performance-Based
Research Fund exercise in 2006, having been ranked 3rd in 2003. Victoria has
been ranked 225th in the World's Top 500 universities by the QS World
University Ranking(2010). History. Victoria is named after Queen Victoria, as
1897 was the 60th anniversary of her coronation. There was initially a dispute
as to where to site it, and it opened in temporary facilities in Thorndon. It
was eventually decided to place it in Kelburn, where it still has its primary
campus. This decision was influenced by the Cable Car company's offer of a
donation of Â£1000 if Victoria were located in Kelburn so students would
patronise the car between the city and the University. The foundation stone of
the historic Hunter Building was laid in 1904. The original name was Victoria
University College, but on the dissolution of the University of New Zealand in
1961 Victoria or "Vic" became the independent Victoria University of
Wellington, conferring its own degrees. An extramural branch of Victoria was
founded at Palmerston North in 1960. It merged with Massey College on 1 January
1963. The merged college itself, having become a branch of Victoria upon the
University of New Zealand's 1961 demise, became an independent Massey
University on 1 January 1964. In 2004, Victoria University celebrated the 100th
birthday of its first home, the Hunter Building. In recent years, Victoria has
had to expand out of its original campus in Kelburn, and new campuses have been
set up in Te Aro (architecture and design), Pipitea (opposite Parliament,
housing the law, and commerce and administration schools) and Karori
(education) - the Wellington College of Education, established in 1880, merged
with the University to become its revived Faculty of Education on 1 January
2005. General information. Its main campus is in Kelburn, a suburb on a hill
overlooking the Wellington central business district, where its administration
and humanities & social science and science faculties are based. The law and
commerce and administration faculties are in the Pipitea Campus, near
Parliament Buildings, which consists of Rutherford House, the restored Old
Government Buildings, and the West Wing of the Wellington Railway Station. A
smaller campus in the Te Aro district of Wellington is the base for the
architecture and design schools. The Faculty of Education is in the Karori
campus. The University's newest facility, the Victoria University Coastal
Ecology Laboratory supports research programmes in marine biology and coastal
ecology on Wellington's rugged south coast. Day-to-day governance is in the
hands of the University Council, which consists of 20 people: five elected by
the Court of Convocation, three elected by the academic staff, one elected by
the general staff, two appointed by the student union executive, four appointed
by the Minister of Education, four selected by the Council itself, and the
Vice-Chancellor. The Court of Convocation is composed of all graduates who
choose to participate. For New Zealand residents entry to most courses is open,
with a few exceptions. Performance Music requires an audition. There is
selection for entry into the second year in degrees such as the LLB, BArch and
BDes. BA in criminology and creative writing is also based on selection. The
University is one of only three institutions (University of Auckland and Unitec
being the others) to offer a degree in Architecture in New Zealand. Victoria,
in conjunction with Massey University, also owns the New Zealand School of
Music. Organisation. The Library. History The Victoria University of Wellington
Library was established in 1899. Today, the Library collections are dispersed
over several sites including Central Library, Law Library, Education Library,
Architecture and Design Library and Commerce Library. In recently years, while
maintaining the traditions of print collections, the Library is developing its
collection of digital resources with a focus on the acquisition of full text
material online. In addition to electronic resources, printed books and
journals, the Library also acquires works in microform, sound recordings,
videos and other media consistent with the University's academic programme
needs. Collections The University Library Service holds approximately 1.3
million printed volumes. The Library currently provide access to 70,000 print
and electronic periodical titles and 200,000 e-books. It is an official
Depository Library (DL-296) of the United Nations System (DEPOLIB), one of only
three in the country. The J. C. Beaglehole Room is the official repository
within the Library of all archival and manuscript material, and also provides a
supervised research service for Rare Books, for fine or fragile print items,
and for 'last resort' copies of University publications. The New Zealand
Electronic Text Centre (NZETC) is a digital library of significant New Zealand
and Pacific Island texts and materials. The collection is arranged according to
the library of Congress classification system. Library Cats Between April 2003
and February 2010 the Library was home to two locally famous residents, Tessa
Brown and Sandy Rankine a pair of very popular library cats. Faculties and
Schools. If you want to see a full list of schools, browse through an A-Z List
of Schools Research Centres and Institutes. Victoria University of Wellington
has more than 40 research centres and institutes, including To see more, browse
through an A-Z List of Research Centres and Institutes Halls of Residence.
Catered Halls Catered/Self-catered Halls Self-catered Halls
