Virgil Goode Virgil Hamlin Goode, Jr. (, born October 17, 1946) is an American
politician who served as a member of the United States House of Representatives
from 1997 to 2009, first as a Democrat; in 2000 he switched to the Republican
Party. He represented the 5th congressional district of Virginia. He lost his
seat in the 2008 election to Democrat Tom Perriello. Goode subsequently joined
the Constitution Party and was the party's 2012 presidential nominee. Early
life and education. Goode was born in Richmond, Virginia, the son of Alice
Clara (nÃ©e Besecker) and Virgil Hamlin Goode. Goode graduated with a B.A. from
the University of Richmond (Phi Beta Kappa) and with a J.D. from the University
of Virginia School of Law. He also is a member of Lambda Chi Alpha Fraternity
and served in the Army National Guard from 1969 to 1975. Virginia Senate. Goode
grew up as a Democrat. He entered politics soon after graduating from law
school. At the age of 27, he won a special election to the state Senate from a
Southside district as an independent after the death of the Democratic
incumbent. One of his major campaign focuses at the time was advocacy for the
Equal Rights Amendment. Soon after being elected, he joined the Democrats.
Goode wore his party ties very loosely. He became famous for his support of the
tobacco industry, expressing his fear that "his elderly mother would be denied
'the one last pleasure' of smoking a cigarette on her hospital deathbed." He
was an ardent defender of gun rights while being an enthusiastic supporter of
L. Douglas Wilder, who later became the first elected black governor in the
history of the United States. At the Democratic Party's state political
convention in 1985, Goode nominated Wilder for lieutenant governor. However,
while governor, Wilder cracked down on the sale of guns in the state. After the
1995 elections resulted in a 20â€“20 split between Democrats and Republicans in
the State Senate, Goode seriously considered voting with the Republicans on
organizing the chamber. Had he done so, the State Senate would have been under
Republican control for the first time since Reconstruction (the Republicans
ultimately won control outright in 1999). Goode's actions at the time "forced
his party to share power with Republican lawmakers in the state legislature,"
which further upset the Democratic Party. U.S. Senate elections. 1982.
Independent incumbent U.S. Senator Harry Flood Byrd, Jr., decided to retire.
Goode ran for the seat, but lost the nomination, getting just 8% of the vote.
Lieutenant Governor Richard Joseph Davis won the convention with 64% of the
vote. Davis lost the general election by a two point margin. 1994. He decided
to run for the U.S. Senate again in 1994, to challenge incumbent Democrat U.S.
Senator Chuck Robb in the Democratic convention. He angered much of the
leadership of the Virginia Democratic Party during his second run. Robb won the
convention 50%â€“22%. However, Robb failed to reach the threshold needed to
avoid a primary election. On June 14, Robb defeated Goode 58%â€“34%. U.S. House
of Representatives. Elections. When incumbent Democrat U.S. Congressman Lewis
Payne decided to retire in 1996, Goode won the Democratic nomination to succeed
him. His state senate district was virtually co-extensive with the southern
portion of the congressional district. He defeated Republican nominee George
Landrith, an attorney, 61%â€“36%. Goode won re-election to a second term
unopposed. Prior to the election, Goode switched from a Democrat to an
independent. He portrayed himself "as independent as the people he serves."
Despite running as an independent, he won re-election to a third term with 67%
of the vote. For the 2001 congressional redistricting, Goode allied with
Republican Bob Goodlatte and Democrat Rick Boucher to ensure that none of them
would be put in the same district. Goode's home in Franklin County is only
about 20 miles (32Â km) south of Goodlatte's home in Roanoke, the heart of the
. The counties to the west of Franklin County are in Boucher's , which had to
expand due to lack of population growth. He won the Republican nomination and
won re-election to a fourth term with 63% of the vote. He was the first
Republican to represent this district since 1889. He won re-election to a fifth
term with 64% of the vote, defeated Vietnam War veteran and businessman Al
Weed. He won re-election to a sixth term with 59% of the vote against Weed
again. In 2008 Goode lost his seat, being defeated by Democrat Tom Perriello by
727 votes (0.24% of over 316,000 votes cast). While Goode won 13 of the
district's 20 counties and independent cities, Perriello's margin of victory
was decided in the district's more urbanized areas. Goode won only one
independent city in the district, Bedford, but by only 16 votes. Ultimately,
Goode could not overcome a combined 19,000-vote deficit in the Charlottesville
area (Charlottesville and surrounding Albemarle County), where Perriello is
from. Goode had filed paperwork with the Federal Election Committee to allow
him to raise money for a possible rematch in the 2010 elections, due to
receiving "unsolicited" campaign contributions, though he said he had not
decided whether or not he would run in 2010. However, Goode announced in late
July 2009 that he would not seek the Republican nomination for the seat in
2010. Nonetheless, many expected this race to be heavily targeted by the
Republican Party in 2010; and it was won by Republican Robert Hurt that year.
Tenure. During his first two terms, he compiled one of the most conservative
records of any Democrat in the Congress. Like many Southern Democrats, Goode
strongly opposed abortion and gun control and vigorously supported the tobacco
industry. His contrarian streak resulted in him being isolated within the
Democratic caucus, which later led to him switching parties. Goode came under
considerable fire shortly after being unopposed for a second term in 1998, when
he voted for three of the four articles of impeachment against Bill Clinton. In
January 2000, he declared himself an independent and began caucusing with the
Republicans, who gave him a seat on the Appropriations Committee. Republicans
had been lobbying him to switch parties since 1998. Reflecting on Goode's
record at the time, David Brown, the mayor of Charlottesville and a former
chairman of the city's Democratic Party said "It was obvious he didn't really
fit in the Democratic Party anymore." Goode's primary policy initiatives were
opposition to amnesty for illegal aliens, veterans' healthcare, and the
enactment in 2004 of a $9.6 billion buyout for tobacco farmers. Goode has
sponsored legislation to permit deployment of the U.S. Armed Forces to the
U.S.-Mexico border. He voted in 2002 to authorize the Iraq War and in support
of an $87 billion Iraq War supplemental spending bill. Goode is an advocate of
a federal prohibition of online poker. In 2006, he cosponsored H.R. 4777, the
Internet Gambling Prohibition Act. Goode voted in 2007 against a resolution
opposing the increase in troop numbers in Iraq, saying that he didn't want to
"aid and assist the Islamic jihadists who want the green flag of the crescent
and star to wave over the Capitol of the United States and over the White House
of this country" and that "radical Muslims" wanted to control the world and put
"In Muhammad We Trust" on American currency. Goode served on the Liberty Caucus
(sometimes called the Liberty Committee), a group of libertarian-leaning
congressional representatives. Congressman Ron Paul hosts a luncheon for the
Liberty Caucus every Thursday. Other members include Jimmy Duncan of Tennessee,
Walter B. Jones of North Carolina, Roscoe Bartlett of Maryland, Scott Garrett
of New Jersey, Zach Wamp of Tennessee, and Jeff Flake of Arizona. In the 2008
Republican primary elections for President, the Federal Election Commission
reported that Goode donated $500 to Republican candidate Ron Paul. In 2005,
Goode faced questions when a major corporate campaign donor, defense contractor
MZM, Inc., was implicated in a bribery scandal that resulted in the criminal
conviction and resignation of California congressman Randy "Duke" Cunningham.
Although Goode insisted that his relations with MZM were motivated solely by
his interest in bringing high-paying skilled jobs to his district, in December
of that year he donated the $88,000 received in MZM contributions to regional
charities. On July 21, 2006 Richard Berglund, a former supervisor of the
Martinsville, Virginia office of MZM Inc., pleaded guilty to making illegal
donations to Goode's campaign. Court papers indicated that Berglund and MZM
owner Mitchell Wade (who previously pleaded guilty) engaged in a scheme to
reimburse MZM employees for campaign donations. There was no allegation of
wrongdoing on the part of Goode's campaign.  Ellison criticized Goode for this
letter, stating that he is not an immigrant and that Goode does not understand
Islam. Ellison also offered to meet with Goode to discuss the matter. On his
first day in office, Ellison sought out Goode and initiated a cordial exchange
on the House floor. In interviews around that time, Goode stated that he was in
favor of decreasing legal immigration to the United States and that he wanted
to do away with Diversity Immigrant Visas. Goode argued that such visas would
allow people "not from European countries" or from "some terrorist states" to
enter America. Goode also repeated his views on a January 1, 2007 post to the
"USA Today" blog. At the 2008 Independence Day parade in Scottsville, Virginia,
independent supporters of Goode drove a Hummer H3 decorated with signs
promoting Goode and Robert B. Bell. With gas prices at $4 a gallon, a supporter
of Goode's opponent, Tom Perriello, put video of the parade on YouTube,
accusing Goode of being out of touch with ordinary citizens grappling with the
high cost of fuel. Goode never rode in the Hummer, and is not known to have had
anything to do with it, but he was widely portrayed as having both owned and
operated the vehicle. He was lampooned on "The Daily Show" for the story. The
Sunlight Foundation pointed out that among the 435 members of the U.S. House of
Representatives, Goode has the 13th-highest amount of investment in oil stocks,
meaning that Goode stands to gain financially through high gas prices and pro-
oil industry legislation. In the end credits of the gay-themed film "Eden's
Curve", the producers list Goode in the acknowledgements. Linwood Duncan,
Goode's press secretary, has a minor role as the dean of the college. A number
of other Danville residents are listed in the cast and credits. The United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development grant that Goode assisted in
bringing to the North Theatre project was received by the North Theatre
organization in 2005. The "Danville Register & Bee" reported that Duncan and
Goodeâ€™s wife Lucy were both on the founding board of the North Theatre.
Virgil Goode checked with the House ethics committee, before Duncan or his wife
Lucy went onto the North Theatre board. In the light of the controversy, Lucy
Goode stepped down from the board. In 2003, Duncan told the "Register & Bee" he
didnâ€™t see any conflict with the earmarked dollars. "I donâ€™t even know how
a question of a conflict even arises," he said. In June 2009, it was revealed
that political scientist Larry Sabato, of the Center for Politics, had been the
recipient of over $7 million in earmark money from Goode, whom Sabato predicted
would win re-election in 2008, despite declining poll numbers; Goode ultimately
lost the race by a small margin. Some observers have suggested that Sabato
should have revealed his financial connection to Goode or recused himself from
making predictions about the race. 2012 presidential campaign. In November
2010, Goode joined the executive committee of the Constitution Party, having
previously been a member of the party's larger national committee. He told the
"Roanoke Times" in June 2011 that he would "consider for the party's
presidential nomination as the year progresses." Goode filed with the Federal
Election Commission (FEC) as a presidential candidate on February 10. He told
the "Daily Caller" on February 16 that he was running for the Constitution
Party nomination. Goode was selected as the party's 2012 presidential nominee
on April 21, 2012, at the 2012 Constitution Party National Convention in
Nashville, Tennessee. On October 23, 2012, Virgil Goode, along with Gary
Johnson, Jill Stein, and Rocky Anderson participated in a debate moderated by
Larry King. Goode lost in a poll conducted after the debate to decide who would
face off in a runoff debate. Electoral history. !|Year !|Democrat !|Votes !|Pct
!|Republican !|Votes !|Pct !|3rd Party !|Party !|Votes !|Pct
