Voter registration Voter registration is the requirement in some democracies
for citizens and residents to check in with some central registry specifically
for the purpose of being allowed to vote in elections. An effort to get people
to register is known as a voter registration drive. In democracies where
resident registration is in effect, voter registration is generally not
required. Centralized/compulsory vs. opt-in. In some countries, including most
developed countries, registration is the responsibility of the government,
either local or national; and in over 30 countries some form of compulsory
voting is required as part of each citizen's civic duty. Even in many countries
where the voting itself is not compulsory, registering one's place of residence
with some government agency is required, which automatically constitutes voter
registration for citizens, and in some cases residents, of the required age. In
other countries, however, people eligible to vote must "opt in" to be permitted
to participate in voting, generally by filling out a specific form registering
them to vote. Governments registering people has been shown to be one of the
most powerful predictors of high voting turnout levels. Even in countries where
registration is the individual's responsibility, many reformers, seeking to
maximize voter turnout, have pushed for wider availability of the required
forms; one such effort in the United States led to the passage of the National
Voter Registration Act of 1993 ("Motor Voter Law") and similar laws, which
required states to offer voter registration at motor vehicle departments
(driver's license offices) as well as disability centers, public schools, and
public libraries, and to accept mail-in voter registration. Same-day voter
registration or Election Day Registration. Same day registration is also known
as Election Day Registration. Ten states in the US do not require advance
registration, instead allowing voters to register when they arrive at the polls
or, in the case of North Dakota, eliminating the registration step altogether.
Five of these states rank highest in the nation in voter turnout. Effects and
controversy. Registration laws making it harder to register have a strong
correlation with lower percentages of people turning out to vote where voting
is voluntary. This lower turnout is especially concentrated among low-income
voters and young voters â€“ i.e., those least likely to vote no matter what the
registration requirements. Because of this, such laws are often controversial.
Some advocate for their abolition, while others argue that the laws should be
reformed, for instance: allowing voters to register on the day of the election.
This tactic, called Election Day Registration, has been adopted by several US
states: Connecticut, Idaho, Iowa, Maine, Minnesota, Montana, New Hampshire,
Wisconsin and Wyoming. For the 2012 election year, California has joined this
list. Registration of voters in various countries. Systems of voter
registration vary widely from country to country, and sometimes from locality
to locality. In some, voters are automatically added to the rolls when they
reach legal voting age. In others, potential voters are required to apply to be
added to the rolls. Australia. The Australian Electoral Commission administers
Australia's federal electoral roll. Each state also has its own electoral
commission or office, but voters need only register with the AEC, which passes
the registration details to relevant state commissions. Voter Registration is
mandatory for all citizens 18 years of age or above. An individual has 8 weeks
after turning 18 to register, but may register at any time with no penalty
being enforced for failure to register. Similarly, if a change of address
causes an individual to move to another electorate (Electoral Division) they
are legally obliged to notify the Electoral Commission within 8 weeks. In
Australia, details of house and apartment sales are in the public domain. The
Electoral Commission monitors these and sends a reminder (and the forms) to new
residents in case they have moved to another electorate, making compliance with
the law much easier. Periodically the Electoral Commission conducts door-to-
door and postal campaigns to try to ensure that all eligible persons are
registered in the correct electorate. The one registration covers Federal,
State and Local voter registration. In Australia it is a legal offence to fail
to vote (or at the very least, attend a polling station and have one's name
crossed off the roll) at any Federal or State election, punishable by a fine.
The amount of the fine varies between federal and various state elections (The
fine for not voting is currently A$20.00 in Victoria. This figure is indexed at
the beginning of every financial year). Usually people are issued with warnings
when it is found that they have not voted, and they are given an opportunity to
show cause for not voting. Acceptable reasons for not voting may include: being
in the Accident Department of a Hospital, being ill (requires confirmation),
being out of the country on election day, religious objections, being
incarcerated etc. "I forgot" is not considered acceptable and will incur a
fine. Section 245 of the Electoral Act provides that if an elector who has been
asked the "true reason" for his failure to vote states that he did not do so
because it was against his religion, this statement shall be regarded as
conclusive, and no further action will be taken. Traditionally voters cannot
register within three weeks of an election, but in 2004 the Howard Government
passed legislation that prevents registration after 8Â pm on the day that the
writs are issued (this can be up to ten days after the election has been
announced). This legislation was considered controversial by some Australians
who contended it disenfranchised first-time voters or those who have forgotten
to re-register. The law was repealed just prior to the 2010 Federal election,
when advocacy group GetUp! won a High Court decision deeming the changes
unconstitutional. Canada. In Canada, the task of enumeration was handled by the
relevant elections bureau such as Elections Canada for the federal level until
1992. Until that time, the task was delegated to temporary employees from the
public who were charged with going to each residence in assigned areas to
determine the eligible voters for a publicly displayed list for each election.
However, this system was discontinued for fiscal reasons in the 1990s in favour
of an opt-in option where voters mark their consent to be added the national
voters list, or register, on their annual income tax returns. Although this
allows the list to be updated annually, there are still complaints of excessive
numbers of omissions which needlessly complicates voting for the public and is
contributing to a serious decline in the percentage of the population who
votes. Same-day registration is also permitted. Denmark. All citizens and
residents of Denmark are included in the national register, Det Centrale
Personregister, where each person is assigned a personal number of ten digits
which include the person's date of birth. The register is used for tax lists,
voter lists, membership in the universal health care system, official record of
residence and other purposes, and it is maintained by the Ministry of Welfare
(VelfÃ¦rdsministeriet). All eligible voters receive a card in the mail before
each election which shows the date, time and local polling place; it may only
be presented at the designated local polling station. Only citizens may vote in
national elections, while long-time residents may vote in local and regional
elections. Voting is not compulsory. Finland. Voter registration in Finland is
automatic and based on the national population register. Each citizen is
assigned a register ID at birth which contains a six digit date of birth, a
century marker, and four other characters to make the ID unique which are
mostly random, but one of which also indicates the person's sex. Permanent
residents appear in this register even if they are not citizens, but this
information is marked on the register. People in the register are legally
obliged to notify the register keeper of changes of address. Changing the
address in the register automatically notifies all other public bodies (for
example the tax district for local taxation, the social security authorities,
the conscription authorities) and certain trusted private ones (e.g. banks and
insurance companies) making the process of moving residence very simple. Close
to election time a notification is mailed to registered persons informing them
of the election and where and when to cast their votes. Only citizens may vote
in national elections but all residents may vote in local elections. Germany.
All permanent residents of Germany are required to register their place of
residence (or the fact that they are homeless) with local government. Citizens
who will be 18 or older on the day of voting will automatically receive a
notification card in the mail some weeks before any election in which they are
eligible to vote; for European and local elections, resident citizens of other
EU countries will also receive these cards. Polling places have lists of all
eligible voters resident in the neighborhood served by the particular station;
the voter's I.D. card (which every citizen is required to have, although
carrying it on the person is not mandatory) is checked against these lists
before they receive a ballot. Voting is not compulsory. Hong Kong. In Hong Kong
all permanent residents who are above 18 years of age and suffering from no
mental illness can register as voters. Imprisoned people can also register and
vote since the laws prohibiting them from voting was ruled unconstitutional in
2009. (They can vote starting from mid-2010 when the electoral roll is updated
annually.) The registration process is voluntary. In 2002 around 1.6 million
permanent residents did not register. India. The Government of India conducts
an intensive revision of the voters list every 5 years. An additional summary
revision is conducted every year. Apart from this, citizens can request their
inclusion in the Voters list by applying through form 6. If the application is
valid, the applicant's name will get included in the list. Israel. In Israel,
all citizens who are 18 years of age or older on election day are automatically
registered to vote. Italy. In Italy, all municipalities have a registry of
resident people. They also have a registry of eligible voters, which is revised
every six months and whenever there is an election. The registry of eligible
voters can be viewed by anyone to insure maximum transparency in the electoral
process. All citizens aged 18 or more on the election day are automatically
registered to vote. Bankruptcy and some criminal convictions carry with them a
temporary revocation of voting rights. Mexico. In Mexico, there is a general
electoral census. Any citizen of age 18 or greater must go to an electoral
office in order be registered into the electoral census. Citizens receive a
voting card ("credencial de elector con fotografÃ­a"), issued by the Federal
Electoral Institute (IFE) that must be shown to vote in any election. The
voting card also serves as a national identity document. Norway. All citizens
and residents of Norway are included in the national register,
"Folkeregisteret", where each person is assigned a personal number of eleven
digits which include the person's date of birth. The register is used for tax
lists, voter lists, membership in the universal health care system and other
purposes, and it is maintained by the tax authorities. All eligible voters
receive a card in the mail before each election which shows the date, time and
local polling place. Only citizens may vote in national elections, while
longtime residents may vote in local and regional elections. Voting is not
compulsory. Switzerland. All citizens and other residents of Switzerland are
required to register themselves with the municipal authorities at their place
of residence. Voter registration is automatic for citizens, who receive their
ballot by mail a few weeks before an election or referendum. United Kingdom. In
the United Kingdom (UK) the head of household is required to list eligible
voters in his household, although, as of January 2012, mandatory individual
registration, pursuant to the Political Parties and Elections Act 2009, is
anticipated. A feasibility study for electronic individual voter registration
(IVR), based on the experience of international nations, was undertaken by
EURIM (Information Society Alliance), following an invitation in 2010; the
final report was released in 2011. According to the House of Commons Hansard
from 16 January 2012, the IVR initiative is yet to be implemented in the UK,
with discussion of the Northern Irish experience, whereby individual voter
registration levels significantly decreased following the introduction of an
IVR policy, having taken place. Registration is mandatory pursuant to section
23 of the Representation of the People (England and Wales) Regulations 2001
(No. 341) and violators are liable on summary conviction and face a maximum
fine of Â£1,000. Voters must be on the electoral roll in order to vote in
national, local or European elections. A fixed address is also required in
order for an individual to vote in an election; if someone wishes to vote but
lacks a fixed address for some reason, they may register to vote by filling in
a 'Declaration of local connection' form. This establishes a connection to the
area based on the last fixed address someone had, or the place where they are
likely to spend a substantial amount of their time (e.g. a homeless shelter). A
voting card is sent to each registrant shortly before any elections. This does
not need to be taken to the polling station, instead it serves to remind
individuals of the exact details they provided to the electoral register. The
current system of registration, introduced by the Labour government is known as
rolling registration whereby electors can register with a local authority at
any time of the year. This replaced the twice-yearly census of electors which
often disenfranchised those who had moved during the interval between censuses.
Following an experiment in Northern Ireland using personal identifiers, such as
National Insurance numbers and signatures, the number of registered electors
fell by some ten thousand; it is understood that this may have taken off the
electoral roll fictitious voters. The system of individual registration used in
Northern Ireland may be piloted in Great Britain. Across the country, the
registration of electors is still technically the responsibility of the 'head
of the household', a concept seen by some as being somewhat out of step with
modern society. This current system is controversial as it is possible for one
person to delete people who may live with them from the electoral roll. United
States. Under the United States Constitution, states may not restrict voting
rights in ways that infringe one's right to equal protection under the law
(Fourteenth Amendment), on the basis of race (Fifteenth Amendment), gender
(Nineteenth Amendment), or age for persons age 18 and older (Twenty-Sixth
Amendment). Only U.S. citizens have the right to vote in federal elections. In
a few cases, permanent residents (Green Card holders) have registered to vote
and have cast ballots, most without realizing that it is illegal; non-citizens
convicted in criminal court of having made a false claim of citizenship for the
purpose of registering to vote in a federal election can be fined and
imprisoned for up to a year, then deported, and removal proceedings have
resulted in several cases. While the federal government has jurisdiction over
federal elections, most election laws are decided at the state level and the
true authority to interpret and enforce those laws comes at the local level.
Usually the county election office is the place to start if you want to
register to vote. The administration of elections can vary widely across
jurisdictions. Citizens of the United states are not automatically registered
to vote once they reach the voting age of 18, and thus must register themselves
if they wish to vote. Every state except North Dakota requires that citizens
who wish to vote be registered. Traditionally, voters had to register at state
offices to vote, but in the mid-1990s efforts were made by the federal
government to make registering easier, in an attempt to increase turnout. The
National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (the "Motor Voter" law) forced state
governments to make the voter registration process easier by providing uniform
registration services through drivers' license registration centers, disability
centers, schools, libraries, and mail-in registration. Some states allow
citizens to register to vote on the same day of the election, known as Election
Day Registration. States with same-day registration are exempt from Motor
Voter, namely: Idaho, Minnesota, New Hampshire, North Dakota, Wisconsin, and
Wyoming. Voters may register at the local election office (which is usually at
city or town hall), or one may call the election department and request a voter
registration form through the mail. Voter registration forms may be found at
public libraries and registries of motor vehicles. These forms must be filled
out and mailed to the local election department. Also, one may register at a
voter registration drive. Some states have begun to allow voters to register
online without filling out and mailing paper forms. Online voter registration
is currently available in Arizona, California, Colorado, Indiana, Kansas,
Louisiana, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, and Washington. Some states prohibit
individuals convicted of a felony from voting, known as felony
disenfranchisement. Some states prohibit voting when on parole and/or probation
but allow voting after. Some states have a lifetime ban from voting for ex-
convicts. One may register wherever one has an address, regardless of its
permanenceâ€”for example, a college student living away from home may register
to vote in the college's city, even if that is not a permanent address. In most
states, one must register, usually 30 days before a given election, in order to
vote in it. Six states, Idaho, Iowa, Minnesota, New Hampshire, Wisconsin and
Wyoming, allow for Election Day Registration. In many states, when registering
to vote, one may declare an affiliation with a political party. This
declaration of affiliation does not cost any money, and it is not the same as
being a dues-paying member of a party; for example, a party cannot prevent
anybody from declaring his or her affiliation with them, but it can refuse
requests for full membership. One purpose of this declaration is that it allows
the voter to take part in the primary elections of the declared party (although
some states allow all people to participate in primaries, regardless of
registration; this is called an open primary). Registering as a member of a
political party can also serve as a form of political expression. Declaring a
party affiliation is never required, however, and some states, including
Georgia, Michigan, Virginia, Minnesota, Wisconsin and Washington, do not offer
the option of declaring party affiliation with registration at all. In general
elections, a voter may choose to vote for all of a particular party's
candidates (straight-ticket voting) or to vote for candidates from different
parties for different offices (Party X's candidate for President, Party Y's
candidate for Senator, Party Z's candidate for Governor). In a general
election, a person may vote for any party's candidates, regardless of the
political party they belong to.
