Votebank A votebank (also spelled vote-bank or vote bank) is a loyal bloc of
voters from a single community, who consistently back a certain candidate or
political formation in democratic elections. Such behaviour is often the result
of an expectation of real or imagined benefits from the political formations,
often at the cost of other communities. Votebank politics is the practice of
creating and maintaining votebanks through divisive policies. As this brand of
politics encourages voters to vote on the basis of narrow communal
considerations, often against their better judgement, it is considered inimical
to democracy. The term was coined in India, where the practice of votebank
politics is rampant. Since then, it has gained currency in other Asian
countries with a significant English-speaking population. Origins. The term
vote-bank was first used by noted Indian sociologist, M. N. Srinivas (who also
coined the terms Sanskritisation and dominant caste), in his 1955 paper
entitled "The Social System of a Mysore Village". He used it in the context of
political influence exerted by a patron over a client. Later, the expression
was used by F. G. Bailey, a professor of anthropology at the University of
California, San Diego, in his 1959 book "Politics and Social Change", to refer
to the electoral influence of the caste leader. This is the usage that has
since become popular. Thought the term originally referred to voting along
caste lines, it was soon expanded to describe votebanks based on other
community characteristics, such as religion and language.
