Wage slavery Wage slavery refers to a situation perceived as quasi-voluntary
slavery, where a person's livelihood depends on wages, especially when the
dependence is total and immediate. It is a negatively connoted term used to
draw an analogy between slavery and wage labor, and to highlight similarities
between owning and employing a person. The term "wage slavery" has been used to
criticize economic exploitation and social stratification, with the former seen
primarily as unequal bargaining power between labor and capital (particularly
when workers are paid comparatively low wages, e.g. in sweatshops), and the
latter as a lack of workers' self-management, fulfilling job choices and
leisure in an economy. not only under threat of starvation or poverty, but also
of social stigma and status . The exchange of money and debt for prolonged and
unfulfilling work choices traces back to the disintegration of hunter-gatherer
gift economies and the origin of prostitution as a "fundamental feature of
human civilization". Similarities between wage labor and slavery were noted in
ancient Rome by Cicero, Before the American Civil War, Southern defenders of
African American slavery invoked the concept of wage slavery to favorably
compare the condition of their slaves to workers in the North. With the advent
of the industrial revolution, thinkers such as Proudhon and Marx elaborated the
comparison between wage labor and slavery in the context of a critique of
societal property not intended for active personal use, while Luddites
emphasized the dehumanization brought about by machines. The introduction of
wage labor in 18th century Britain was met with resistance – giving rise to
the principles of syndicalism. Historically, some labor organizations and
individual social activists have espoused workers' self-management or worker
cooperatives as possible alternatives to wage labor. History. The view that
working for wages is akin to slavery was already present in the ancient world,
beginning with the notion of prostitution as temporary slavery. At a time when
self-sale contracts were one of the most direct ways to become a citizen in
ancient Rome, Cicero wrote in his De Officiis that The view that wage work has
substantial similarities with chattel slavery was actively put forward in the
late 18th and 19th centuries by defenders of chattel slavery (most notably in
the Southern states of the US), and by opponents of capitalism (who were also
critics of chattel slavery). Some defenders of slavery, mainly from the
Southern slave states argued that Northern workers were "free but in name –
the slaves of endless toil," and that their slaves were better off. This
contention has been partly corroborated by some modern studies that indicate
slaves' material conditions in the 19th century were "better than what was
typically available to free urban laborers at the time." The Height of American
Slaves: New Evidence of Slave Nutrition and Health In this period, Henry David
Thoreau wrote that “t is hard to have a Southern overseer; it is worse to
have a Northern one; but worst of all when you are the slave-driver of
yourself.” The description of wage workers as wage slaves was not without
controversy. Many abolitionists in the United States regarded the analogy as
spurious. They believed that wage workers were "neither wronged nor oppressed".
The abolitionist and former slave Frederick Douglass declared "Now I am my own
master" when he took a paying job. Abraham Lincoln and the republicans "did not
challenge the notion that those who spend their entire lives as wage laborers
were comparable to slaves", though they argued that the condition was
different, as laborers were likely to have the opportunity to work for
themselves in the future, achieving self-employment. However, self-employment
became less common as the artisan tradition slowly disappeared in the later
part of the 19th century. In 1869 "The New York Times" described the system of
wage labor as "a system of slavery as absolute if not as degrading as that
which lately prevailed at the South". E. P. Thompson notes that for British
workers at the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th centuries, the "gap in
status between a 'servant,' a hired wage-laborer subject to the orders and
discipline of the master, and an artisan, who might 'come and go' as he
pleased, was wide enough for men to shed blood rather than allow themselves to
be pushed from one side to the other. And, in the value system of the
community, those who resisted degradation were in the right." A "Member of the
Builders' Union" in the 1830s argued that the trade unions "will not only
strike for less work, and more wages, but will ultimately abolish wages, become
their own masters and work for each other; labor and capital will no longer be
separate but will be indissolubly joined together in the hands of workmen and
work-women." This perspective inspired the Grand National Consolidated Trades
Union of 1834 which had the "two-fold purpose of syndicalist unions – the
protection of the workers under the existing system and the formation of the
nuclei of the future society" when the unions "take over the whole industry of
the country." "Research has shown", summarises William Lazonick, "that the
'free-born Englishman' of the eighteenth century – even those who, by force
of circumstance, had to submit to agricultural wage labour – tenaciously
resisted entry into the capitalist workshop." The use of the term wage slave by
labor organizations may originate from the labor protests of the Lowell Mill
Girls in 1836. The imagery of wage slavery was widely used by labor
organizations during the mid-19th century to object to the lack of workers'
self-management. However, it was gradually replaced by the more neutral term
"wage work" towards the end of the 19th century, as labor organizations shifted
their focus to raising wages. [[Image:Jay Gould 1911.jpg|thumb|right|American
financier Jay Gould. After hiring strikebreakers, he said "I can hire one-half
of the working class to kill the other half." The similarities between chattel
and wage slavery were noticed by the workers themselves. For example, the 19th
century Lowell Mill Girls, who, without any reported knowledge of European
marxism or anarchism, condemned the "degradation and subordination" of the
newly emerging industrial system, and the "new spirit of the age: gain wealth,
forgetting all but self", maintaining that "those who work in the mills should
own them."  However, the structural changes associated with the later stages of
industrial capitalism, including "increased centralization of production...
declining wages... expanding... labor pool... intensifying competition, and...
[the loss of competence and independence experienced by skilled labor" meant
that "a critique that referred to all work as slavery and avoided demands for
wage concessions in favor of supporting the creation of the producerist
republic (by diverting strike funds towards funding... co-operatives, for
example) was far less compelling than one that identified the specific
conditions of slavery as low wages..." Thus, "wage slavery" was gradually
replaced by the more pragmatic term "wage work" towards the end of the 19th
century. Defenses of wage labor and chattel slavery in the literature have
linked the subjection of man to man with the subjection of man to nature;
arguing that hierarchy and a social system's particular relations of production
represent human nature and are no more coercive than the reality of life
itself. According to this narrative, any well-intentioned attempt to
fundamentally change the status quo is naively utopian and will result in more
oppressive conditions. Bosses in both of these long-lasting systems argued that
their system created a lot of wealth and prosperity. Both did, in some sense
create jobs and their investment entailed risk. For example, slave owners might
have risked losing money by buying expensive slaves who later became ill or
died; or might have used those slaves to make products that didn't sell well on
the market. Marginally, both chattel and wage slaves may become bosses;
sometimes by working hard. It may be the "rags to riches" story which
occasionally occurs in capitalism, or the "slave to master" story that occurred
in places like colonial Brazil, where slaves could buy their own freedom and
become business owners, self-employed, or slave owners themselves. Social
mobility, or the hard work and risk that it may entail, are thus not considered
to be a redeeming factor by critics of the concept of wage slavery.
Anthropologist David Graeber has noted that, historically, the first wage labor
contracts we know about – whether in ancient Greece or Rome, or in the Malay
or Swahili city states in the Indian ocean – were in fact contracts for the
rental of chattel slaves (usually the owner would receive a share of the money,
and the slave, another, with which to maintain his or her living expenses.)
Such arrangements, according to Graeber, were quite common in New World slavery
as well, whether in the United States or Brazil. C. L. R. James argued that
most of the techniques of human organization employed on factory workers during
the industrial revolution were first developed on slave plantations. Treatment
in various economic systems. Capitalism. The concept of wage slavery could
conceivably be traced back to pre-capitalist figures like Gerrard Winstanley
from the radical Christian Diggers movement in England, who wrote in his 1649
pamphlet, "The New Law of Righteousness", that there "shall be no buying or
selling, no fairs nor markets, but the whole earth shall be a common treasury
for every man," and "there shall be none Lord over others, but every one shall
be a Lord of himself." Aristotle made the statement "...the citizens must not
live a mechanic or a mercantile life (for such a life is ignoble and inimical
to virtue), nor yet must those who are to be citizens in the best state be
tillers of the soil（for leisure is needed both for the development of virtue
and for active participation in politics.)" (often paraphrased as "all paid
jobs absorb and degrade the mind"). Cicero wrote in 44 BC that "…vulgar are
the means of livelihood of all hired workmen whom we pay for mere manual
labour, not for artistic skill; for in their case the very wage they receive is
a pledge of their slavery." Somewhat similar criticisms have also been
expressed by some proponents of liberalism, like Henry George, Silvio Gesell
and Thomas Paine, as well as the Distributist school of thought within the
Roman Catholic Church. Wage laborers and their families sometimes borrow from
financial institutions to compensate for insufficient earnings or improve their
societal status. According to economist Steve Keen, the "deleveraging" moments
when they (or the governments they live under) pay down debt instead of
spending on consumption or investment in real-economy infrastructure, result in
economic crises or even depressions (such as The Great Depression). The lack of
aggregate demand caused by low wages and low unionization, as well as the
higher wages that create inflation – as capitalists pass increased labor
costs onto consumers – are important factors in the creation of the business
cycle. Communism. Both American and Russian media described the USSR as
communist and socialist society. Thus Soviet state brutality and destruction of
workers' councils became identified with socialism and communism. This helped
to vilify these political movements and portray capitalist wage labor as the
only alternative to the soviet model. Fascism. Fascism was more discriminating
of trade unions than modern economies in Europe or the United States. Fascist
economic policies were widely accepted in the 1920s and 1930s and foreign
(especially US) corporate investment in Italy and Germany increased after the
fascist take over. In Germany, this foreign investment, in conjunction with
Hitler's economic policies, led to economic growth and an increase in the
standard of living of some Germans, though critics like Noam Chomsky do not
believe that such improvements justify fascism nor wage slavery. Focusing
largely on US support for the Latin American "National Security States,"
Chomsky and Edward S. Herman argue that U.S. corporations support (and in many
instances create) fascist (or "sub" and "neo"-fascist) terror states in order
to create a favorable investment climate. Quote from an interview with Pierre
van Paassen (24 July 1936), published in the "Toronto Daily Star" (5 August
1936) Opinions on psychological effects. According to Noam Chomsky, analysis of
the psychological implications of wage slavery goes back to the Enlightenment
era. In his 1791 book "On the Limits of State Action", classical liberal
thinker Wilhelm von Humboldt explained how "whatever does not spring from a
man's free choice, or is only the result of instruction and guidance, does not
enter into his very nature; he does not perform it with truly human energies,
but merely with mechanical exactness" and so when the laborer works under
external control, "we may admire what he does, but we despise what he is." Both
the Milgram and Stanford experiments have been found useful in the
psychological study of wage-based workplace relations. Self-identity problems
and stress. According to research, modern work provides people with a sense of
personal and social identity that is tied to 1) the particular work role, even
if unfulfilling; and 2) the social role it entails e.g. family bread-winning,
friendship forming etc. Thus job loss entails the loss of this identity.
Psychiatrist Dayal Mirchandani thinks this problem has become important enough
that humans should "divorce self-image from [their job and from the perks it
provides." Erich Fromm noted that if a person perceives himself as being what
he owns, then when that person loses (or even thinks of losing) what he "owns"
(e.g. the good looks or sharp mind that allow him to sell his labor for high
wages), then, a fear of loss may create anxiety and authoritarian tendencies
because that person's sense of identity is threatened. In contrast, when a
person's sense of self is based on what he experiences in a state of "being"
(creativity, love, sadness, taste, sight etc.) with a less materialistic regard
for what he once had and lost, or may lose, then less authoritarian tendencies
prevail. The state of being, in his view, flourishes under a worker-managed
workplace and economy, whereas self-ownership entails a materialistic notion of
self, created to rationalize the lack of worker control that would allow for a
state of being. Due to this lack of control, the exploited worker, according to
Marx, "puts his life into the object... thus the greater his activity...the
less he possesses...labour becomes an object...[and the life which he has given
to the object sets itself against him as an alien and hostile force" And since
the worker could be working for wages or saving money instead of enjoying life
or having fun, (which in a capitalist society often costs money), "all passions
and all activity is submerged in avarice... the less you are, the less you
express your own life, the more you have, i.e., the greater is your alienated
life." Investigative journalist Robert Kuttner in Everything for Sale, analyzes
the work of public-Health scholars Jeffrey Johnson and Ellen Hall about modern
conditions of work, and concludes that "to be in a life situation where one
experiences relentless demands by others, over which one has relatively little
control, is to be at risk of poor health, physically as well as mentally."
Under wage labor, "a relatively small elite demands and gets empowerment, self-
actualization, autonomy, and other work satisfaction that partially compensate
for long hours" while "epidemiological data confirm that lower-paid, lower-
status workers are more likely to experience the most clinically damaging forms
of stress, in part because they have less control over their work." Wage
slavery, and the educational system that precedes it "implies power held by the
leader. Without power the leader is inept. The possession of power inevitably
leads to corruption… in spite of… good intentions … means power of
initiative, this sense of responsibility, the self-respect which comes from
expressed manhood, is taken from the men, and consolidated in the leader. The
sum of their initiative, their responsibility, their self-respect becomes his
… the order and system he maintains is based upon the suppression of the men,
from being independent thinkers into being 'the men' … In a word, he is
compelled to become an autocrat and a foe to democracy." For the "leader", such
marginalisation can be beneficial, for a leader "sees no need for any high
level of intelligence in the rank and file, except to applaud his actions.
Indeed such intelligence from his point of view, by breeding criticism and
opposition, is an obstacle and causes confusion." Wage slavery "implies erosion
of the human personality… some men submit to the will of others, arousing in
these instincts which predispose them to cruelty and indifference in the face
of the suffering of their fellows." Psychological control. Higher wages. In
19th century discussions of labor relations, it was normally assumed that the
threat of starvation forced those without property to work for wages.
Proponents of the view that modern forms of employment constitute wage slavery,
even when workers appear to have a range of available alternatives, have
attributed its perpetuation to a variety of social factors that maintain the
hegemony of the employer class. These include efforts at manufacturing consent
and eliciting false consciousness. Robinson, Harriet H. "Early Factory Labor in
New England," in Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor, Fourteenth Annual
Report (Boston: Wright & Potter, 1883), pp. 380­82, 387­88, 391­92. Parecon
theory posits a social class "between labor and capital" of higher paid
professionals such as "doctors, lawyers, engineers, managers and others" who
monopolize empowering labor and constitute a class above wage laborers who do
mostly "obedient, rote work". Lower wages. The terms "employee" or "worker"
have often been replaced by "associate". This plays up the allegedly voluntary
nature of the interaction, while playing down the subordinate status of the
wage laborer, as well as the worker-boss class distinction emphasized by labor
movements. Billboards, as well as TV, Internet and newspaper advertisements,
consistently show low-wage workers with smiles on their faces, appearing happy.
Job interviews and other data on requirements for lower skilled workers in
developed countries – particularly in the growing service sector – indicate
that the more workers depend on low wages, and the less skilled or desirable
their job is, the more employers screen for workers without better employment
options and expect them to feign unremunerative motivation. Such screening and
feigning may not only contribute to the positive self-image of the employer as
someone granting desirable employment, but also signal wage-dependence by
indicating the employee's willingness to feign, which in turn may discourage
the dissatisfaction normally associated with job-switching or union activity.
At the same time, employers in the service industry have justified unstable,
part-time employment and low wages by playing down the importance of service
jobs for the lives of the wage laborers (e.g. just temporary before finding
something better, student summer jobs etc.). In the early 20th century,
"scientific methods of strikebreaking" were devised – employing a variety of
tactics that emphasized how strikes undermined "harmony" and "Americanism".
Lowest wages. This category would include those who "are falling further behind
as the global economy recovers, amid rising competition from hordes of new
working poor" Workers' self-management. Some social activists objecting to the
market system or price system of wage working, historically have considered
syndicalism, worker cooperatives, workers' self-management and workers' control
as possible alternatives to the current wage system. Labor and government. The
American philosopher John Dewey believed that until "industrial feudalism" is
replaced by "industrial democracy," politics will be "the shadow cast on
society by big business". Thomas Ferguson has postulated in his investment
theory of party competition that the undemocratic nature of economic
institutions under capitalism causes elections to become occasions when blocs
of investors coalesce and compete to control the state. In this regard Chomsky
has used Bakunin's theories about an "instinct for freedom", the militant
history of labor movements, Kropotkin's mutual aid evolutionary principle of
survival and Marc Hauser's theories supporting an innate and universal moral
faculty, to explain the incompatibility of oppression with certain aspects of
human nature. Influence on environmental degradation. Loyola University
philosophy professor John Clark and libertarian socialist philosopher Murray
Bookchin have criticized the system of wage labor for encouraging environmental
destruction, arguing that a self-managed industrial society would better manage
the environment. They, like other anarchists, attribute much of the industrial
revolution's pollution to the "hierarchical" and "competitive" economic
relations accompanying it. Employment contracts. Some criticize wage slavery on
strictly contractual grounds, e.g. David Ellerman and Carole Pateman, arguing
that the employment contract is a legal fiction in that it treats human beings
juridically as mere tools or inputs by abdicating responsibility and self-
determination, which the critics argue are inalienable. As Ellerman points out,
"employee is legally transformed from being a co-responsible partner to being
only an input supplier sharing no legal responsibility for either the input
liabilities [costs or the produced outputs profits of the employer’s
business." Such contracts are inherently invalid "since the person remaina de
facto fully capacitated adult person with only the contractual role of a non-
person . . ." as it is impossible to physically transfer self-determination. As
Pateman argues:Ellerman, David, "Translatio versus Concessio", 32 In a modern
liberal-capitalist society, the employment contract is enforced while the
enslavement contract is not; the former being considered valid because of its
consensual/non-coercive nature, and the later being considered inherently
invalid, consensual or not. The noted economist Paul Samuelson described this
discrepancy. Ellerman, David, "Inalienable Rights and Contracts", 21 Some
advocates of laissez-faire capitalism, among them philosopher Robert Nozick,
address this inconsistency in modern societies, arguing that a consistently
libertarian society would allow and regard as valid consensual/non-coercive
enslavement contracts, rejecting the notion of inalienable rights. Ellerman,
David, "Translatio versus Concessio", 2 "Man, Economy, and State", vol. I , p.
441 Criticism. Many abolitionists in the United States regarded the analogy of
wage workers as wage slaves to be spurious. They believed that wage workers
were "neither wronged nor oppressed". The abolitionist and former slave
Frederick Douglass declared "Now I am my own master" when he took a paying job.
However, Abraham Lincoln and the republicans "did not challenge the notion that
those who spend their entire lives as wage laborers were comparable to slaves",
though they argued that the condition was different, as laborers were likely to
have the opportunity to work for themselves in the future, achieving self-
employment. Some advocates of laissez-faire capitalism, among them philosopher
Robert Nozick, have said that inalienable rights can be waived if they are done
so voluntary: Ellerman, David. "Translatio versus Concessio". p. 2 Schools of
economics. In mainstream, neoclassical economics philosophy, wage labor is seen
as the voluntary sale of one's own time and efforts, just like a carpenter
would sell a chair, or a farmer would sell wheat. It is considered neither an
antagonistic nor abusive relationship, and carries no particular moral
implications. Austrian economics argues that a person is not "free" unless they
can sell their labor, because otherwise that person has no self-ownership and
will be owned by a "third party" of individuals. Post Keynesian economics
perceives wage slavery as resulting from inequality of bargaining power between
labor and capital, which exists when the economy does not "allow labor to
organize and form a strong countervailing force" 1. – Libertarian Socialism
sees it as a lack of workers' self-management in the context of substituting
state and capitalist control with political and economic decentralization and
confederation. 2. – State-socialists view it as an injustice perpetrated by
capitalists and solved by state control of the means of production.
