Wage A wage is remuneration paid by an employer to an employee. It may be a
calculated as a fixed amount, or at an hourly rate, or based on the quantity of
work done. Remuneration to manual workers is often referred to as "wages",
while remuneration to white-collar workers is called "salary". Determinants of
wage rates. Depending on the structure and traditions of different economies
around the world, wage rates will be influenced by market forces (supply and
demand), legislation, and tradition. Market forces are perhaps more dominant in
the United States, while tradition, social structure and seniority, perhaps
play a greater role in Japan. Wage Discrimination. Even in countries where
market forces primarily set wage rates, studies show that there are still
differences in remuneration for work based on sex and race. For example,
according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 2007 women of all races
made approximately 80% of the median wage of their male counterparts.
Similarly, white men made about 84% the wage of Asian men, and black men 64%.
These are overall averages and are not adjusted for the type, amount, and
quality of work done. Wages in the United States. In the United States, wages
for most workers are set by market forces, or else by collective bargaining,
where a labor union negotiates on the workers' behalf. The Fair Labor Standards
Act establishes a minimum wage at the federal level that all states must abide
by, among other provisions. Fourteen states and a number of cities have set
their own minimum wage rates that are higher than the federal level. For
certain federal or state government contacts, employers must pay the so-called
prevailing wage as determined according to the Davis-Bacon Act or its state
equivalent. Activists have undertaken to promote the idea of a living wage rate
which account for living expenses and other basic necessities, setting the
living wage rate much higher than current minimum wage laws require.
