Ward Churchill September 11 attacks essay controversy Ward Churchill, former
ethnic studies professor at the University of Colorado at Boulder, wrote an
essay in September 2001 titled "Some People Push Back: On the Justice of
Roosting Chickens" about the September 11, 2001 attacks, in which he argued
that American foreign policies provoked the attacks. He described what he
called the "technocratic corps at the very heart of America's global financial
empire" in the World Trade Center as "little Eichmanns," i.e. as those who
banally conduct their duties in the service of evil. In response to 2005
publicity from the mass media and in weblogs, Churchill was both widely
condemned and widely defended. Some defenders who did not agree with
Churchill's analysis and/or with his inflammatory phrasing nonetheless felt
that the attacks on Churchill represented efforts at intimidation against
academic discourse and suppression of political dissent. At the height of the
controversy, the University ordered an inquiry into Churchill's research, and
then fired him on July 24, 2007, leading to a claim from some scholars that he
was fired over the ideas he expressed. Churchill filed a lawsuit against the
University of Colorado for unlawful termination of employment. In April 2009 a
Denver jury found that Churchill was wrongly fired, awarding him $1 in damages.
On July 7, 2009, Judge Larry Naves vacated the ruling and determined that the
university does not have to rehire or pay Churchill. The essay. In "Some People
Push Back," Churchill argued that effects of decade-long economic sanctions on
Iraqis, together with the Middle East policies of President Lyndon Johnson, and
the history of Crusades against the Islamic world, had contributed to a climate
in which 9/11 was what he called a "natural and inevitable response." The
"roosting chickens" phrase comes from Malcolm X's comment about the
assassination of U.S. president John F. Kennedy that Kennedy "never foresaw
that the chickens would come home to roost so soon." Churchill compared the
American people to the "good Germans" of Nazi Germany, claiming that the vast
majority of Americans had ignored the civilian suffering caused by the
sanctions on Iraq during the 1990s, which had killed millions of Iraqi
civilians, including over 500,000 children. Churchill characterized these
sanctions as a policy of genocide. The essay was later expanded into a book,
"On the Justice of Roosting Chickens," which won Honorable Mention for the
Gustavus Myers Human Rights Award in 2004. Public controversy. National
attention was drawn to the essay in January 2005, when Churchill was invited to
speak at Hamilton College as a panelist in a debate, "Limits of Dissent." The
text of the essay was quoted on the January 28, 2005, edition of the Fox News
Channel program "The O'Reilly Factor" and commentator Bill O'Reilly
subsequently discussed Churchill on a number of other segments as well. The
January 31 edition of "The O'Reilly Factor" featured Paul Campos, a University
of Colorado professor, who said he was appalled at Churchill's comments. At the
end of the segment, O'Reilly suggested that viewers wishing to voice their
opinions could contact Hamilton College or Hamilton's president, Joan Stewart;
Hamilton College subsequently received 6,000 e-mails concerning Churchill. The
lecture was changed to a larger venue, but was later canceled by Stewart,
following what she described as "credible threats of violence." Churchill said
that he received threats against his life as a consequence of his statements
and the corresponding news coverage. Fox News Channel, "The O'Reilly Factor" in
particular, led the coverage of Churchill's scheduled appearance at Hamilton
College. In the three weeks following the January 28, 2005 debut, FOX ran 16
stories on the Churchill story (9 on "The O'Reilly Factor"). By contrast, ABC
aired no stories on Churchill, CBS aired one (on its morning newscast), NBC
aired two (one on its morning broadcast, one on the nightly news,) and CNN
aired four stories. Thus, FOX News aired more than twice as many stories on
Ward Churchill than the other four news networks combined. Churchill clarified
further in a February 2005 interview with "Democracy Now!" On January 31, 2005,
Churchill resigned as chairman of the Ethnic Studies department at the
University of Colorado. Former Colorado Republican governor Bill Owens and
former Democratic governor Bill Ritter have publicly called for Churchill's
dismissal. The Board of Regents of the University of Colorado, meeting in
executive session on February 3, 2005, adopted a resolution apologizing to the
American people for Churchill's statements, and ratifying interim chancellor
Phil DiStefano's review of Churchill's actions. DiStefano was directed to
investigate whether Churchill had overstepped his bounds as a faculty member
and whether his actions were cause for dismissal. The university's Standing
Committee on Research Misconduct agreed that his words were protected by the
university's academic free-speech code, but agreed to investigate subsequent
charges made against Churchill of plagiarism, falsification, fabrication and
ethnic fraud (see below). In May 2006, the University announced that its
Research Misconduct Committee found that Churchill's publications demonstrate a
pattern of research misconduct. On June 26, 2006, Chancellor Phil DiStefano
recommended Churchill's dismissal to the Board of Regents, and relieved
Churchill of his campus duties including teaching, service, and research. In
August 2006, the CU student government passed a resolution to support the
committee's recommendations to fire Churchill. Defense of Churchill. A number
of academics and activists defended Churchill's essay, or argued that it was
not grounds for firing him from his teaching job. One of Churchill's fellow
professors in the Ethnic Studies department at the University of Colorado, Emma
Perez, alleged that the attacks on Churchill were an organized "test case" by
neo-conservatives to stifle liberal criticism of the War on Terror, and to
undermine the funding of ethnic studies departments nationwide. Betsy Hoffman,
then the president of the University of Colorado, said of the attacks on
Churchill, "We are in dangerous times. I'm very concerned.Â ... It's looking a
lot like former CU President George Norlin being asked to fire all the
Catholics and Jews of the McCarthy era." A number of other political
commentators have analyzed the "Churchill Affair" in terms of a "witch hunt";
for example, Gilles d'Aymery, Fred Feldman, the Michigan Independent Media
Center, Scott Richard Lyons (Native American Studies professor) and others.
Scholars, activists and organizations expressing concern over the firing
include the ACLU, the National Association of Chicana and Chicano Studies,
Mumia Abu-Jamal, Noam Chomsky, Howard Zinn, Derrick Jensen, Drucilla Cornell,
Bill Ayers and Immanuel Wallerstein. Two professors writing in defense of
Churchill have questioned the politics motivating his accusers. Gary
Witherspoon, an anthropologist and linguist, faults what he believes to be the
inaccurate journalism and biased quality of the investigation that have marked
the affair. Similarly, sociologist Tom Mayer criticized what he believes to be
the politically motivated tenor of the investigation of Churchill: A
documentary on the reactions to Churchill's essay, called "When They Came For
Ward Churchill" was produced by the Free Speech Network. Churchill calls for
the end of the existence of the state. Colorado governor Bill Owens called this
comment "treasonous", arguing that "Churchill has clearly called for violence
against the state, and no country is required to subsidize its own destruction.
That's what we're doing with Ward Churchill." On February 6, 2005, the "Denver
Post" reported that this comment would be included by the university in its
review of Churchill's tenure. Although there has been some suggestion that the
constitutionally overturned Smith Act should be invoked in order to prosecute
Churchill for his remarks , the debate is mostly focused on whether the First
Amendment protects the tenure of a professor of a public university. Many,
including Governor Owens, argue that the University of Colorado (or any other
public university) is not required to support faculty that support the
overthrow of the government. When asked by a member of the audience about the
officers' families, Churchill responded, "how do you feel about Adolf
Eichmann's family?" The CU Alumni Association Award. Teaching Recognition
Awards are voted on annually by students at the University of Colorado; In
2005, more than 2,000 students voted. A plurality of students nominated
Churchill for the award in the category for class sizes of 25 to 75. With the
ongoing investigations by the Ethics Committee, the Alumni Association
responsible for presenting the award has yet to present the award to Churchill.
Clark Oldroyd, The vice president of the Alumni Association stated that "We're
giving that committee time to complete its study" and also stated that, "It
just seems like the prudent thing to do." Alumni Association President Kent
Zimmerman told the campus Silver & Gold Record that the group is holding back
the award until Churchill's "name has been cleared" by the committee. He
compared it to withholding a student's grade on a final exam "if there were
questions about the student's effort." Zimmerman is also quoted by the Denver
Post as stating that Churchill's "award is being withheld, in part, due to his
tendency to "antagonize and create enemies." According to Churchill, "What
Alumni Association President Kent Zimmerman is really sayingâ€”obviouslyâ€”is
that it would be really awkward for the institution to have to acknowledge the
quality of my teaching in the midst of an effort to paint an exactly opposite
portrait of me." Churchill's attorney David Lane contends, "They are punishing
Ward Churchill for his free speech by withholding this award". Within the
University of Colorado community, opinions on the Alumni Association's actions
vary. Instructor Ann Ellis states "I think it's legitimate to withhold the
award. I think the students voting on the award were trying to influence the
investigation." Churchill is being evaluated, she said, "because the university
has a responsibility to make sure that its faculty members are who they say
they are." In contrast, graduate program assistant Mary Gregory said, "If it's
a student award, and it has nothing to do with the review, then it should not
be withheld." According to the website Indianz.com, which dedicates its
resources to American Indian issues, "Students at the University of Colorado
have overwhelmingly chosen Ward Churchill as their favorite professor but he
will not be given the award because he is too controversial." Churchill's
fifty-four votes for the award were a plurality among all the faculty, but only
a small percentage of CU's 28,000 students chose to participate. Given annually
for 44 years, this is the first time the award was withheld from its winner.
