Welfare economics Welfare economics is a branch of economics that uses
microeconomic techniques to evaluate economic well-being, especially relative
to competitive general equilibrium within an economy as to economic efficiency
and the resulting income distribution associated with it. It analyzes "social
welfare", however measured, in terms of economic activities of the individuals
that compose the theoretical society considered. Accordingly, individuals, with
associated economic activities, are the basic units for aggregating to social
welfare, whether of a group, a community, or a society, and there is no "social
welfare" apart from the "welfare" associated with its individual units. Welfare
economics typically takes individual preferences as given and stipulates a
welfare improvement in Pareto efficiency terms from social state "A" to social
state "B" if at least one person prefers "B" and no one else opposes it. There
is no requirement of a unique quantitative measure of the welfare improvement
implied by this. Another aspect of welfare treats income/goods distribution,
including equality, as a further dimension of welfare. Social welfare refers to
the overall welfare of society. With sufficiently strong assumptions, it can be
specified as the summation of the welfare of all the individuals in the
society. Welfare may be measured either cardinally in terms of "" or dollars,
or measured ordinally in terms of Pareto efficiency. The cardinal method in
"utils" is seldom used in pure theory today because of aggregation problems
that make the meaning of the method doubtful, except on widely challenged
underlying assumptions. In applied welfare economics, such as in cost-benefit
analysis, money-value estimates are often used, particularly where income-
distribution effects are factored into the analysis or seem unlikely to
undercut the analysis. The capabilities approach to welfare argues that freedom
- what people are free to do or be - should be included in welfare assessments,
and the approach has been particularly influential in development policy
circles where the emphasis on multi-dimensionality and freedom has shaped the
evolution of the Human Development Index. Other or problems in welfare
economics include externalities, equity, justice, inequality, and altruism. Two
approaches. There are two mainstream approaches to welfare economics: the early
"Neoclassical approach" and the "New welfare economics approach". With these
assumptions, it is possible to construct a social welfare function simply by
summing all the individual utility functions. The "New Welfare Economics"
approach is based on the work of Pareto, Hicks, and Kaldor. It explicitly
recognizes the differences between the efficiency aspect of the discipline and
the distribution aspect and treats them differently. Questions of efficiency
are assessed with criteria such as Pareto efficiency and the Kaldor-Hicks
compensation tests, while questions of income distribution are covered in
social welfare function specification. Further, efficiency dispenses with
cardinal measures of utility, replacing it with ordinal utility, which merely
ranks commodity bundles (with an indifference-curve map, for example).
Efficiency. Situations are considered to have distributive efficiency when
goods are distributed to the people who can gain the most utility from them.
Many economists use Pareto efficiency as their efficiency goal. According to
this measure of social welfare, a situation is optimal only if no individuals
can be made better off without making someone else worse off. To determine
whether an activity is moving the economy towards Pareto efficiency, two
compensation tests have been developed. Any change usually makes some people
better off while making others worse off, so these tests ask what would happen
if the winners were to compensate the losers. Using the "Kaldor criterion", an
activity will contribute to Pareto optimality if the maximum amount the gainers
are prepared to pay is greater than the minimum amount that the losers are
prepared to accept. Under the "Hicks criterion", an activity will contribute to
Pareto optimality if the maximum amount the losers are prepared to offer to the
gainers in order to prevent the change is less than the minimum amount the
gainers are prepared to accept as a bribe to forgo the change. The Hicks
compensation test is from the losers' point of view, while the Kaldor
compensation test is from the gainers' point of view. If both conditions are
satisfied, both gainers and losers will agree that the proposed activity will
move the economy toward Pareto optimality. This is referred to as Kaldor-Hicks
efficiency or the Scitovsky criterion. "See also: first welfare theorem" Income
distribution. There are many combinations of consumer utility, production
mixes, and factor input combinations consistent with efficiency. In fact, there
are an infinity of consumption and production equilibria that yield Pareto
optimal results. There are as many optima as there are points on the aggregate
production possibilities frontier. Hence, Pareto efficiency is a necessary, but
not a sufficient condition for social welfare. Each Pareto optimum corresponds
to a different income distribution in the economy. Some may involve great
inequalities of income. So how do we decide which Pareto optimum is most
desirable? This decision is made, either tacitly or overtly, when we specify
the social welfare function. This function embodies value judgements about
interpersonal utility. The social welfare function shows the relative
importance of the individuals that comprise society. A utilitarian welfare
function (also called a Benthamite welfare function) sums the utility of each
individual in order to obtain society's overall welfare. All people are treated
the same, regardless of their initial level of utility. One extra unit of
utility for a starving person is not seen to be of any greater value than an
extra unit of utility for a millionaire. At the other extreme is the Max-Min,
or Rawlsian utility function (Stiglitz, 2000, p102)reference. According to the
Max-Min criterion, welfare is maximized when the utility of those society
members that have the least is the greatest. No economic activity will increase
social welfare unless it improves the position of the society member that is
the worst off. Most economists specify social welfare functions that are
intermediate between these two extremes. The social welfare function is
typically translated into social indifference curves so that they can be used
in the same graphic space as the other functions that they interact with. A
utilitarian social indifference curve is linear and downward sloping to the
right. The Max-Min social indifference curve takes the shape of two straight
lines joined so as they form a 90 degree angle. A social indifference curve
drawn from an intermediate social welfare function is a curve that slopes
downward to the right. The intermediate form of social indifference curve can
be interpreted as showing that as inequality increases, a larger improvement in
the utility of relatively rich individuals is needed to compensate for the loss
in utility of relatively poor individuals. A crude social welfare function can
be constructed by measuring the subjective dollar value of goods and services
distributed to participants in the economy ("see also" consumer surplus). A
simplified seven-equation model. The solution to this problem yields a Pareto
optimum. In a more realistic example of millions of consumers, millions of
products, and several factors of production, the math gets more complicated.
Also, finding a solution to an abstract function does not directly yield a
policy recommendation! In other words, solving an equation does not solve
social problems. However, a model like the one above can be viewed as an
argument that solving a social problem (like achieving a Pareto-optimal
distribution of wealth) is at least theoretically possible. Efficiency between
production and consumption. The relation between production and consumption in
a simple seven equation model (2x2x2 model) can be shown graphically. In the
diagram below, the aggregate production possibility frontier, labeled PQ shows
all the points of efficiency in the production of goods X and Y. If the economy
produces the mix of good X and Y shown at point A, then the marginal rate of
transformation (MRT), X for Y, is equal to 2. Point A defines the boundaries of
an Edgeworth box diagram of consumption. That is, the same mix of products that
are produced at point A, can be consumed by the two consumers in this simple
economy. The consumers' relative preferences are shown by the indifference
curves inside the Edgeworth box. At point B the marginal rate of substitution
(MRS) is equal to 2, while at point C the marginal rate of substitution is
equal to 3. Only at point B is consumption in balance with production
(MRS=MRT). The curve 0BCA (often called the contract curve) inside the
Edgeworth box defines the locus of points of efficiency in consumption
(MRS1=MRS Â²). As we move along the curve, we are changing the mix of goods X
and Y that individuals 1 and 2 choose to consume. The utility data associated
with each point on this curve can be used to create utility functions. Social
welfare maximization. Utility functions can be derived from the points on a
contract curve. Numerous utility functions can be derived, one for each point
on the production possibility frontier (PQ in the diagram above). A social
utility frontier (also called a grand utility frontier) can be obtained from
the outer envelope of all these utility functions. Each point on a social
utility frontier represents an efficient allocation of an economy's resources;
that is, it is a Pareto optimum in factor allocation, in production, in
consumption, and in the interaction of production and consumption (supply and
demand). In the diagram below, the curve MN is a social utility frontier. Point
D corresponds with point C from the earlier diagram. Point D is on the social
utility frontier because the marginal rate of substitution at point C is equal
to the marginal rate of transformation at point A. Point E corresponds with
point B in the previous diagram, and lies inside the social utility frontier
(indicating inefficiency) because the MRS at point C is not equal to the MRT at
point A. Although all the points on the grand social utility frontier are
Pareto efficient, only one point identifies where social welfare is maximized.
Such point is called "the point of bliss". This point is Z where the social
utility frontier MN is tangent to the highest possible social indifference
curve labelled SI. Welfare economics in relation to other subjects. Welfare
economics uses many of the same techniques as microeconomics and can be seen as
intermediate or advanced microeconomic theory. Its results are applicable to
macroeconomic issues so welfare economics is somewhat of a bridge between the
two branches of economics. Cost-benefit analysis is a specific application of
welfare economics techniques, but excludes the income distribution aspects.
Political science also looks into the issue of social welfare (political
science), but in a less quantitative manner. Human development theory explores
these issues also, and considers them fundamental to the development process
itself. Paretian welfare economics. Paretian welfare economics rests on the
assumed value judgment that, if a particular change in the economy leaves at
least one individual better off and no individual worse off, social welfare may
be said to have increased. Criticisms. Some, such as economists in the
tradition of the Austrian School, doubt whether a cardinal utility function, or
cardinal social welfare function, is of any value. The reason given is that it
is difficult to aggregate the utilities of various people that have differing
marginal utility of money, such as the wealthy and the poor. Also, the
economists of the Austrian School question the relevance of pareto optimal
allocation considering situations where the framework of means and ends is not
perfectly known, since neoclassical theory always assumes that the ends-means
framework is perfectly defined. Some even question the value of ordinal utility
functions. They have proposed other means of measuring well-being as an
alternative to price indices, "willingness to pay" functions, and other price
oriented measures. These price based measures are seen as promoting consumerism
and productivism by many. It should be noted that it is possible to do welfare
economics without the use of prices, however this is not always done. Value
assumptions explicit in the social welfare function used and implicit in the
efficiency criterion chosen tend to make welfare economics a normative and
perhaps subjective field. This can make it controversial. However, perhaps most
significant of all are concerns about the limits of a utilitarian approach to
welfare economics. According to this line of argument utility is not the only
thing that matters and so a comprehensive approach to welfare economics should
include other factors. The capabilities approach to welfare is an attempt to
construct a more comprehensive approach to welfare economics, one in which
functionings, happiness and capabilities are the three key aspects of welfare
outcomes that people should seek to promote and foster.
