White-collar worker __NOTOC__ The term white-collar worker refers to a person
who performs professional, managerial, or administrative work, in contrast with
a blue-collar worker, whose job requires manual labor. Typically white collar
work is performed in an office or cubicle. Etymology. The term refers to the
white dress shirts of male office workers common through most of the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries Western countries as opposed to the blue shirts,
uniforms or cover-alls of manual or service workers. The term "white collar" is
credited to Upton Sinclair, an American writer, in relation to contemporary
clerical, administrative and management workers during the 1930s, though
references to "easy work and a white collar" appear as early as 1911. Examples
of its usage in the 1920s include a 1923 "Wall Street Journal" article that
reads, "Movement from high schools to manual labor in steel plants is unusual,
as boys formerly sought white collar work." Demographics. Formerly a minority
in the agrarian and early industrial societies, white-collar workers have
become a majority in industrialized countries due to modernization and
exportation of manufacturing jobs. The blue collar and white collar descriptors
as it pertains to work dress may no longer be an accurate descriptor as office
attire has broadened beyond a white shirt and tie. Employees in office
environments may wear a variety of colors, may dress business casual or wear
casual clothes altogether. In addition work tasks have blurred. "White-collar"
employees may perform "blue-collar" tasks (or ""). An example would be a
restaurant manager who may wear more formal clothing yet still assist with
cooking food or taking customers' orders or a construction worker who also
performs desk work.
