Workers' council A workers' council, or revolutionary councils, is the
phenomenon where a single place of work or enterprise, such as a factory,
school, or farm, is controlled collectively by the workers of that workplace,
through the core principle of temporary and instantly revocable delegates. In a
system with temporary and instantly revocable delegates, workers decided on
what their agenda is and what their needs are. They also mandate a temporary
delegate to divulge and pursue them. The temporary delegates are elected among
the workers themselves, can be instantly revoked if they betray their mandate,
and are supposed to change frequently. There are no managers and all decision
power and organization is based on the delegates system. On a larger scale, a
group of delegates may in turn elect a delegate in a higher position to pursue
their mandate, and so on, until the top delegates are running the industrial
system of a state. In such a system decision power rises from bottom to top
from the agendas of the workers themselves, and there is not a decision
imposition from the top, as would happen in the case of a power seizure by a
supposedly revolutionary party. Historical examples. Several times in modern
history the idea of workers' councils has been attributed to similar forms of
organization, although in most cases the workers didn't actually have full
power control, and were subdued to some external authority. Examples include
Russia in 1905 and 1917, where councils were called "soviets"; Germany during
1918 ("RÃ¤te"); Turin, Italy during 1919-1920; rural Ireland during 1920-1921;
China during 1926-1927; Spain during 1936; Hungary during 1919 and 1956; France
during 1871 and 1968; Chile in 1973 ("cordones"); Iran during 1978-1979
("shoras"); and from at the latest 2002 to the present in Venezuela. Despite
Lenin's declarations that "the workers must demand the immediate establishment
of genuine control, to be exercised by the workers themselves", on May 30, the
Menshevik minister of labor, Skobolev, pledged to not give the control of
industry to the workers but instead to the state: "The transfer of enterprises
into the hands of the people will not at the present time assist the revolution
[...] The regulation and control of industry is not a matter for a particular
class. It is a task for the state. Upon the individual class, especially the
working class, lies the responsibility for helping the state in its
organizational work." Organization details. In the workers' councils organised
as part of the German revolution, factory organisations, such as the General
Workers' Union of Germany (AAUD), formed the basis for organising region-wide
councils. The council communists in the Communist Workers' Party of Germany
advocated organising "on the basis of places of work, not trades, and to
establish a National Federation of Works Committees." Councils operate on the
principle of recallable delegates. This means that elected delegates may be
recalled at any time through a vote in a form of impeachment. Recall of
management committee members, specialist professionals such as engineers, and
delegates to higher councils was observed in the Central Workers Council of
Greater Budapest during 1956, where delegates were removed for industrial,
organisational and political reasons. Workers' councils combine to elect higher
bodies for coordinating between one another. This means that the upper councils
are not superior to the lower councils, but are instead built from and operated
by them. The national council would therefore have delegates from every city in
the country. Their nature means that workers' councils do away with traditional
centralized governments and instead give power indirectly to the people. This
type of democratic order is called council democracy. The Central Workers
Council of Greater Budapest occupied this role in the Hungarian Revolution of
1956, between late October and early January 1957, where it grew out of local
factory committees. Councils against unions and Stalinists. A workers' council
is a deliberative assembly, composed of working class members, intended to
institute workers' self-management or workers' control. Unlike a trade union,
in a workers' council the workers are assumed to be in actual control of the
workplace, rather than merely negotiating with employers through collective
bargaining. They are a form of workplace democracy. Many Marxists and most
anarchists believe that workers' councils embody the fundamental principles of
socialism, such as workers' control over production and distribution. Indeed,
some have described this as "socialism from below," which they counterpose
against what they see as "socialism from above" endorsed by Stalinism and
Maoism. According to this view, socialism from above is carried out by a
centralized state run by an elite bureaucratic apparatus, whereas socialism
from below represents the self-administration and self-rule of the working
class. Some left communists (particularly council communists) and anarchists
support a council-based society; believing that only the workers themselves can
spark a revolution and so workers' councils will be the foundation of the
revolution. There are also Leninists (for example the International Socialist
Tendency and its offshoots) who advocate a council-based society, but maintain
that workers' councils cannot carry out a revolution without the leadership of
a vanguard party. During May 1968 ( "The largest general strike that ever
stopped the economy of an advanced industrial country, and the first "wildcat
general strike" in history" ), the Situationists, against the unions and the
Communist Party that were starting to side with the de Gaulle government to
contain the revolt, called for the formation of workers' councils to take
control of the factories, expelling union leaders and left-wing bureaucrats, in
order to keep the power in the hands of the workers with direct democracy.
