Worker center Worker centers (alternatively workers' centers or workers
centers) are non-profit organizations that organize workers who are not already
members of a collective bargaining organization (such as a trade union). Many
worker centers in the United States focus on immigrant workers, and most focus
on low-wage workers in sectors such as restaurant, construction, day labor or
agriculture. In the United States, over 130 such worker centers exist, as
defined by Janice Fine. Definition. Fine defines worker centers as: "community-
based and community-led organizations that engage in a combination of service,
advocacy, and organizing to provide support to low-wage workers. The vast
majority of them have grown up to serve predominantly or exclusively immigrant
populations. However, there are a few centers that serve a primarily African
American population or bring immigrants together with African Americans." José
Oliva, director of the Interfaith Worker Justice network of worker centers,
emphasizes that worker centers perform three main functions: service,
organizing and advocacy. While many other organizations provide services, or
advocate on behalf of low-wage workers, only worker centers perform all three
functions for workers outside of traditional trade unions. Networks. "The AFL-
CIO and NDLON will work together for state and local enforcement of rights as
well as the development of new protections in areas including wage and hour
laws, health and safety regulations, immigrants’ rights and employee
misclassification. They will also work together for comprehensive immigration
reform that supports workplace rights and includes a path to citizenship and
political equality for immigrant workers – and against punitive, anti-
immigrant, anti-worker legislation." This partnership stems from the AFL-CIO's
decision to embrace immigrant workers, a change from the federation's policies
in the 1980s and 1990s.
