World government in fiction In both science fiction and utopian/dystopian
fiction, authors have made frequent use of the age-old idea of a global state
and, accordingly, of world government. Overview. In tune with Immanuel Kant's
vision of a world state based on the voluntary political union of all countries
of this planet in order to avoid colonialism and in particular any future war
("Idee zu einer allgemeinen Geschichte in weltb√ºrgerlicher Absicht", 1784;
"Zum ewigen Frieden", 1795), some of these scenarios depict an egalitarian and
environmentally sustainable world supervised (rather than controlled) by a
benevolent (and usually democratic) world government. Others, however, describe
the effects of a totalitarian regime which, after having seized power in one
country, annexes the rest of the world in order to dominate and oppress all
humankind. One major influence was Edward Bellamy's "Looking Backward". The
best-known advocate of world government was H. G. Wells. He describes such a
system in "The Shape of Things to Come", "Men Like Gods" and "The World Set
Free". Some writers have also parodied the idea: E. M. Forster's "The Machine
Stops" (1909) and Aldous Huxley's 1932 novel "Brave New World". Wells himself
wrote "The Sleeper Awakes", an early vision of a dystopian world. World
government themes in science fiction are particularly prominent in the years
following World War II, coincident with the involvement of many scientists in
the actual political movement for world government in response to the perceived
dangers of nuclear holocaust. Prominent examples from the Cold War era include
"Childhood's End" (1953), "Starship Troopers" (1959), "Star Trek" (from 1966)
and the "Doctor Who" story "The Enemy of the World" (1968). Later references to
a unified world government also appear however in post-Cold War science fiction
television series such as "Babylon 5". The concept also appears frequently in
science fiction anime, whether in the form of a strengthened United Nations or
an entirely new organizations with world presidential election. Examples of
anime with this premise are "Macross" (adapted in America as the first part of
Robotech) and "Gundam". President of Earth. President of Earth is a fictional
concept or character who is the ruler of the planet Earth. Examples include the
following:
