Write-in candidate A write-in candidate is a candidate in an election whose
name does not appear on the ballot, but for whom voters may vote nonetheless by
writing in the person's name. Some states and local jurisdictions allow a voter
to affix a sticker with a write-in candidate's name on it to the ballot in lieu
of actually writing in the candidate's name. Write-in candidacies are sometimes
a result of a candidate being legally or procedurally ineligible to run under
his or her own name or party. In some cases, write-in campaigns have been
organized to support a candidate who is not personally involved in running;
this may be a form of draft campaign. Write-in candidates rarely win, and votes
are often cast for ineligible people or fictional characters. Some
jurisdictions require write-in candidates be registered as official candidates
before the election. This is standard in elections with a large pool of
potential candidates, as there may be multiple candidates with the same name
that could be written in. Many U.S. states and municipalities allow for write-
in votes in a partisan primary election where no candidate is listed on the
ballot to have the same functional effect as nominating petitions: for example,
if there are no Reform Party members on the ballot for state general assembly
and a candidate receives more than 200 write-in votes when the primary election
is held (or the other number of signatures that were required for ballot
access), the candidate will be placed on the ballot on that ballot line for the
general election. In most places, this provision is in place for non-partisan
elections as well. United States. Typically, write-in candidates have a very
small chance of winning, but there have been some notable write-in candidates
in the past. Other countries. With a few exceptions, the practice of
recognizing write-in candidates is typically viewed internationally as an
American tradition.
