Youth activism Youth activism is engagement by the youth voice in community
organizing for social change. Around the world, young people are engaged in
activism as planners, researchers, teachers, evaluators, social workers,
decision-makers, advocates and leading actors in the environmental movement,
social justice organizations, campaigns supporting or opposing legalized
abortion, and anti-racism, anti-homophobia and pro gay rights campaigns. As the
central beneficiaries of public schools, youth are also advocating for student-
led school change and education reform through student activism and meaningful
student involvement. Forms. There are three main forms of youth activism. The
first is youth involvement in social activism. This is the predominant form of
youth activism today, as millions of young people around the world participate
in social activism that is organized, informed, led, and assessed by adults.
Many efforts, including education reform, children's rights, and government
reform call on youth to participate this way, often called youth voice. Youth
councils are an example of this. The second type is youth-driven activism
requires young people to be the primary movers within an adult-led movement.
Such is the case with the Sierra Club, where youth compel their peers to join
and become active in the environmental movement. This is also true of many
organizations that were founded by youth who became adults, such as SEAC and
National Youth Rights Association. The third type is the increasingly common
youth-led community organizing. This title encompasses action which is
conceived of, designed, enacted, challenged, redesigned, and driven entirely by
young people. There is now global initiative by youth in international
movements, such as in the International Youth Rights, the first entirely
student-run, non-profit, non-political, international movement organization,
which was founded in 2009 by Seung Woo Son, a South Korean youth living in
China. Working closely with Ms. Kim, the Director for Education Development at
UNICEF Korea, the organization strives to make the youthâ€™s opinions,
experiences and their suggested solutions to the world issues be heard across
the world and to actualize their solutions in real life, for all to realize
what youth can do to make an impact in the world. The World Federation of
Democratic Youth is also another international movement, which has UN NGO
status. I final example is the iMatter Movement, an entirely youth-lead
environmental advocacy organization. United States. Youth activism as a social
phenomenon in the United States truly became defined in the mid- to late-
nineteenth century when young people began forming labor strikes in response to
their working conditions, wages, and hours. Child laborers in the coal mines of
Appalachia began this trend, with newspaper carriers, soon following. These
actions isolated youths' interests in the popular media of the times, and
separated young people from their contemporary adult labor counterparts. This
separation continued through the 1930s, when the American Youth Congress
presented a "Bill of Youth Rights" to the US Congress. Their actions were
indicative of a growing student movement present throughout the US from the
1920s through the early 1940s. The 1950s saw the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee bring young people into larger movements for civil
rights. This led to the outbreak of youth activism in the 1960s. Important
individuals in U.S. youth activism. Mary Harris "Mother" Jones organized the
first youth activism in the U.S., marching 100,000 child miners from the coal
mines of Pennsylvania to the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C. in 1908. In 1959,
Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. engaged youth activists in protesting against
Bull Connor's racist law enforcement practices in Birmingham, Alabama. Coupled
with the youth activism of Tom Hayden, Keith Hefner and other 1960s youth, this
laid a powerful precedent for modern youth activism. John Holt, Myles Horton
and Paulo Freire were each important in this period. In the 1960s, the Supreme
Court Justice Abe Fortas handed out two landmark case decisions in favor of
youth rights, "Tinker v. Des Moines" and "In re Gault". In recent years,
educators such as the Paulo Freire, Henry Giroux, Howard Zinn, Alfie Kohn, and
Jonathan Kozol have all called for young people to become central actors in the
guidance of schools and communities. Modern advocates have included Aaron
Keider, William Upski Wimsatt and Adam Fletcher. Researchers, including Shawn
Ginwright, David Driskell, Barry Checkoway and Lorraine Gutierrez have led the
burgeoning study of modern youth activism.
