1973 Chilean coup d'Ã©tat The 1973 Chilean coup d'Ã©tat was a watershed event
of the Cold War and the history of Chile. Following an extended period of
social and political unrest by the conservative-dominated Congress of Chile
against the democratically-elected socialist President Salvador Allende,
Allende was overthrown in a coup dâ€™Ã©tat. The United States played a
prominent role in the events, funding the conservative opposition and utilising
the Central Intelligence Agency in sabotage campaigns to encourage a coup;
subsequently supporting the Allende government's replacement with a military
junta led by Army Commander-in-Chief Augusto Pinochet. The junta was composed
of the heads of the Air Force, Navy, Carabineros (police force) and the Army,
though Pinochet eventually arose to supreme power within a year after the coup,
formally assuming the presidency in late 1974. Pinochet later assumed power and
ended Allende's elected Popular Unity government, instigating a campaign of
terror on its supporters which included the murder of former Foreign Minister
Orlando Letelier. Before Pinochet's rule, Chile had for decades been hailed as
a beacon of democracy and political stability in South America plagued by
military juntas and Caudillismo. During the air raids and ground attacks that
preceded the coup, Allende gave his last speech, in which he vowed to stay in
the presidential palace, denouncing offers for safe passage should he choose
exile over confrontation. Direct witness accounts of his death agree that he
committed suicide in the palace. After the coup, Pinochet established a
military dictatorship with Western support that ruled Chile until 1990; it was
marked by numerous human rights violations. A weak insurgent movement against
the Pinochet government was maintained inside Chile by elements sympathetic to
the former Allende government, and a plebiscite in 1988 eventually removed
Pinochet from power. Political background. Allende contested the 1970 election
with Jorge Alessandri Rodriguez of the National Party and Radomiro Tomic of the
Christian Democratic Party. Allende received 36.6% of the vote (around
1,070,334 votes). Alessandri was a very close second with 35.3%, and Tomic
third with 28.1%. In total, 2,954,799 people voted. Although Allende received
the highest number of votes, according to the Chilean constitution and since
none of the candidates won by an absolute majority, the National Congress had
to decide among the candidates. Alessandri announced on 9 September that if
Congress decided on him, he would resign â€“ which would then require another
election. Congress then decided on Allende. Soon after hearing news of his win,
Allende signed a Statute of Constitutional Guarantees, which stated that he
would follow the constitution during his presidency. The U.S. feared "an
irreversible Marxist regime in Chile" and exerted diplomatic, economic, and
covert pressure upon Chile's elected socialist government. During his
presidency, Allende nationalized US copper firms (in July 1971), nationalized
banks and other large industries such as Purina, and sped up land distribution
(by 1972, peasants lived in approximately 1700 rural properties). Total
expenditures for social programs increased from $562.8 million to $828.5
million under Allendeâ€™s rule; this included health, education, housing, child
assistance, and social assistance. Between 1967â€“1969 and 1973, employment in
mines increased by 45% â€“ but, per capita production decreased by 28%. The
Allende administration faced other disappointments in its programs. By 1973,
the amount of land in Chile under cultivation fell by 20%. Allende installed a
price freeze and increased wages in the industry, which resulted in Chile
spending 56% of its export earnings on food (the country was producing 2/3 of
what Chileans consumed). Also, Chileâ€™s trade deficit increased from $18
million to $255 million from 1971â€“1972. Exports fell by 25%, and imports
increased by 40%, which caused an economic imbalance. Chronic inflation had
been a problem in Chile for decades before Allendeâ€™s rule, but Allendeâ€™s
wage and spending increases caused inflation to double in 1972, and the cost of
living increased by nearly 50%. Allende had to deal with labor troubles as
well: in 1972, a group of truckers went on strike due to his plan to create a
state transportation enterprise. At its peak, 23,000 trucks were stopped. The
truckers' strike ignited others all over Chile. At the end of 1971, the Cuban
Prime Minister Fidel Castro made a four-week state visit to Chile, alarming
Western observers worried about the "Chilean Way to Socialism" yielding to
Cuban Socialism, i.e. a dictatorialÂ single-party state. In 1972, the economics
minister Pedro Vuskovic adopted monetary policies that increased the amount of
circulating currency and devalued the escudo, which increased inflation to 140
percent in 1972 and engendered a black market economy. The Allende Government
acted against the black market with organised distribution of basic products.
In October 1972, Chile suffered the first of many strikes. Among the
participants were small-scale businessmen, some professional unions, and
student groups. Its leaders â€“ VilarÃ­n, Jaime GuzmÃ¡n, Rafael Cumsille,
Guillermo Elton, Eduardo Arriagada â€“ expected to depose the elected
government. Other than damaging the national economy, the principal effect of
the twenty-four-day strike was drawing Army head, Gen. Carlos Prats, into the
government as Interior Minister, an appeasement to the right wing. Gen. Prats
succeeded Gen. RenÃ© Schneider after his assassination on 24 October 1970 by a
group led by Gen. Roberto Viaux, whom the Central Intelligence Agency had taken
actions to discourage. Gen. Prats supported the legalist Schneider Doctrine and
refused military involvement in a "coup d'Ã©tat" against President Allende.
Despite the declining economy, President Allende's Popular Unity coalition
increased its vote to 43.2 percent in the March 1973 parliamentary elections;
but, by then, the informal alliance between Popular Unity and the Christian
Democrats ended. The Christian Democrats allied with the right-wing National
Party, who were opposed to Allende's Socialist government; the two right-wing
parties forming the ConfederaciÃ³n DemocrÃ¡tica (CODE) (The Democratic
Coalition). The internecine parliamentary conflict, between the legislature and
the executive branch, paralyzed the activities of government. The CIA paid some
U.S. $6.8-$8 million to right-wing opposition groups to "create pressures,
exploit weaknesses, magnify obstacles" and hasten Allende's deposition. Crisis.
On 29 June 1973, Colonel Roberto Souper surrounded the La Moneda presidential
palace with his tank regiment and failed to depose the Allende Government. That
failed "coup dâ€™Ã©tat" â€“ known as the "Tanquetazo" tank putsch â€“ organized
by the nationalist "Patria y Libertad" paramilitary group, was followed by a
general strike at the end of July that included the copper miners of El
Teniente. In August 1973, a constitutional crisis occurred; the Supreme Court
publicly complained about the Allende Government's inability to enforce the law
of the land. On 22 August, the Chamber of Deputies (with the Christian
Democrats united with the National Party) accused the Allende Government of
unconstitutional acts and called upon the military to enforce constitutional
order. For months, the Allende Government had feared calling upon the
"Carabineros" (Carabineers) national police, suspecting them to be disloyal. On
9 August, Allende appointed Gen. Carlos Prats as Minister of Defence. He was
forced to resign both as defence minister and as the Army Commander-in-chief on
24 August 1973, embarrassed by the Alejandrina Cox incident and a public
protest of the wives of his generals before his house. Gen. Augusto Pinochet
replaced him as Army commander-in-chief the same day. In late August 1973,
100,000 Chilean women congregated at Plaza de la ConstituciÃ³n to vent their
rage against the rising cost and increasing shortages of food, but they were
dispersed with tear gas. Supreme Court's resolution. On 26 May 1973, Chileâ€™s
Supreme Court unanimously denounced the Allende rÃ©gimeâ€™s "disruption of the
legality of the nation" in its failure to uphold judicial decisions. It refused
to permit police execution of judicial resolutions that contradicted the
Government's measures. Chamber of Deputies' resolution. On 22 August 1973, with
the support of the Christian Democrats and National Party members, the Chamber
of Deputies passed 81â€“47 a resolution that asked "the President of the
Republic, Ministers of State, and members of the Armed and Police Forces" to
"put an immediate end" to "breachof the Constitution . . . with the goal of
redirecting government activity toward the path of Law and ensuring the
Constitutional order of our Nation, and the essential underpinnings of
democratic co-existence among Chileans." The resolution declared that the
Allende Government sought ". . . to conquer absolute power with the obvious
purpose of subjecting all citizens to the strictest political and economic
control by the State . . . the goal of establishing a totalitarian system",
claiming it had made "violations of the Constitution . . . a permanent system
of conduct." Essentially, most of the accusations were about the Socialist
Government disregarding the separation of powers, and arrogating legislative
and judicial prerogatives to the executive branch of government. Finally, the
resolution condemned the "creation and development of government-protected
armed groups, which . . . are headed towards a confrontation with the armed
forces". President Allende's efforts to re-organize the military and the police
forces were characterised as "notorious attempts to use the armed and police
forces for partisan ends, destroy their institutional hierarchy, and
politically infiltrate their ranks". President Allende's response. Two days
later, on 24 August 1973, President Allende responded, characterising the
Congress's declaration as "destined to damage the countryâ€™s prestige abroad
and create internal confusion", predicting "It will facilitate the seditious
intention of certain sectors". He noted that the declaration had not obtained
the two-thirds Senate majority "constitutionally required" to convict the
president of abuse of power: essentially, the Congress were "invoking the
intervention of the armed forces and of Order against a democratically elected
government" and "subordinat political representation of national sovereignty to
the armed institutions, which neither can nor ought to assume either political
functions or the representation of the popular will". Allende argued he had
obeyed constitutional means for including military men to the cabinet "at the
service of civic peace and national security, defending republican institutions
against insurrection and terrorism". In contrast, he said that Congress was
promoting a "coup dâ€™Ã©tat" or a civil war with a declaration "full of
affirmations that had already been refuted before-hand" and which, in substance
and process (directly handing it to the ministers rather than directly handing
it to the President) violated a dozen articles of the (then-current)
Constitution. He further argued that the legislature was usurping the
government's executive function. President Allende wrote: "Chilean democracy is
a conquest by all of the people. It is neither the work nor the gift of the
exploiting classes, and it will be defended by those who, with sacrifices
accumulated over generations, have imposed it . . . With a tranquil conscience
. . . I sustain that never before has Chile had a more democratic government
than that over which I have the honor to preside . . . I solemnly reiterate my
decision to develop democracy and a state of law to their ultimate consequences
. . . Parliament has made itself a bastion against the transformations . . .
and has done everything it can to perturb the functioning of the finances and
of the institutions, sterilizing all creative initiatives". Adding that
economic and political means would be needed to relieve the country's current
crisis, and that the Congress were obstructing said means; having already
"paralyzed" the State, they sought to "destroy" it. He concluded by calling
upon "the workers, all democrats and patriots" to join him in defending the
Chilean Constitution and the "revolutionary process". American involvement. The
U.S. Government's hostility to the election of Allende in Chile was
substantiated in documents declassified during the Clinton administration;
involving the CIA, which show that covert operatives were inserted in Chile, in
order to prevent a Marxist government from arising and for the purpose of
spreading anti-Allende propaganda. The CIA, as recounted in the Church
Committee report, was involved in various plots designed to remove Allende and
then let the Chileans vote in a new election where he would not be a candidate:
It tried to buy off the Chilean Congress to prevent his appointment, worked to
sway public opinion against him to prevent his election, and financed protests
designed to bring the country to a stand-still and make him resign. The CIA,
acting with the approval of the 40 Committeeâ€”the body charged with overseeing
covert actions abroadâ€”devised what in effect was a constitutional coup. The
most expeditious way to prevent Allende from assuming office was somehow to
convince the Chilean congress to confirm Jorge Alessandri as the winner of the
election. Once elected by the congress, Alessandriâ€”a party to the plot
through intermediariesâ€”was prepared to resign his presidency within a matter
of days so that new elections could be held. This first, nonmilitary, approach
to stopping Allende was called the Track I approach. The CIA's second approach,
the Track II approach, was designed to encourage a military overthrow, by
creating an atmosphere of crisis and disaster (a "coup climate") in the
country. False flag operatives approached senior Chilean military officers, in
"some two dozen contacts", with the message that "the United States intended to
cut military assistance to Chile unless they moved against Allende, and that
the U.S. desired, and would actively support, a coup." The CIA provided
extensive support for black propaganda against Allende, funneled largely
through "El Mercurio", but also using other media outlets. Propaganda targeted
both the people and the military. Financial support was also provided for anti-
Allende political opponents and for organized strikes and unrest to destabilize
his government. The first attempt to engineer a military overthrow of Allende
occurred in 1970. The CIA had been in contact with two groups of coup plotters,
one group run by retired General Roberto Viaux and a second by active-duty
General Camilo Valenzuela. The CIA had attempted to stop Viaux's group from
moving forward until it had joined forces with Valenzuela's group. Both groups
were attempting to remove Chilean general RenÃ© Schneider, due to his support
for military non-intervention in politics, and thus the appointment of Allende.
The Church hearings found that the CIA gave weapons to a group of men who it
knew had attacked him twice before, ostensibly as a test of loyalty so that the
CIA would remain privy to their information, but that the weapons provided and
the group thereby armed (Valenzuela's group) were not the ones who actually
killed him (Viaux's group). Historian Mark Falcoff credits the CIA with
preserving democratic opposition to Allende and preventing the "consolidation"
of his supposed "totalitarian project". However, Peter Kornbluh asserts that
the CIA destabilized Chile and helped create the conditions for the coup. In
1970, the U.S. manufacturing company ITT Corporation owned of 70% of Chitelco,
the Chilean Telephone Company, and funded "El Mercurio", a Chilean right-wing
newspaper. The CIA used ITT as a conduit to financially aid opponents of
Allende's government. On 28 September 1973, ITT's headquarters in New York
City, was bombed by the Weather Underground for the alleged involvement of the
company in the overthrow of Allende. Military action. By 7:00Â am on 11
September 1973, the Navy captured ValparaÃ­so, strategically stationing ships
and marine infantry in the central coast and closed radio and television
networks. The Province Prefect informed President Allende of the Navy's
actions; immediately, the president went to the presidential palace, "La
Moneda", with his bodyguards, the "Grupo de Amigos Personales" (GAP) (Group of
Personal Friends). By 8:00Â am, the Army had closed most radio and television
stations in Santiago city; the Air Force bombed the remaining active stations;
the President received incomplete information, and was convinced that only a
sector of the Navy conspired against him and his government. President Allende
and Defence minister Orlando Letelier were unable to communicate with military
leaders. Admiral Montero, the Navy's commander and an Allende loyalist, was
rendered incommunicado; his telephone service was cut and his cars were
sabotaged before the "coup dâ€™Ã©tat", to ensure he could not thwart the
opposition. Leadership of the Navy was transferred to JosÃ© Toribio Merino,
planner of the "coup dâ€™Ã©tat" and executive officer to Adm. Montero. Augusto
Pinochet, General of the Army, and Gustavo Leigh, General of the Air Force, did
not answer Allende's telephone calls to them. The General Director of the
"Carabineros" (uniformed police), JosÃ© MarÃ­a SepÃºlveda, and the head of the
Investigations Police (plain clothes detectives), Alfredo Joignant answered
Allende's calls and immediately went to the "La Moneda" presidential palace.
When Defence minister Letelier arrived at the Ministry of Defense, controlled
by Adm. Patricio Carvajal, he was arrested as the first prisoner of the "coup
dâ€™Ã©tat". Despite evidence that all branches of the Chilean armed forces were
involved in the coup, Allende hoped that some units remained loyal to the
government. Allende was convinced of Pinochet's loyalty, telling a reporter
that the "coup dâ€™Ã©tat" leaders must have imprisoned the general. Only at 8:
30Â am, when the armed forces declared their control of Chile and that Allende
was deposed, did the president grasp the magnitude of the military's rebellion.
Despite the lack of any military support, Allende refused to resign his office.
By 9:00Â am, the armed forces controlled Chile, except for the city centre of
the capital, Santiago. Allende refused to surrender, despite the military's
declaring they would bomb the "La Moneda" presidential palace if he resisted
being deposed. The Socialist Party proposed to Allende that he escape to the
San JoaquÃ­n industrial zone in southern Santiago, to later re-group and lead a
counter-"coup dâ€™Ã©tat"; the president rejected the proposition. The military
rebels attempted negotiations with Allende, but the President refused to
resign, citing his constitutional duty to remain in office. Finally, Allende
gave a potent , telling the nation of the "coup dâ€™Ã©tat" and his refusal to
resign his elected office under threat. Annoyed with negotiating, Leigh ordered
the presidential palace bombed, but was told the Air Force's Hawker Hunter jet
aircraft would take forty minutes to arrive. Pinochet ordered an armoured and
infantry force under General Sergio Arellano to advance upon the "La Moneda"
presidential palace. When the troops moved forward, they were forced to retreat
after coming under fire from GAP snipers perched on rooftops. General Arellano
called for helicopter gunship support from the commander of the Chilean Army
Puma helicopter squadron and the troops were able to advance again. Chilean Air
Force aircraft soon arrived to provide close air support for the assault (by
bombing the Palace), but the defenders did not surrender until nearly 2:30Â pm.
First reports said the 65-year-old president had died fighting troops, but
later police sources reported he had committed suicide. In the first months
after the "coup dâ€™Ã©tat," the military killed thousands of Chilean Leftists,
both real and suspected, or forced their "disappearance". The military
imprisoned 40,000 political enemies in the National Stadium of Chile; among the
tortured and killed "desaparecidos" (disappeared) were the U.S. citizens
Charles Horman, and Frank Teruggi. In October 1973, the Chilean song-writer
VÃ­ctor Jara, and 70 other political killings were perpetrated by the death
squad, Caravan of Death ("Caravana de la Muerte"). The government arrested some
130,000 people in a three-year period; the dead and disappeared numbered
thousands in the first months of the military government. Those include the
British physician Sheila Cassidy, who survived to publicize to the UK the human
rights violations in Chile. Among those detained was Alberto Bachelet (father
of future Chilean President Michelle Bachelet), an air force official; he was
tortured and died on 12 March 1974. The right-wing newspaper, "El Mercurio"
(The Mercury), reported that Mr Bachelet died after a basketball game, citing
his poor cardiac health. Michelle Bachelet and her mother were imprisoned and
tortured in the Villa Grimaldi detention and torture centre on 10 January 1975.
After Gen. Pinochet lost the election in the 1988 plebiscite, the Rettig
Commission, a multi-partisan truth commission, in 1991 reported the location of
torture and detention centers: Colonia Dignidad, Esmeralda ship and VÃ­ctor
Jara Stadium. It said that some 2,700 people were killed or disappeared by the
military rÃ©gime for seventeen years, from 1973 to 1990. Later, in November
2004, the Valech Report confirmed the number as less than 3,000 killed, and
reduced the number of cases of forced disappearance; but some 28,000 people
were arrested, imprisoned, and tortured. Critics of the Valech Report say that
families are falsely claiming that their relatives went missing during the
1973â€“1990 military regime, as there have been reports since 2000 that four
people listed as killed or missing, were alive or had died in unrelated
circumstances. The cases have raised questions about the system of verification
of victims of dictatorships. "The Age" newspaper has reported that the number
of people killed or reported missing and presumed dead is a total of 1,183
people, and that their names appear on a special memorial at the General
Cemetery of Santiago. Clive Foss, in "The Tyrants: 2500 years of Absolute Power
and Corruption", estimates that 1,500 Chileans were killed or disappeared
during the Pinochet regime. Nearly 700 civilians disappeared in the 1974â€“1977
period, after being detained by the Chilean military and police. In October
1979, the "New York Times" reported that Amnesty International had documented
the disappearance of approximately 1,500 Chileans since 1973. In "El dÃ­a
decisivo" (The Decisive Day), Pinochet recounts the "coup dâ€™Ã©tat", affirming
he was the leading plotter. Pinochet said that he co-ordinated from his army
commander office the deposition of President Salvador Allende. Recently, high
military officials from the time said Pinochet was at first a reluctant
participant and followed the lead of Adm. Merino and air force Gen. Leigh.
Casualties. Fewer than sixty individuals died as a direct result of fighting on
11 September although the MIR and GAP continued to fight the following day. In
all, 46 of Allende's praetorian guard (the GAP, "Grupo de Amigos Personales",
including ex-Chilean Special Forces Black Beret Mario Melo) were killed, some
of them in combat with the soldiers that took the Moneda. Allende's praetorian
guard under Cuban-trained commando Ariel Fontana would have had about 300 elite
commando-trained GAP fighers at the time of the coup, but the use of brute
military force, especially the use of Hawker Hunters, may have handicapped many
GAP fighters from further action. According to official reports prepared after
the return of the democracy, at La Moneda only two people died: President
Allende and the journalist Augusto Olivares (both by suicide). Two more were
injured, Antonio Aguirre and Osvaldo Ramos, both members of President Allende's
entourage; they would later be allegedly kidnapped from the hospital and
disappeared. In November 2006, the Associated Press noted that more than
fifteen bodyguards and aides were taken from the palace during the coup and are
still unaccounted for; in 2006 Augusto Pinochet was indicted for two of their
deaths . On the military side, there were 34 deaths: two army sergeants, three
army corporals, four army privates, 2 navy lieutenants, 1 navy corporal, 4
naval cadets, 3 navy conscripts and 15 carabineros. In Mid-September, the
Chilean military junta claimed its troops suffered another 16 dead and 100
injured by gunfire in mop-up operations against Allende supporters, and
Pinochet said ""sadly there are still some armed groups who insist on
attacking, which means that the military rules of wartime apply to them."" A
press photographer also died in the crossfire while attempting to cover the
event. On 23 October 1973, 23-year-old Army Corporal BenjamÃ­n Alfredo
Jaramillo Ruz, who was serving with the "Cazadores", became the first fatal
casualty of the counterinsurgency operations in the mountainous area of
Alquihue in Valdivia after being shot by a sniper. The Chilean Army suffered
twelve killed in various clashes with MIR guerrillas and GAP fighters in
October 1973. While fatalities in the battle during the coup might have been
relatively small, the Chilean security forces sustained 162 dead in the three
following months as a result of continued resistance and tens of thousands of
people were arrested during the coup and held in the National Stadium. This was
because the plans for the coup called for the arrest of every man, woman and
child on the streets the morning of 11 September. Of these approximately 40,000
to 50,000 perfunctory arrests, several hundred individuals would later be
detained, questioned, tortured, and in some cases murdered. While these deaths
did not occur before the surrender of Allende's forces, they occurred as a
direct result of arrests and round-ups during the coup's military action.
Allende's death. President Allende died in La Moneda during the coup. The junta
officially declared that he committed suicide with a rifle given to him by
Fidel Castro, two doctors from the infirmary of La Moneda stated that they
witnessed the suicide, and an autopsy labelled Allende's death a suicide. Vice
Admiral Patricio Carvajal, one of the primary instigators of the coup, claimed
that "Allende committed suicide and is dead now." At the time, few of Allende's
supporters believed the explanation that Allende had killed himself. Allende's
body was exhumed in May 2011. A scientific autopsy was performed and the
autopsy team delivered a unanimous finding on 19 July 2011 that Allende
committed suicide using an AK-47 rifle given to him by Fidel Castro. The gun
was set to fire automatically and the shots tore off the top of Allende's head,
killing him instantly. Aftermath. On 13 September, the Junta dissolved
Congress. At the same time, it outlawed the parties that had been part of the
Popular Unity coalition, and all political activity was declared "in recess".
Initially, there were four leaders of the junta: In addition to General Augusto
Pinochet, from the Army, there were General Gustavo Leigh GuzmÃ¡n, of the Air
Force; Admiral JosÃ© Toribio Merino Castro, of the Navy (who replaced
Constitutionalist Admiral RaÃºl Montero); and General Director CÃ©sar Mendoza
DurÃ¡n, of the National Police ("Carabineros de Chile") (who replaced
Constitutionalist General Director JosÃ© MarÃ­a SepÃºlveda). Coup leaders soon
decided against a rotating presidency and named General Pinochet permanent head
of the junta The newspaper "La Tercera" published on its front page a
photograph showing prisoners at the Quiriquina Island Camp who had been
captured during the fighting in ConcepciÃ³n. The photograph's caption stated
that some of the detained were local leaders of the "Unidad Popular" while
others were "extremists who had attacked the armed forces with firearms". The
photo is reproduced in Docuscanner. This is consistent with reports in
newspapers and broadcasts in ConcepciÃ³n about the activities of the Armed
Forces, which mentioned clashes with "extremists" on several occasions from 11
to 14 September. Nocturnal skirmishes took place around the Hotel Alonso De
Ercilla in Colo Colo and San Martino Street, one block away from the Army and
military police administrative headquarters. A recent published testimony about
the clashes in Concepcion offers several plausible explanations for the
reticence of witnesses to these actions. Assault on the Neltume police station.
After hearing the news about the 11 September coup MRC (Spanish acronym for
Revolutionary Campesino Movement), a group formed with help of MIR, decided to
take actions against the police station in Neltume as a first step to defend
the Unidad Popular government. The idea of the MRC was to take control of the
building, have the police surrender, make them join the revolt, and seize any
weapons to be found there. People from MRC gathered all the weapons they could
find, four rifles and some shotguns, and prepared dozens of molotov cocktails
and home-made grenades. The assault was launched at 02.00 in the night, 12
September. The attackers numbered between 60 and 80 men. Jorge DurÃ¡n Delgado,
a former MIR militant who was 19 years old when he participated in the assault
on the police station, later said ""Pepe shouted at them to surrender, not to
fear for their lives; to and fight together with us to defend the government of
Allende"". Benito Carrasco Riffo, by then commandant of the police station,
said that they shouted back: ""We won't surrender, "carabineros" don't
surrender shit!"" The four policemen inside the police station had two SIG
automatic rifles and two carbines with which they answered the fire from the
MRC. The police station was a rustic tree building but was enough to resist the
weak firepower of the assailants and rain prevented the molotov cocktails from
putting the structure on fire. Inside the police station were also the wives
and children of the policemen. Corporal Juan Campos in the police station asked
for help to the police station in Choshuenco some 20Â km west and shouted
desperately though the radio: ""Send the aerial cavalry!"" At around 03.00 a
reinforcement of four policemen arrived on a pickup truck. These reinforcements
erroneously fired at the police at first, but by the time they had arrived, the
attack was almost over and the MRC assailants had retired. Guerrilla
resistance. After the coup, left-wing organizations tried to set up resistance
groups against the regime. Many activists created groups of resistance from
refugees abroad, while the Communist Party of Chile set up an armed wing, which
became in 1983 the FPMR ("Frente PatriÃ³tico Manuel RodrÃ­guez"). In the first
three months of military rule, the Chilean forces recorded 162 military deaths.
A total of 756 servicemen and police are reported to have been killed or
wounded in guerrilla incidents. The Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria
("Revolutionary Left Movement", MIR) founded at the University of ConcepciÃ³n
suffered heavy casualties in the coup's immediate aftermath, and most of its
members fled the country. Among the killed and disappeared during the military
regime were 440 MIR guerrillas. Many guerrillas confessed under torture and
several hundred other young men and women, sympathetic to the guerrillas, were
detained and tortured and often killed. Nearly 700 civilians disappeared in the
1974â€“1977 period, after being detained by the Chilean military and police. In
1976 there had been plans to infiltrate 1,200 Marxist guerrillas from Argentina
into Chile in an operation christened "Plan Boomerang Rojo" (Red Boomerang
Plan), but the infiltration failed to materialize due to the cooperation with
Argentine authorities. Chilean officials reported 100 of the "Red Boomerang"
guerrillas succeeded in infiltrating into Chile, but that 14 were captured. On
the fighting reported to have taken place in Concepcion from 11â€“14 September,
the newspaper "La Tercera" published a frontpage article about the prisoners
being held at the Quiriquina Island Camp. In an accompanying photograph it is
reported that the detainees being held under guard, were largely local leaders
of the "Unidad Popular" and "extremists that have attacked the armed forces
with firearms". A recent account by a MIR leader explains that the sheer
brutality of the military forces, especially the spectacular bombing of La
Moneda, may have dissuaded many Allende sympathizers from taking action.
