1992 Los Angeles riots The 1992 Los Angeles riots were a series of race riots
that occurred over six days in the Los Angeles metropolitan area in California
in April 1992. The riots started on April 29, 1992, after a jury trial resulted
in the acquittal of four Los Angeles Police Department officers accused in the
videotaped beating of motorist Rodney King following a high-speed police
pursuit. Thousands of people throughout the Los Angeles metropolitan area
rioted over the six days following the announcement of the verdict. Widespread
looting, assault, arson and murder occurred during the riots, and estimates of
property damages topped one billion dollars. The rioting ended after soldiers
from the California Army National Guard, along with U.S. Marines from Camp
Pendleton were called in to stop the rioting. In total, 53 people were killed
during the riots and over two thousand people were injured. Name. The riots are
also known as the Rodney King Riots, the South Central Riots, the 1992 Los
Angeles Civil Disturbance, and the 1992 Los Angeles Civil Unrest. Among South
Korean immigrants living in the Los Angeles metropolitan area, the 1992 Los
Angeles Riots are referred to as "Sah-E-Goo", meaning literally "four-two-nine"
in the Korean language, in reference to the date of which the rioting started,
April 29, 1992. Background. On March 3, 1991, Rodney King and two passengers
were driving west on the Foothill Freeway (I-210) through the Lake View Terrace
neighborhood of Los Angeles. The California Highway Patrol (CHP) attempted to
initiate a traffic stop. A high-speed pursuit ensued with speeds estimated at
up to 115Â mph first over freeways and then through residential neighborhoods.
When King came to a stop, CHP Officer Timothy Singer and his wife, CHP Officer
Melanie Singer, ordered the occupants under arrest. After two passengers were
placed in the patrol car, five white Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)
officers (Stacey Koon, Laurence Powell, Timothy Wind, Theodore Briseno, and
Rolando Solano) attempted to subdue King, who came out of the car last. In a
departure from the usual procedure, which is to tackle and cuff a suspect, King
was tasered, kicked in the head, beaten with PR-24 batons for over one minute,
then tackled and cuffed. The officers claimed that King was under the influence
of PCP at the time of arrest, which caused him to be very aggressive and
violent towards the officers. The video showed that he was crawling on the
ground during the beating and that the police made no attempt to cuff him. A
subsequent test for the presence of PCP turned up negative. The incident was
captured on a camcorder by resident George Holliday from his apartment in the
vicinity. The tape was roughly ten minutes long. While the case was presented
to the court, clips of the incident were not released to the public. In a later
interview, King, who was on parole from prison on a robbery conviction and who
had past convictions for assault, battery and robbery, said that he had not
surrendered earlier because he knew that an arrest for DUI would violate the
terms of his parole. The footage of King being beaten by police while lying on
the ground became a focus for media attention and a rallying point for
activists in Los Angeles and around the United States. Coverage was extensive
during the initial two weeks after the incident: the "Los Angeles Times"
published forty-three articles about the incident, "The New York Times"
published seventeen articles, and the "Chicago Tribune" published eleven
articles. Eight stories appeared on ABC News, including a sixty-minute special
on "Primetime Live". Charges and trial. The Los Angeles District Attorney
subsequently charged four police officers, including one sergeant, with assault
and use of excessive force. Due to the heavy media coverage of the arrest, the
trial received a change of venue from Los Angeles County to the politically
conservative city of Simi Valley in neighboring Ventura County. The jury was
composed of ten Caucasians, one Hispanic, and one Asian. The prosecutor, Terry
White, was black. On April 29, 1992, the seventh day of jury deliberations, the
jury acquitted all four officers of assault and acquitted three of the four of
using excessive force. The jury could not agree on a verdict for the fourth
officer charged with using excessive force. The verdicts were based in part on
the first three seconds of a blurry, 13-second segment of the video tape that,
according to journalist Lou Cannon, was edited out by television news stations
in their broadcasts. During the first two seconds of videotape, in confirmation
of claims by the police, the video showed King aggressing toward Laurence
Powell. During the next one minute and 19 seconds, King is beaten continuously
by the officers. The officers testified that they tried to physically restrain
King prior to the starting point of the videotape but, according to the
officers, King was able to physically throw them off himself. Another theory
offered by the prosecution for the officers' acquittal is that the jurors may
have become desensitized to the violence of the beating, as the defense played
the videotape repeatedly in slow motion, breaking it down until its emotional
impact was lost. Outside the Simi Valley courthouse where the acquittals were
delivered, county sheriff's deputies protected Stacey Koon from angry protest
on the way to his car. Director John Singleton, who was in the crowd at the
courthouse, predicted, "By having this verdict, what these people done, they
lit the fuse to a bomb." Riots. The riots, beginning the day of the verdicts,
peaked in intensity over the next two days. A dusk-to-dawn curfew and
deployment of the National Guard eventually worked to control the situation.
Fifty-three people died during the riots, including ten who were shot dead by
police and military forces, with as many as 2,000 people injured. Estimates of
the material losses vary between about $800Â million and $1Â billion.
Approximately 3,600 fires were set, destroying 1,100 buildings, with fire calls
coming once every minute at some points. Widespread looting also occurred.
Stores owned by Korean and other Asian immigrants were widely targeted,
although other stores owned by whites and blacks were targeted by rioters as
well. Many of the disturbances were concentrated in South Central Los Angeles,
which was primarily composed of African American and Hispanic residents. Half
of all riot arrestees and more than a third of those killed during the violence
were Hispanic. First day (Wednesday, April 29, 1992). The acquittals of the
four accused Los Angeles Police Department officers came at 3:15Â pm local
time. By 3:45, a crowd of more than 300 people had appeared at the Los Angeles
County Courthouse protesting the verdicts passed down a half an hour earlier.
Between 5 and 6Â pm, a group of two dozen officers, commanded by Los Angeles
Police officer, Lieutenant Michael Moulin, confronted a growing crowd at the
intersection of Florence and Normandie in South Central Los Angeles.
Outnumbered, the police officers retreated. By about 6:30Â pm, a new group of
protesters appeared at the Los Angeles Police Department's headquarters at
Parker Center, and fifteen minutes later, the crowd at Florence and Normandie
had started looting, attacking vehicles and people. Attack on Reginald Denny.
At approximately 6:45Â pm, Reginald Oliver Denny, a white truck driver who
stopped at a traffic light at the intersection of Florence and Normandie
Avenues, was dragged from his vehicle and severely beaten by a mob of local
black residents as a TV news helicopter hovered above, piloted by reporter/
pilot Bob Tur, who broadcast live pictures of the attack, including a concrete
brick that was thrown by 'Football' Damian Williams that struck Denny in the
temple, causing a near-fatal seizure. As Tur continued his reporting, it was
clear that local police had deserted the city. Coincidentally, it was Tur's
live reports that led to Denny being rescued by an unarmed, African American
civilian named Bobby Green Jr. who, seeing the assault live on television,
rushed to the scene and drove Denny to the hospital using the victim's own
truck, which carried twenty-seven tons of sand. Denny had to undergo years of
rehabilitative therapy, and his speech and ability to walk were permanently
damaged. Although several other motorists were brutally beaten by the same mob,
Denny remains the best-known victim of the riots because of the live television
coverage. Fidel Lopez beating. At the same intersection, just minutes after
Denny was rescued, another beating was captured on video tape. Fidel Lopez, a
self-employed construction worker and Guatemalan immigrant, was pulled from his
truck and robbed of nearly $2,000. Damian Williams smashed his forehead open
with a car stereo as another rioter attempted to slice his ear off. After Lopez
lost consciousness, the crowd spray painted his chest, torso and genitals
black. Lopez survived the attack, undergoing extensive surgery to reattach his
partially severed ear, and months of recovery. Second day (Thursday, April 30).
Although the day began relatively quietly, by mid-morning on the second day
violence appeared widespread and unchecked as heavy looting and fires were
witnessed across Los Angeles County. Korean-Americans, seeing the police
force's abandonment of Koreatown, organized armed security teams composed of
store owners, who defended their livelihoods from assault by the mobs. Open gun
battles were televised as Korean shopkeepers exchanged gunfire with armed
looters. Organized law-enforcement response began to come together by midday.
Fire crews began to respond backed by police escort; California Highway Patrol
reinforcements were airlifted to the city; and Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley
announced a dusk-to-dawn curfew at 12:15Â am. President George H. W. Bush spoke
out against the rioting, stating that "anarchy" would not be tolerated. The
California National Guard, which had been advised not to expect civil
disturbance and had, as a result, loaned its riot equipment out to other law
enforcement agencies, responded quickly by calling up about 2,000 soldiers, but
could not get them to the city until nearly 24 hours had passed because of a
lack of proper equipment, training, and available ammunition which had to be
picked up from Camp Roberts, California (near Paso Robles). In an attempt to
end hostilities, Bill Cosby spoke on the NBC affiliate television station KNBC
and asked people to stop what they were doing and instead watch the final
episode of "The Cosby Show". Third day (Friday, May 1). The third day was
punctuated by live footage of Rodney King at an impromptu news conference in
front of his lawyer's Los Angeles offices on Wilshire & Doheny, saying,
"People, I just want to say, you know, can we all get along?" That morning, at
1:00Â am, California Governor Pete Wilson had requested federal assistance, but
it was not ready until Saturday, by which time the rioting and looting was
under control. National Guard units (doubled to 4,000 troops) continued to move
into the city in Humvees, eventually seeing 10,000 National Guard troops
activated. Additionally, a varied contingent of 1,700 federal law-enforcement
officers from different agencies from across the state began to arrive, to
protect federal facilities and assist local police. As darkness fell, the main
riot area was further hit by a power cut. Friday evening, U.S. President George
H.W. Bush addressed the country, denouncing "random terror and lawlessness",
summarizing his discussions with Mayor Bradley and Governor Wilson, and
outlining the federal assistance he was making available to local authorities.
Citing the "urgent need to restore order", he warned that the "brutality of a
mob" would not be tolerated, and he would "use whatever force is necessary". He
then turned to the Rodney King case and a more moderate tone, describing
talking to his own grandchildren and pointing to the reaction of "good and
decent policemen" as well as civil rights leaders. He said he had already
directed the Justice Department to begin its own investigation, saying that
"grand jury action is underway today" and that justice would prevail. By this
point, many entertainment and sports events were postponed or canceled. The Los
Angeles Lakers hosted the Portland Trail Blazers in a basketball playoff game
on the night the rioting started, but the following game was postponed until
Sunday and moved to Las Vegas. The Los Angeles Clippers moved a playoff game
against the Utah Jazz to nearby Anaheim. In baseball, the Los Angeles Dodgers
postponed games for four straight days from Thursday to Sunday, including a
whole 3-game series against the Montreal Expos (now Washington Nationals); all
were made up as part of doubleheaders in July. In San Francisco, a city curfew
due to unrest there forced the postponement of a May 1 San Francisco Giants
home game against the Philadelphia Phillies. The horse racing venues Hollywood
Park Racetrack and Los Alamitos Race Course were also shut down. L.A. Fiesta
Broadway, a major event in the Latino community, was not held in the first
weekend in May as scheduled. In Music, Van Halen canceled two concert shows in
Inglewood on Saturday and Sunday. Michael Bolton was scheduled to perform at
the Hollywood Bowl for Sunday, but the concert was canceled. The World
Wrestling Federation also canceled events on Friday and Saturday in the cities
of Long Beach and Fresno. The Southern California Rapid Transit District (now
Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority) suspended all bus
service throughout the Los Angeles area. Some major freeways were closed down.
Fourth day (Saturday, May 2). On the fourth day, 2,000 7th Infantry Division
(L) 2nd BDE soldiers, and a company's worth of military policemen from Fort
Ord, along with 1,500 U.S. Marines from Camp Pendleton, arrived to reinforce
the California Army National Guard soldiers already in the city. This federal
force took twenty-four hours to deploy to Huntington Park, about the same time
it took for the California Army National Guard soldiers. This brought total
troop strength associated with the effort to stop the breakdown in civil order
to 13,500. U.S. military forces directly supported Los Angeles Police officers
in restoring order and had a major effect of first containing, then stopping
the violence. With most of the violence under control, 30,000 people attended a
peace rally. On the same day, U.S. Justice Department announced it would begin
a federal investigation of the Rodney King beating. Fifth day (Sunday, May 3).
Overall quiet set in and Mayor Bradley assured the public that the crisis was,
more or less, under control. In one incident, National Guardsmen shot and
killed a motorist who tried to run them over at a barrier. Sixth day (Monday,
May 4). Although Mayor Bradley lifted the curfew, signaling the official end of
the riots, sporadic violence and crime continued for a few days afterward.
Schools, banks, and businesses reopened. Federal troops did not stand down
until May 9; the Army National Guard remained until May 14; and some soldiers
remained as late as May 27. Riots and Korean-Americans. Korea-Americans in Los
Angeles refer to the event as "Sa-E-Gu", meaning "four-two-nine" in the Korean
language, in reference to the April 29, 1992, which was the day the riots
started. The riots prompted various responses from Korean-Americans, including
the formation of activist organizations such as the Association of Korean-
American Victims, and increased efforts to build collaborative links with other
ethnic groups. During the riots, many Korean immigrants from the area rushed to
Koreatown, after Korean-language radio stations called for volunteers to guard
against rioters. Many were armed, with a variety of improvised weapons,
shotguns, and semi-automatic rifles. According to Professor Edward Park,
director of the Asian Pacific American Studies Program at Loyola Marymount
University, the 1992 violence stimulated a new wave of political activism among
Korean-Americans, but it also split them into two camps. The liberals sought to
unite with other minorities in Los Angeles to fight against racial oppression
and scapegoating. The conservatives emphasized law and order and generally
favored the economic and social policies of the Republican Party. The
conservatives tended to emphasize the political differences between Koreans and
other minorities, specifically blacks and Hispanics. One of the most iconic and
controversial television images of the violence was a scene of two Korean
merchants firing pistols repeatedly at roving looters. "The New York Times"
said "that the image seemed to speak of race war, and of vigilantes taking the
law into their own hands." The merchants, jewelry store and gun shop owner
Richard Park and his gun store manager, David Joo, were reacting to the
shooting of Mr. Park's wife and her sister by looters who converged on the
shopping center where the shops were located. David Joo, a manager of the gun
store, said, "I want to make it clear that we didn't open fire first. At that
time, four police cars were there. Somebody started to shoot at us. The LAPD
ran away in half a second. I never saw such a fast escape. I was pretty
disappointed." Carl Rhyu, a participant in the Korean immigrants' armed
response to the rioting, said, "If it was your own business and your own
property, would you be willing to trust it to someone else? We are glad the
National Guard is here. They're good backup. But when our shops were burning we
called the police every five minutes; no response. At a shopping center several
miles north of Koreatown, Jay Rhee, who estimated that he and others fired five
hundred shots into the ground and air, said, "We have lost our faith in the
police. Where were you when we needed you?" One of the largest armed camps in
Los Angeles' Koreatown, Koreatown was at the California Market. On the first
night after the verdicts were returned in the trial of the four officers
charged in the beating of Rodney King, Richard Rhee, the market owner, posted
himself in the parking lot with about 20 armed employees. One year after the
riots fewer than one in four damaged or destroyed businesses reopened,
according to the survey conducted by the Korean-American Inter-Agency Council.
According to a "Los Angeles Times" survey conducted eleven months after the
riots, almost 40% of Korean-Americans said they were thinking of leaving Los
Angeles. Before a verdict was issued in the new 1993 Rodney King federal civil
rights trial against the four officers, Korean shop owners prepared for the
worst as fear ran throughout the city, gun sales went up, virtually all of them
by those of Korean descent, some merchants at flea markets removed their
merchandise from their shelves, storefronts were fortified with extra Plexiglas
and bars. Throughout the region, merchants readied to defend themselves as if
on the eve of a war. College student Elizabeth Hwang spoke of the attacks on
her parents' convenience store in 1992 and the fact that if trouble erupted
following the 1993 trial, that they were armed with a Glock 17 pistol, a
Beretta and a shotgun and they plan to barricade themselves in their store to
fight off looters. Some Koreans formed armed self defence groups following the
1992 riots. Speaking just prior to the 1993 verdict, Mr. Yong Kim, leader of
the Korea Young Adult Team of Los Angeles, which purchased five AK-47s, stated,
"We made a mistake last year. This time we won't. I don't know why Koreans are
always a special target for African-Americans, but if they are going to attack
our community then we are going to pay them back." Post-riot commentary. In
addition to the immediate trigger of the Rodney King verdicts, a range of other
factors were cited as reasons for the unrest. Anger over Korean American shop-
owner Soon Ja Du's weak sentence for fatally shooting a black teenager Latasha
Harlins was pointed to as a potential reason for the riots, particularly for
aggression toward Korean Americans. Publications such as "Newsweek" and "Time"
suggested that the source of these racial antagonisms was derived from
perceptions amongst blacks that Korean-American merchants were taking money out
of their community and refusing to hire blacks to work in their shops.
According to this view, these tensions were intensified when Du was sentenced
to five years probation but no jail time after a jury convicted her of
manslaughter. Another explanation offered for the riots was the extremely high
unemployment among the residents of South Central Los Angeles, which had been
hit very hard by the nation-wide recession, and the high levels of poverty
there. Articles in the "Los Angeles Times" and "The New York Times" linked the
economic deterioration of South Central to the declining living conditions of
the residents, and suggested that local resentments about these conditions
helped to fuel the riots. Social commentator Mike Davis pointed to the growing
economic disparity in Los Angeles in the years leading up to the riots caused
by corporate restructuring and government deregulation, with inner-city
residents bearing the brunt of these changes. Such conditions engendered a
widespread feeling of frustration and powerlessness in the urban populace, with
the King verdicts eventually setting off their resentments in a violent
expression of collective public protest. To Davis and other writers, the
tensions witnessed between African-Americans and Korean-Americans during the
unrest was as much to do with the economic competition forced on the two groups
by wider market forces, as with either cultural misunderstandings or blacks
angered about the killing of Harlins. One of the more detailed analyses of the
unrest was a study produced shortly after the riots by a Special Committee of
the California Legislature, entitled "To Rebuild is Not Enough". After
extensive research, the Committee concluded that the inner-city conditions of
poverty, segregation, lack of educational and employment opportunities, police
abuse and unequal consumer services created the underlying causes of the riots.
It also pointed to changes in the American economy and the growing ethnic
diversity of Los Angeles as important sources of urban discontent, which
eventually exploded on the streets following the King verdicts. Another
official report, "The City in Crisis", was initiated by the Los Angeles Board
of Police Commissioners and made many of the same observations as the Assembly
Special Committee about the growth of popular urban dissatisfaction leading up
to the unrest. In his public statements during the riots, civil rights activist
and Baptist minister Jesse Jackson sympathized with the anger experienced by
African-Americans regarding the verdicts in the King trial, and pointed to
certain root causes of the disturbances. Although he suggested that the
violence was not justified, he repeatedly emphasized that the riots were an
inevitable result of the continuing patterns of racism, police brutality and
economic despair suffered by inner-city residentsÂ â a tinderbox of seething
frustrations which was eventually set off by the verdicts. Democratic
presidential candidate, Bill Clinton, argued likewise that the violence
resulted from the breakdown of economic opportunities and social institutions
in the inner city. He also berated both major political parties for failing to
address urban issues, especially the Republican Administration for its
presiding over "more than a decade of urban decay" generated by their spending
cuts. He maintained that the King verdicts could not be avenged by the "savage
behavior" of "lawless vandals". He also stated that people "are looting because
... hey do not share our values, and their children are growing up in a culture
alien from ours, without family, without neighborhood, without church, without
support." African-American Congressional representative of South Central Los
Angeles, Democrat Maxine Waters, said that the events in L.A. constituted a
"rebellion" or "insurrection" caused by the underlying reality of poverty and
despair existing in the inner city. This state of affairs, she asserted, were
brought about by a government which had all but abandoned the poor through the
loss of local jobs and by the institutional discrimination encountered by
people of racial minorities, especially at the hands of the police and
financial institutions. Conversely, President Bush argued that the unrest was
"purely criminal". Though he acknowledged that the King verdicts were plainly
unjust, he maintained that "we simply cannot condone violence as a way of
changing the system ... Mob brutality, the total loss of respect for human life
was sickeningly sad ... What we saw last night and the night before in Los
Angeles is not about civil rights. It's not about the great cause of equality
that all Americans must uphold. It's not a message of protest. It's been the
brutality of a mob, pure and simple." Vice President Dan Quayle blamed the
violence on a "Poverty of Values"Â â"I believe the lawless social anarchy
which we saw is directly related to the breakdown of family structure, personal
responsibility and social order in too many areas of our society" Similarly,
the White House Press Secretary, Marlin Fitzwater, alleged that "many of the
root problems that have resulted in inner city difficulties were started in the
'60s and '70s and ... they have failed ... ow we are paying the price." Several
prominent writers expressed a similar "culture of poverty" argument. Writers in
"Newsweek", for example, drew a distinction between the actions of the rioters
in 1992 with those of the urban upheavals in the 1960s, arguing that "here the
looting at Watts had been desperate, angry, mean, the mood this time was closer
to a manic fiesta, a TV game show with every looter a winner." Meanwhile, in an
article published in "Commentary" entitled "How the Rioters Won", conservative
columnist Midge Decter referred to African-American city youths and asked "ow
is it possible to go on declaring that what will save the young men of South-
Central L.A., and the young girls they impregnate, and the illegitimate babies
they sire, is jobs? How is it possible to look at these boys of the underclass
... and imagine that they either want or could hold on to jobs?" Media
coverage. Almost as soon as the disturbances broke out in South Central, local
television news cameras were on the scene to record the events as they
happened. Television coverage of the riots was near-continuous, starting with
the beating of motorists at the intersection of Florence and Normandie
broadcast live by television news pilot/reporter Bob Tur, and his camera
operator, Marika Gerrard. By virtue of their extensive coverage, mainstream
television stations provided a vivid, comprehensive and valuable record of the
violence occurring on the streets of Los Angeles. In part because of extensive
media coverage of the Los Angeles riots, smaller but similar riots and other
anti-police actions took place in other cities throughout the United States.
The Emergency Broadcast System was also utilized during the rioting. Aftermath.
In the aftermath of the riots, pressure mounted for a retrial of the officers,
and federal charges of civil rights violations were brought against them. As
the first anniversary of the acquittal neared, the city tensely awaited the
decision of the federal jury; seven days of deliberations raised fears of
further violence in the event of another "not guilty" verdict. The decision was
read in an atypical 7:00Â am Saturday court session on April 17, 1993. Two
officers - Officer Laurence Powell and Sergeant Stacey Koon - were found
guilty, while officers Theodore Briseno and Timothy Wind were acquitted.
Mindful of accusations of sensationalist reporting in the wake of the first
trial and the resulting chaos, media outlets opted for more sober coverage,
which included calmer on-the-street interviews. Police were fully mobilized
with officers on 12-hour shifts, convoy patrols, scout helicopters, street
barricades, tactical command centers, and support from the National Guard and
Marines. All four of the officers involved have since quit or have been fired
from the LAPD. Officer Theodore Briseno left the LAPD after being acquitted on
federal charges. Officer Timothy Wind, who was also acquitted a second time,
was fired after the appointment of Willie L. Williams as Chief of Police. Chief
Williams' tenure was also short-lived. The Los Angeles Police Commission
declined to renew his contract, citing Williams' failure to fulfill his mandate
to create meaningful change in the department in the wake of the Rodney King
disaster. Susan Clemmer, an officer who gave crucial testimony for the defense
at the initial trial, committed suicide in July 2009 in the lobby of a Los
Angeles Sheriff's Station. She rode in the ambulance with King and testified
that he was laughing and spat blood on her uniform. She had remained in law
enforcement and was a Sheriff's Detective at the time of her death. Rodney King
was awarded $3.8Â million in damages from the City of Los Angeles for the
attack. He invested most of this money in founding a record label, "Straight
Alta-Pazz Records". The venture was unable to garner any success and soon
folded. Since the arrest which culminated in his severe beating by the four
police officers, King was arrested at least a further eleven times on a variety
of charges, including domestic abuse and hit-and-run. King and his family moved
from Los Angeles to Rialto, California, a suburb in San Bernardino County in an
attempt to escape the fame and notoriety and to begin a new life. King and his
family later returned to Los Angeles, where they ran a family-owned
construction company. King, until his death on June 17, 2012, rarely discussed
the incident or its aftermath, preferring to remain out of the spotlight. Renee
Campbell, his most recent attorney, described King as "...simply a very nice
man caught in a very unfortunate situation." Many Los Angeles residents were
motivated to buy weapons for self-defense against further violence, though the
10-day waiting period in California law stymied those who wanted to purchase
firearms while the riot was going on. Nearly a third of the rioters arrested
were released because police officers were unable to identify individuals in
the sheer volume of the crowd. In one case, officers arrested around 40 people
stealing from one store- while they were identifying them, a group of another
12 looters were brought in. With the groups mingled, charges could not be
brought against individuals for stealing from specific stores, and the police
were forced to release them all.
