American Airlines Flight 77 American Airlines Flight 77 was a passenger flight
which was hijacked by five al-Qaeda terrorists on September 11, 2001, as part
of the September 11 attacks. They deliberately crashed it into the Pentagon
near Washington, D.C., killing all 59 people on board plus the hijackers, as
well as 125 people in the building. The aircraft involved, a Boeing 757-223,
was flying American Airlines' daily scheduled morning transcontinental service
from Washington Dulles International Airport, in Dulles, Virginia to Los
Angeles International Airport in Los Angeles, California. Less than 35Â minutes
into the flight, the hijackers stormed the cockpit and forced the passengers,
crew, and pilots to the rear of the aircraft. Hani Hanjour, one of the
hijackers who was trained as a pilot, assumed control of the flight. Unknown to
the hijackers, passengers aboard were able to make telephone calls to loved
ones and relay information on the hijacking. The aircraft crashed into the
western side of the Pentagon at 09:37 EDT. Dozens of people witnessed the crash
and news sources began reporting on the incident within minutes. The impact
severely damaged an area of the Pentagon and caused a large fire. At 10:10AM, a
portion of the Pentagon collapsed; firefighters spent days trying to fully
extinguish the blaze. The damaged sections of the Pentagon were rebuilt in
2002, with occupants moving back into the completed areas on August 15, 2002.
The 184 victims of the attack are memorialized in the Pentagon Memorial
adjacent to the Pentagon. The park contains a bench for each of the victims,
arranged according to their year of birth, ranging from 1930 (age 71) to 1998
(age 3). Hijackers. The hijackers on American Airlines FlightÂ 77 were led by
Hani Hanjour, who piloted the aircraft into the Pentagon. Hanjour first came to
the United States in 1990. He trained at the CRM Airline Training Center in
Scottsdale, Arizona, earning his FAA commercial pilot's certificate in
AprilÂ 1999. He had wanted to be a commercial pilot for the Saudi national
airline but was rejected when he applied to the civil aviation school in Jeddah
in 1999. Hanjour's brother later explained that, frustrated at not finding a
job, Hanjour "increasingly turned his attention toward religious texts and
cassette tapes of militant Islamic preachers". Hanjour left Saudi Arabia in
late 1999, telling his family that he was going to the United Arab Emirates to
work for an airline. Instead, Hanjour likely ended up in Afghanistan where Al
Qaeda recruits were screened for special skills they may have. Already having
selected the Hamburg Cell members, Al Qaeda leaders selected Hanjour to lead
the fourth team of hijackers. The CIA's unit dedicated to tracking Osama bin
Laden, Alec Station, had discovered that two of the other hijackers, al-Hazmi
and al-Mihdhar, had multiple entry visas to the United States well before 9/11.
Two FBI agents inside the unit tried to alert FBI headquarters, but CIA
officers rebuffed them. In December 2000, Hanjour arrived in San Diego, joining
"muscle" hijackers Nawaf al-Hazmi and Khalid al-Mihdhar, who had been there
since JanuaryÂ 2000. Soon after arriving, Hanjour and Hazmi left for Mesa,
Arizona, where Hanjour began refresher training at Arizona Aviation. In
AprilÂ 2001, they relocated to Falls Church, Virginia, where they awaited the
arrival of the remaining "muscle" hijackers. One of these men, Majed Moqed,
arrived on May 2, 2001, with FlightÂ 175 hijacker Ahmed al-Ghamdi from Dubai at
Dulles International Airport and moved into an apartment with Hazmi and
Hanjour. On May 21, 2001, Hanjour rented a room in Paterson, New Jersey, where
he stayed with other hijackers through the end of August. The last FlightÂ 77
"muscle" hijacker, Salem al-Hazmi, arrived on June 29, 2001, with FlightÂ 11
hijacker Abdulaziz al-Omari at John F. Kennedy International Airport from the
United Arab Emirates and stayed with Hanjour. Hani Hanjour received ground
instruction and did practice flights at Air Fleet Training Systems in
Teterboro, New Jersey, and at Caldwell Flight Academy in Fairfield, New Jersey.
Hanjour moved out of the room in Paterson and arrived at the Valencia Motel in
Laurel, Maryland, on September 2, 2001. While in Maryland, Hanjour and fellow
hijackers trained at the Gold's Gym in Greenbelt. On September 10, he completed
a certification flight, using a terrain recognition system for navigation, at
Congressional Air Charters in Gaithersburg, Maryland. On September 10, Nawaf
al-Hazmi, accompanied by other hijackers, checked into the Marriott in Herndon,
Virginia. Suspected accomplices. According to U.S. State Department cable of
February 2010, the FBI has investigated another suspect, Mohammed al-Mansoori,
who had associated with three Qatari citizens who had flown from Washington to
London on the eve of the attacks, after allegedly surveying the World Trade
Center and the White House. U.S. law enforcement officials said that the
information about the four men was "just one of many leads that were thoroughly
investigated at the time and never led to terrorism charges". An official
added, however, that the three Qatari citizens have never been questioned by
the FBI. Eleanor Hill, the former staff director for the congressional joint
inquiry on the September 11 attacks, said the cable reinforces questions about
the thoroughness of the FBI's investigation. She also said that the inquiry
concluded that the hijackers had a support network that helped them in
different ways. The three Qatari men were booked to fly from Los Angeles to
Washington on September 10, 2001, on the same plane that was hijacked and
piloted into the Pentagon on the following day, but did instead fly from Los
Angeles to Qatar, via London. While the cable states that Mansoori would be
currently under investigation, U.S. law enforcement officials said that there
was no active investigation of him or of the Qatari citizens mentioned in the
cable. Flight. The American Airlines FlightÂ 77 aircraft was a Boeing 757-223
(registration number N644AA). The flight crew included pilot Charles
Burlingame, First Officer David Charlebois, and flight attendants Michele
Heidenberger, Jennifer Lewis, Kenneth Lewis, and Renee May. The capacity of the
aircraft was 188 passengers, but with 58 passengers on September 11, the load
factor was 33 percent. Tuesdays were the least-traveled day of the week, with
the same load factor seen on Tuesdays in the previous three months for Flight
77. Boarding and departure. On the morning of September 11, 2001, the five
hijackers arrived at Washington, D.C.'s Dulles International Airport. At 07:15,
Khalid al-Mihdhar and Majed Moqed checked in at the American Airlines ticket
counter for Flight 77, arriving at the passenger security checkpoint a few
minutes later at 07:18. Both men set off the metal detector and were put
through secondary screening. Moqed continued to set off the alarm, so he was
searched with a hand wand. The Hazmi brothers checked in together at the ticket
counter at 07:29. Hani Hanjour checked in separately and arrived at the
passenger security checkpoint at 07:35. Hanjour was followed minutes later at
the checkpoint by Salem and Nawaf al-Hazmi, who also set off the metal
detector's alarm. The screener at the checkpoint never resolved what set off
the alarm. As seen in security footage later released, Nawaf Hazmi appeared to
have an unidentified item in his back pocket, but four-inch utility knives were
nonetheless then permitted by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) as
carry-on items. The passenger security checkpoint at Dulles International
Airport was operated by Argenbright Security, under contract with United
Airlines. The hijackers were also all selected for extra screening of their
checked bags. Hani Hanjour, Khalid al-Mihdhar, and Majed Moqed were chosen by
the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System criteria, while Nawaf al-
Hazmi and Salem al-Hazmi were selected because they did not provide adequate
identification and were deemed suspicious by the airline check-in agent.
Hanjour, Mihdhar, and Nawaf al-Hazmi did not check any bags for the flight.
Checked bags belonging to Moqed and Salem al-Hazmi were held until they boarded
the aircraft. By 07:50, the five hijackers, carrying knives and box cutters,
had made it through the airport security checkpoint. Flight 77 was scheduled to
depart for Los Angeles at 08:10; 58 passengers boarded through Gate D26,
including the five hijackers. Excluding the hijackers, of the 59 other
passengers and crew on board, there were 26 men, 22 women, and five children
ranging in age from three to eleven. On the flight, Hani Hanjour was seated up
front in 1B, while Salem and Nawaf al-Hazmi were seated in first class in seats
5E and 5F. Majed Moqed and Khalid al-Mihdhar were seated further back in 12A
and 12B, in economy class. Flight 77 left the gate on time and took off from
Runway 30 at Dulles at . Hijacking. The 9/11 Commission estimated that the
flight was hijacked between 08:51 and 08:54, shortly after American Airlines
Flight 11 struck the World Trade Center and not too long after United Airlines
Flight 175 had just been hijacked. The last normal radio communications from
the aircraft to air traffic control occurred at 08:50:51. Unlike the other
three flights, there were no reports of anyone being stabbed or a bomb threat.
At 08:54, the plane began to deviate from its normal, assigned flight path and
turned south. The hijackers set the flight's autopilot heading for Washington,
D.C. By 08:56, the flight was turned around, and the transponder had been
disabled. The FAA was aware at this point that there was an emergency on board
the airplane. By this time, American Airlines Flight 11 had already crashed
into the North Tower of the World Trade Center, and United Airlines Flight 175
was known to have been hijacked and was within minutes of also striking the
South Tower. After learning of this second hijacking involving an American
Airlines aircraft and the hijacking involving United Airlines, American
Airlines' Executive Vice President Gerard Arpey ordered a nationwide ground
stop for the airline. The Indianapolis Air Traffic Control Center, as well as
American Airlines dispatchers, made several failed attempts to contact the
aircraft. At the time the airplane was hijacked, it was flying over an area of
limited radar coverage. With air controllers unable to contact the flight by
radio, an Indianapolis official declared that the Boeing 757 had possibly
crashed at 09:09. Two people on the aircraft made phone calls to contacts on
the ground. At 09:12, flight attendant Renee May called her mother, Nancy May,
in Las Vegas. During the call, which lasted nearly two minutes, May said her
flight was being hijacked by six individuals and they had been moved to the
rear of the airplane. May also asked her mother to contact American Airlines,
which she and her husband promptly did; American Airlines was already aware of
the hijacking. Between 09:16 and 09:26, passenger Barbara Olson called her
husband, United States Solicitor General Theodore Olson and reported that the
airplane had been hijacked and that the assailants had box cutters and knives.
She reported that the passengers, and possibly the crew, had been moved to the
back of the cabin and that the hijackers were unaware of her call. A minute
into the conversation, the call was cut off. Theodore Olson contacted the
command center at the Department of Justice, and tried unsuccessfully to
contact Attorney General John Ashcroft. About five minutes later, Barbara Olson
called again, told her husband that the "pilot" (possibly Hanjour on the cabin
intercom) had announced the flight was hijacked, and asked "what do I tell the
pilot to do?" Ted Olson asked her location and she reported the plane was
flying over a residential area. He then informed her of the attacks on the
World Trade Center. Soon afterward, the call cut off again. An airplane was
detected again by Dulles controllers on radar screens as it approached
Washington, turning and descending rapidly. Controllers initially thought this
was a military fighter, due to its high speed and maneuvering. Reagan Airport
controllers then asked a passing Air National Guard Lockheed C-130 Hercules to
identify and follow the aircraft. The pilot, Lt. Col. Steven O'Brien, told them
it was a BoeingÂ 757 or 767, and its silver fuselage meant it was probably an
American Airlines jet. He had difficulty picking out the airplane in the "East
Coast haze", but then saw a "huge" fireball, and initially assumed it had hit
the ground. Approaching the Pentagon, he saw the impact site on the building's
west side and reported to Reagan control, "Looks like that aircraft crashed
into the Pentagon, sir". Crash. According to the 9/11 Commission Report, as
Flight 77 was west-southwest of the Pentagon, it made a 330-degree turn. At the
end of the turn, it was descending through , pointed toward the Pentagon and
downtown Washington. Hani Hanjour advanced the throttles to maximum power and
dived towards the Pentagon. While level above the ground and seconds from the
crash, the wings knocked over five street lampposts and the right wing struck a
portable generator, creating a smoke trail seconds before smashing into the
Pentagon. FlightÂ 77, flying at 530Â mph (853Â km/h, 237Â m/s, or 460 knots)
over the Navy Annex Building adjacent to Arlington National Cemetery, crashed
into the western side of the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia, just south
of Washington, D.C., at 09:37:46, killing all 53 passengers, five hijackers,
and six crew. The plane hit the Pentagon at the first-floor level, and at the
moment of impact, the airplane was rolled slightly to the left, with the right
wing elevated. The front part of the fuselage disintegrated on impact, while
the mid and tail sections moved for another fraction of a second, with tail
section debris penetrating furthest into the building. In all, the airplane
took eight-tenths of a second to fully penetrate into the three outermost of
the building's five rings and unleashed a fireball that rose above the
building. At the time of the attacks, approximately 18,000Â people worked in
the Pentagon, which was 4,000Â fewer than before renovations began in 1998. The
section of the Pentagon, which had recently been renovated at a cost of
$250Â million, housed the Naval Command Center and other Pentagon offices, as
well as some unoccupied offices. The crash and subsequent fire penetrated three
outer ring sections of the western side. The outermost ring section was largely
destroyed, and a large section collapsed. One hundred and twenty-five people in
the Pentagon died in the attack. In all, there were 189Â deaths at the Pentagon
site, including 125 in the Pentagon building in addition to the 64 on board the
aircraft. Passenger Barbara Olson was en route to a taping of "Politically
Incorrect". A group of children, their chaperones, and National Geographic
Society staff members were also on board, embarking on an educational trip west
to the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary near Santa Barbara,
California. The fatalities at the Pentagon included 55Â military personnel and
70Â civilians. Of those 125 killed, 92 were on the first floor, 31 were on the
second floor, and two were on the third. The Army suffered 75 fatalitiesâfar
more than any other branch. Another 106 injured were treated at area hospitals.
Lieutenant General Timothy Maude, an Army Deputy Chief of Staff, was the
highest-ranking military officer killed at the Pentagon, also killed was
retired Rear Admiral Wilson Flagg, who was a passenger on the plane. The
Pentagon is bordered by Interstate 395 and Washington Boulevard, on the side
where the impact occurred. Motorist Mary Lyman, who was on I-395, saw the
airplane pass over at a "steep angle toward the ground and going fast" and then
saw the cloud of smoke from the Pentagon. Omar Campo, another witness, was
cutting the grass on the other side of the road when the airplane flew over his
head. "I was cutting the grass and it came in screaming over my head. I felt
the impact. The whole ground shook and the whole area was full of fire. I could
never imagine I would see anything like that here". Afework Hagos, a computer
programmer, was on his way to work and stuck in a traffic jam near the Pentagon
when the airplane flew over. "There was a huge screaming noise and I got out of
the car as the plane came over. Everybody was running away in different
directions. It was tilting its wings up and down like it was trying to balance.
It hit some lampposts on the way in." Daryl Donley witnessed the crash and took
some of the first photographs after the crash. "USA Today" reporter Mike Walter
was driving on Washington Boulevard when he witnessed the crash, which he
recounted, "I looked out my window and I saw this plane, this jet, an American
Airlines jet, coming. And I thought, 'This doesn't add up, it's really low.'
And I saw it. I mean it was like a cruise missile with wings. It went right
there and slammed right into the Pentagon". Terrance Kean, who lived in a
nearby apartment building, heard the noise of loud jet engines, glanced out his
window, and saw a "very, very large passenger jet". He watched "it just plow
right into the side of the Pentagon. The nose penetrated into the portico. And
then it sort of disappeared, and there was fire and smoke everywhere." AP
reporter Dave Winslow recounted, "I saw the tail of a large airlinerÂ ... It
plowed right into the Pentagon." Tim Timmerman, who is a pilot himself, noticed
American Airlines markings on the aircraft as he saw it hit the Pentagon. Other
drivers on Washington Boulevard, Interstate 395, and Columbia Pike witnessed
the crash, as did people in Pentagon City, Crystal City, and other nearby
locations. Former Georgetown University basketball coach John Thompson had
originally booked a ticket on Flight 77. As he would tell the story many times
in the following years, including a September 12, 2011 interview on Jim Rome's
radio show, he had been scheduled to appear on that show on September 12, 2001.
Thompson was planning to be in Las Vegas for a friend's birthday on September
13, and initially insisted on traveling to Rome's Los Angeles studio on the
11th. However, this did not work for the show, which wanted him to travel on
the day of the show. After a Rome staffer personally assured Thompson that he
would be able to travel from Los Angeles to Las Vegas immediately after the
show, Thompson changed his travel plans. He felt the impact from the crash at
his home near the Pentagon. Rescue and recovery. Rescue efforts began
immediately after the crash. Almost all the successful rescues of survivors
occurred within half an hour of the impact. Initially, rescue efforts were led
by the military and civilian employees within the building. Within minutes, the
first fire companies arrived and found these volunteers searching near the
impact site. The firemen ordered them to leave as they were not properly
equipped or trained to deal with the hazards. The Arlington County Fire
Department (ACFD) assumed command of the immediate rescue operation within
10Â minutes of the crash. ACFD Assistant Chief James Schwartz implemented an
incident command system (ICS) to coordinate response efforts among multiple
agencies. It took about an hour for the ICS structure to become fully
operational. Firefighters from Fort Myer and Reagan National Airport arrived
within minutes. Rescue and firefighting efforts were impeded by rumors of
additional incoming planes. Chief Schwartz ordered two evacuations during the
day in response to these rumors. As firefighters attempted to extinguish the
fires, they watched the building in fear of a structural collapse. One
firefighter remarked that they "pretty much knew the building was going to
collapse because it started making weird sounds and creaking". Officials saw a
cornice of the building move and ordered an evacuation. Minutes later, at 10:
10, the upper floors of the damaged area of the Pentagon collapsed. The
collapse area was about at its widest point and at its deepest. This amount of
time between impact and collapse allowed everyone on the fourth and fifth
levels to evacuate safely before the structure collapsed. After the collapse,
the interior fires intensified, spreading through all five floors. After 11:00,
firefighters mounted a two-pronged attack against the fires. Officials
estimated temperatures of up to . While progress was made against the interior
fires by late afternoon, firefighters realized a flammable layer of wood under
the Pentagon's slate roof had caught fire and begun to spread. Typical
firefighting tactics were rendered useless by the reinforced structure as
firefighters were unable to reach the fire to extinguish it. Firefighters
instead made firebreaks in the roof on September 12 to prevent any further
spreading. At 18:00 on the 12th, Arlington County issued a press release
stating the fire was "controlled" but not fully "extinguished". Firefighters
continued to put out smaller fires that ignited in the succeeding days. Various
pieces of aircraft debris were found within the wreckage at the Pentagon. While
on fire himself, and escaping from the Navy Command Center, Lt. Kevin Shaeffer
observed a chunk of the aircraft's nose cone and the nose landing gear in the
service road between rings B and C. Early in the morning on Friday, September
14, Fairfax County Urban Search and Rescue Team members Carlton Burkhammer and
Brian Moravitz came across an "intact seat from the plane's cockpit", while
paramedics and firefighters located the two black boxes near the punch out hole
in the A-E drive, nearly into the building. The cockpit voice recorder was too
badly damaged and charred to retrieve any information, though the flight data
recorder yielded useful information. Investigators also found a part of Nawaf
al-Hazmi's driver's license in the North Parking Lot rubble pile. Personal
effects belonging to victims were also found, and taken to Fort Myer. Remains.
Army engineers determined by 5:30 p.m. on the first day that no one remained
alive in the damaged section of the building. In the days after the crash, news
reports emerged that up to 800 people had died. Army troops from Fort Belvoir
were the first teams to survey the interior of the crash site and noted the
presence of human remains. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Urban
Search and Rescue teams, including Fairfax County Urban Search and Rescue
assisted the search for remains, working through the National Interagency
Incident Management System (NIIMS). Kevin Rimrodt, a Navy photographer
surveying the Navy Command Center after the attacks, remarked that "there were
so many bodies, I'd almost step on them. So I'd have to really take care to
look backwards as I'm backing up in the dark, looking with a flashlight, making
sure I'm not stepping on somebody". Debris from the Pentagon were taken to the
Pentagon's north parking lot for more detailed search for remains and evidence.
Remains that were recovered from the Pentagon were photographed, and turned
over to the Armed Forces Medical Examiner office, located at Dover Air Force
Base in Delaware. The medical examiner's office was able to identify remains
belonging to 179 of the victims. Investigators eventually identified 184 of the
189 people who died in the attack. The remains of the five hijackers were
identified through a process of elimination, and were turned over as evidence
to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). On September 21, the ACFD
relinquished control of the crime scene to the FBI. The Washington Field
Office, National Capital Response Squad (NCRS), and the Joint Terrorism Task
Force (JTTF) led the crime scene investigation at the Pentagon. By October 2,
2001, the search for evidence and remains was complete and the site was turned
over to Pentagon officials. In 2002, the remains of 25 victims were buried
collectively at Arlington National Cemetery, with a five-sided granite marker
inscribed with the names of all the victims in the Pentagon. The ceremony also
honored the five victims whose remains were never found. Cockpit voice
recorder. At around 3:40 a.m on September 14, a paramedic and a firefighter who
were searching through the debris of the impact site found two dark boxes,
about by long. They called for an FBI agent, who in turn called for someone
from the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). The NTSB employee
confirmed that these were the flight recorders ("black boxes") from American
Airlines Flight 77. Dick Bridges, deputy manager for Arlington County,
Virginia, said the voice recorder was damaged on the outside and the flight
data recorder was charred. But he said the FBI still was confident the data can
be recovered from both. Bridges said the recorders were found "right where the
plane came into the building." Officials at both American Airlines and United
Airlines said the black boxes aboard their destroyed aircraft were modern
solid-state versions, which are more resistant to damage than the older
magnetic tape recorders. The cockpit voice recorder was quickly transported to
the NTSB lab in Washington, D.C., and its data was downloaded. Soon afterward,
the FBI took charge of the box and its data. CBS News reported that
"Preliminary information shows there is nothing that appears to be useful on
the cockpit voice tape. The tape appears to be blank or erased." In its report
on the CVR, the NTSB identified the unit as an L-3 Communications, Fairchild
Aviation Recorders model A-100A cockpit voice recorder; a device which records
on magnetic tape. The NTSB reported that "The majority of the recording tape
was fused into a solid block of charred plastic." No usable segments of tape
were found inside the recorder. Continuity of operations. At the moment of
impact, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld was in his office on the other
side of the Pentagon, away from the crash site. He ran to the site and assisted
the injured. Rumsfeld then returned to his office, and went to a conference
room in the Executive Support Center where he joined a secure
videoteleconference with Vice President Dick Cheney and other officials. On the
day of the attacks, Department of Defense officials considered moving command
operations to Site R, a backup facility in Pennsylvania. Secretary of Defense
Rumsfeld insisted he remain at the Pentagon, instead sending Deputy Secretary
Paul Wolfowitz to Site R. The National Military Command Center (NMCC) continued
to operate at the Pentagon, even with smoke getting into the facility.
Engineers and building managers manipulated the ventilation and other building
systems that still functioned to draw smoke out of the NMCC and bring in fresh
air. During a press conference held inside the Pentagon at 18:42, Rumsfeld
announced "The Pentagon's functioning. It will be in business tomorrow."
Pentagon employees returned the next day to offices in areas of the Pentagon
mostly unaffected. By the end of September, more workers returned to the
lightly damaged areas of the Pentagon. Aftermath. Early estimates on rebuilding
the damaged section of the Pentagon were that it would take three years to
complete. However, the project moved forward at an accelerated pace and was
completed by the one-year anniversary. The rebuilt section of the Pentagon
includes a small indoor memorial and chapel at the point of impact. An outdoor
memorial, designed by Julie Beckman and Keith Kaseman, was completed on
schedule for its dedication on September 11, 2008. Security camera video. On
May 16, 2006, the Department of Defense released filmed footage that was
recorded by a security camera of American Airlines FlightÂ 77 crashing into the
Pentagon, with a plane visible in one frame, as a "thin white blur" and an
explosion following. The images were made public in response to a December 2004
Freedom of Information Act request by Judicial Watch. Some still images from
the video had previously been released and publicly circulated, but this was
the first official release of the full video of the crash. A nearby Citgo
service station also had security cameras installed, but a video released on
September 15, 2006, did not show the crash because the camera was pointed away
from the crash site. The Doubletree Hotel, located nearby in Crystal City,
Virginia, also had a security camera video, and on December 4, 2006, the FBI
released the video in response to a freedom of information lawsuit filed by
Scott Bingham. The footage is "grainy and the focus is soft, but a rapidly
growing tower of smoke is visible in the distance on the upper edge of the
frame as the plane crashes into the building". Memorials. On September 12,
2002, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and General Richard Myers, Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, dedicated the Victims of Terrorist Attack on the
Pentagon Memorial at Arlington National Cemetery. The memorial specifically
honors the five individuals for whom no identifiable remains were found. This
included Dana Falkenberg, age three, who was aboard American Airlines Flight 77
with her parents and older sister. However, a portion of the remains of 25
other victims are buried at the site. The memorial is a pentagonal granite
marker high. On five sides of the memorial along the top are inscribed the
words "Victims of Terrorist Attack on the Pentagon September 11, 2001".
Aluminum plaques, painted black, are inscribed with the names of the 184
victims of the terrorist attack. The site is located in Section 64, on a slight
rise, which gives it a view of the Pentagon. At the National September 11
Memorial, the names of the Pentagon victims are inscribed on the South Pool, on
Panels S-1 and S-72 â S-76.
