Aryan race The Aryan race is a concept historically influential in Western
culture in the period of the late 19th century and early 20th century. It
derives from the idea that the original speakers of the Indo-European languages
and their descendants up to the present day constitute a distinctive race or
subrace of the larger Caucasian race. Belief in the existence of an Aryan race
is sometimes referred to as "Aryanism". While originally meant simply as a
neutral ethno-linguistic classification, it was later used for ideologically
motivated racism in Nazi and neo-Nazi doctrine, as well as in occultism and
white supremacism in particular. Origin of the term. The term "Aryan"
originates from the Sanskrit word "ƒÅrya", in origin an ethnic self-
designation, in Classical Sanskrit meaning "honourable, respectable, noble". In
the 18th century, the most ancient known Indo-European languages were those of
the Indo-Iranians' ancestors. The word "Aryan" was therefore adopted to refer
not only to the Indo-Iranian people, but also to native Indo-European speakers
as a whole, including the Greeks, Latins, and Germans. It was soon recognised
that Armenians, Balts, Celts, Albanians and Slavs also belonged to the same
group. It was argued that all of these languages originated from a common
root‚Äînow known as Proto-Indo-European‚Äîspoken by an ancient people. The
ethnic group composed of the Proto-Indo-Europeans and their modern descendants
was termed the "Aryans". This usage was common in the late 19th and early 20th
century. An example of an influential best-selling book that reflects this
usage is the 1920 book "The Outline of History" by H. G. Wells. Wells wrote
about the accomplishments of the Aryan people, stating how they "learned
methods of civilization" while "Sargon II and Sardanapalus were ruling in
Assyria and fighting with Babylonia and Syria and Egypt". As such, Wells
suggested that the Aryans had eventually "subjugated the whole ancient world,
Semitic, Aegean and Egyptian alike". In the 1944 edition of Rand McNally‚Äôs
World Atlas, the Aryan race is depicted as being one of the ten major racial
groupings of mankind. The science fiction author Poul Anderson (1926‚Äì2001),
an anti-racist libertarian of Scandinavian ancestry, in his many novels,
novellas, and short stories, consistently used the term "Aryan" as a synonym
for "Indo-Europeans". He spoke of the "Aryan bird of prey" which impelled those
of the Aryan race to take the lead in developing interstellar travel, colonize
habitable planets in other planetary systems and become leading business
entrepreneurs on the newly colonized planets. The use of "Aryan" as a synonym
for "Indo-European" or to a lesser extent for "Indo-Iranian", is regarded today
by many as obsolete and politically incorrect, but may still occasionally
appear in material based on older scholarship, or written by persons accustomed
to older usage, such as in a 1989 article in "Scientific American" by Colin
Renfrew in which he uses the word "Aryan" in its traditional meaning as a
synonym for "Indo-European". However, the term Indo-Aryan is still commonly
used to describe the Indic half of the Indo-Iranian languages, i.e. the family
that includes Sanskrit and modern languages such as Hindi, Urdu and Bengali.
19th-century physical anthropology. In 19th century physical anthropology,
represented by some as being scientific racism, the "Aryan race" was defined as
the subgroup of the Caucasian (or Europid) race consisting of the native
speakers of Indo-European languages descended from the original Proto-Indo-
Europeans, that in modern times reside in Northern India, Sri Lanka, Maldives,
Pakistan, Eastern India, Bangladesh, Nepal, Europe, Asian Russia, Anglo-
America, Quebec, Southern South America, South Africa, Australia and New
Zealand, Armenia, Iran, and in Afghanistan and Tadzhikistan, . The original
19th-century and early 20th-century use of the term "Aryan" referred to "the
early speakers of Proto-Indo European and their descendents". Max M√ºller is
often identified as the first writer to speak of an Aryan "race" in English. In
his "Lectures on the Science of Language" in 1861 he referred to Aryans as a
"race of people". At the time, the term "race" had the meaning of "a group of
tribes or peoples, an ethnic group". When M√ºller's statement was interpreted
to imply a biologically distinct sub-group of humanity, he soon clarified that
he simply meant a line of descent, insisting that it was very dangerous to mix
linguistics and anthropology. "The Science of Language and the Science of Man
cannot be kept too much asunder¬ ... I must repeat what I have said many times
before, it would be wrong to speak of Aryan blood as of dolichocephalic
grammar". He restated his opposition to this method in 1888 in his essay
"Biographies of words and the home of the Aryas". M√ºller was responding to the
development of racial anthropology, and the influence of the work of Arthur de
Gobineau who argued that the Indo-Europeans represented a superior branch of
humanity. A number of later writers, such as the French anthropologist Vacher
de Lapouge in his book "L'Aryen", argued that this superior branch could be
identified biologically by using the cephalic index (a measure of head shape)
and other indicators. He argued that the long-headed "dolichocephalic-blond"
Europeans, characteristically found in northern Europe, were natural leaders,
destined to rule over more "brachiocephalic" (short headed) peoples. The
division of the Caucasian race into Aryans, Semites and Hamites is in origin
linguistic, not based on physical anthropology, the division in physical
anthropology being that into Nordic, Alpine and Mediterranean. However, the
linguistic classification of "Aryan" later became closely associated, and
conflated, with the classification of "Nordic" among some archaeologists and
anthropologists. This claim became increasingly important during the 19th
century. In the mid-19th century, it was commonly believed that the Aryans
originated in the southwestern steppes of present-day Russia. However, by the
late 19th century the steppe theory of Aryan origins was challenged by the view
that the Aryans originated in ancient Germany or Scandinavia, or at least that
in those countries the original Aryan ethnicity had been preserved. The German
origin of the Aryans was especially promoted by the archaeologist Gustaf
Kossinna, who claimed that the Proto-Indo-European peoples were identical to
the Corded Ware culture of Neolithic Germany. This idea was widely circulated
in both intellectual and popular culture by the early twentieth century, and is
reflected in the concept of "Corded-Nordics" in Carleton S. Coon's 1939 "The
Races of Europe". Other anthropologists contested such claims. In Germany,
Rudolf Virchow launched a study of craniometry, which prompted him to denounce
"Nordic mysticism" in the 1885 Anthropology Congress in Karlsruhe, while Josef
Kollmann, a collaborator of Virchow, stated in the same congress that the
people of Europe, be they English, German, French, and Spaniard belonged to a
"mixture of various races," furthermore declaring that the "results of
craniology...against any theory concerning the superiority of this or that
European race" to others. Virchow's contribution to the debate sparked a
controversy. Houston Stewart Chamberlain, a strong supporter of the theory of a
superior Aryan race, attacked Josef Kollmann arguments in detail. While the
"Aryan race" theory remained popular, particularly in Germany, some authors
defended Virchow's perspective, in particular Otto Schrader, Rudolph von
Jhering and the ethnologist Robert Hartmann (1831‚Äì1893), who proposed to ban
the notion of "Aryan" from anthropology. Indo-Aryan migration. Models of the
Indo-Aryan migration discuss scenarios of prehistoric migrations of the early
Indo-Aryans to their historically attested areas of settlement in the northwest
of the Indian subcontinent and from there further across all of North India.
Claims of Indo-Aryan migration are primarily drawn from linguistic evidence but
also from a multitude of data stemming from genetics,(although more recent
genetic studies cast doubt on the certitude of earlier claims), Vedic religion,
rituals, poetics as well as some aspects of social organization and chariot
technology. All discussion of historical Indo-Aryan migrations or Aryan and
Dravidian races remains highly controversial in India to this day, and
continues to affect political and religious debate. Some Dravidians, and
supporters of the Dalit movement, most commonly Tamils, claim that the worship
of Shiva is a distinct Dravidian religion going back to the Indus Civilization,
to be distinguished from Brahminical "Aryan" Hinduism. In contrast, the Indian
nationalist Hindutva movement argues that no Aryan invasion or migration ever
occurred, asserting that Vedic beliefs emerged from the Indus Valley
Civilisation, which pre-dated the supposed advent of the Indo-Aryans in India,
and is identified as a likely candidate for a Proto-Dravidian culture. Some
Indians were also influenced by the debate about the Aryan race during the
British Raj. The Indian nationalist V. D. Savarkar believed in the theory that
an "Aryan race" migrated to India, but he didn't find much value in a
racialized interpretation of the "Aryan race". Some Indian nationalists
supported the British version of the theory because it gave them the prestige
of common descent with the ruling British class. Genetic anthropology of Indo-
Aryan Migration. In a major study (2009) using over 500,000 biallelic autosomal
markers, Reich hypothesized that the modern Indian population was the result of
admixture between two genetically divergent ancestral populations dating from
the post-Holocene era. These two "reconstructed" ancient populations he termed
"Ancestral South Indians" (ASI) and "Ancestral North Indians" (ANI). According
to Reich: "ANI ancestry is significantly higher in Indo-European than Dravidian
speakers, suggesting that the ancestral ASI may have spoken a Dravidian
language before mixing with the ANI." Furthermore, Reich observes: "It is
tempting to assume that the population ancestral to ANI and CEU spoke 'Proto-
Indo-European', which has been reconstructed as ancestral to both Sanskrit and
European languages, although we cannot be certain without a date for ANI‚ÄìASI
mixture." Similarly, an earlier study conducted by Watkins et al. (2008)
states:Genetic variation in South Indian castes: evidence from Y-chromosome,
mitochondrial, and autosomal polymorphisms Occultism. Theosophy. The
Theosophical movement founded by Helena Blavatsky and Henry Olcott at the end
of the nineteenth century took inspiration from Indian culture, in this case,
perhaps, from the Hindu reform movement the Arya Samaj founded by Swami
Dayananda. Blavatsky used "Root Race" as a technical term to describe human
evolution over the large time periods in her cosmology. However, she also
claimed that there were modern non-Aryan peoples who were inferior to Aryans.
She regularly contrasts "Aryan" with "Semitic" culture, to the detriment of the
latter, asserting that Semitic peoples are an offshoot of Aryans who have
become "degenerate in spirituality and perfected in materiality." She also
states that some peoples are "semi-animal creatures". These latter include "the
Tasmanians, a portion of the Australians and a mountain tribe in China." There
are also "considerable numbers of the mixed Lemuro-Atlantean peoples produced
by various crossings with such semi-human stocks -- e.g., the wild men of
Borneo, the Veddhas of Ceylon, most of the remaining Australians, Bushmen,
Negritos, Andaman Islanders, etc." Despite this, Blavatsky's admirers claim
that her thinking was not connected to fascist or racialist ideas, asserting
that she believed in a Universal Brotherhood of humanity and wrote that "all
men have spiritually and physically the same origin" and that "mankind is
essentially of one and the same essence". On the other hand, in "The Secret
Doctrine", Blavatsky states: "Verily mankind is 'of one blood,' but not of the
same essence." According to Blavatsky, "the MONADS of the lowest specimens of
humanity (the "narrow-brained" savage South-Sea Islander, the African, the
Australian) had no Karma to work out when first born as men, as their more
favoured brethren in intelligence had". The second subrace of the Fifth or
Aryan root race, the Arabian, is regarded by Theosophists as one of the Aryan
subraces. It is believed by Theosophists that the Arabians, although asserted
in traditional Theosophy to be of Aryan (i.e., Indo-European) ancestry, adopted
the Semitic language of the people around them who had migrated earlier from
Atlantis (the fifth or (original) Semite subrace of the Atlantean root race).
Theosophists assert that the Jews originated as an offshoot of the Arabian
subrace in what is now Yemen about 30,000 BC. They migrated first to Somalia
and then later to Egypt where they lived until the time of Moses. Thus,
according to the teachings of Theosophy, the Jews are part of the Aryan race.
Samael Aun Weor published a book in 1967 retitled in 2008 "The Doomed Aryan
Race" in which he asserted that the Aryan "Root Race" is doomed to be destroyed
by hydrogen bombs unless the people of the Aryan race learn tantric yoga.
Ariosophy. Guido von List (and his followers such as Lanz von Liebenfels) later
took up some of Blavatsky's ideas, mixing her ideology with nationalistic and
fascist ideas; this system of thought became known as Ariosophy. It was
believed in Ariosophy that the Teutonics were superior to all other peoples
because according to Theosophy the Teutonics or Nordics were the most recent
subrace of the Aryan root race to have evolved. Such views also fed into the
development of Nazi ideology. Theosophical publications such as "The Aryan
Path" were strongly opposed to the Nazi usage, attacking racialism. Nazism and
Neo-Nazism. Nazism. The idea of the Northern origins of the Aryans was
particularly influential in Germany. It was widely believed that the "Vedic
Aryans" were ethnically identical to the Goths, Vandals and other ancient
Germanic peoples of the "V√∂lkerwanderung". This idea was often intertwined
with antisemitic ideas. The distinctions between the "Aryan" and "Semitic"
peoples were based on the aforementioned linguistic and ethnic history. Semitic
peoples came to be seen as a foreign presence within Aryan societies, and the
Semitic peoples were often pointed to as the cause of conversion and
destruction of social order and values leading to culture and civilization's
downfall by proto-Nazi and Nazi theorists such as Houston Stewart Chamberlain
and Alfred Rosenberg. According to the adherents to Ariosophy, the Aryan was a
"master race" that built a civilization that dominated the world from Atlantis
about 10,000 years ago. This alleged civilization declined when other parts of
the world were colonized after the 8000 BC destruction of Atlantis because the
inferior races mixed with the Aryans but it left traces of their civilization
in Tibet (via Buddhism), and even in Central America, South America, and
Ancient Egypt. (The date of 8000 BC for the destruction of Atlantis in
Ariosophy is 2,000 years later than the date of 10,000 BC given for this event
in Theosophy.) These theories affected the more esotericist strand of Nazism. A
complete, highly speculative theory of Aryan and anti-Semitic history can be
found in Alfred Rosenberg's major work, "The Myth of the Twentieth Century".
Rosenberg's well-researched account of ancient history, melded with his racial
speculations, proved to be very effective in spreading racialism among German
intellectuals in the early twentieth century, especially after the First World
War. These and other ideas evolved into the Nazi use of the term "Aryan race"
to refer to what they saw as being a master race, which was narrowly defined by
the Nazis as being identical with the Nordic race, followed by other sub-races
of the Aryan race. They worked to maintain the purity of this race through
eugenics programs (including anti-miscegenation legislation, compulsory
sterilization of the mentally ill and the mentally deficient, the execution of
the institutionalized mentally ill as part of a euthanasia program). Heinrich
Himmler (the "Reichsf√ºhrer" of the SS), the person ordered by Adolf Hitler to
implement the Final Solution, or The Holocaust, told his personal masseur Felix
Kersten that he always carried with him a copy of the ancient Aryan scripture,
the Bhagavad Gita because it relieved him of guilt about what he was doing ‚Äì
he felt that like the warrior Arjuna, he was simply doing his duty without
attachment to his actions. Himmler was also interested in Buddhism and his
institute "Ahnenerbe" sought to mix some traditions from Hinduism and Buddhism
‚Äì Gautama Buddha's original name for the religion we now call "Buddhism" was
"The Aryan Path". Himmler sent a 1939 German expedition to Tibet as part of his
research into Aryan origins. In 1936 biologists Julian Huxley and Alfred Court
Haddon famously ridiculed the Nazi idea of the superior Aryan race, writing:
Neo-Nazism. Since the military defeat of Nazi Germany by the Allies in 1945,
most neo-Nazis have expanded their concept of the Aryan race, moving from the
Nazi concept that the purest Aryans were the Teutonics or Nordics of Northern
Europe to the idea that the true Aryans are everyone descended from the Western
or European branch of the Indo-European peoples because it is believed that
they most closely resemble the original racial stock of the Proto-Indo-
Europeans. Although admitting that those of the Eastern or Indo-Iranian branch
of the Indo-European peoples are "Aryans" in name, it is felt that they are not
really true Aryans because it is believed that the Iranian peoples are mostly
too intermixed with the Arabs and Mongols, and the Indo-Aryans are mostly too
intermixed with the Dravidians, to still be pure Aryans. Moderate white
nationalists who embrace what is called "Pan-Aryanism" want to establish a
democratically governed "Aryan Federation." It is envisioned that the North
American part of the "Aryan Federation" would be a new nation for Euro-Anglo
Americans (European Americans and English Canadians) called "Vinland" which
would include what is now the northern United States and all of Canada except
Quebec, and which would use the Vinland flag. On the other hand, according to
Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke, many neo-Nazis want to establish an autocratic state
modeled after Nazi Germany to be called the "Western Imperium". It is believed
this proposed state would be able to attain world domination by combining the
nuclear arsenals of the four major Aryan world powers, the United States, the
United Kingdom, France, and Russia under a single military command. This
proposed state would be led by a "F√ºhrer"-like figure called the "Vindex", and
would include all areas inhabited by the "Aryan race", as conceived by Neo-
Nazis. Only those of the Aryan race would be full citizens of the state. The
"Western Imperium" would embark on a vigorous and dynamic program of space
exploration, followed by the creation by genetic engineering of a super race
called Homo Galactica. The concept of the "Western Imperium" as outlined in the
previous three sentences is based on the original concept of the "Imperium" as
outlined in the 1947 book "Imperium: The Philosophy of History and Politics" by
Francis Parker Yockey as further updated, extended and refined in the early
1990s in pamphlets published by David Myatt. Tempelhofgesellschaft. A neo-Nazi
esoteric Nazi Gnostic sect headquartered in Vienna, Austria called the
"Tempelhofgesellschaft", founded in the early 1990s, teaches a form of what it
calls Marcionism. They distribute pamphlets claiming that the Aryan race
originally came to Atlantis from the star Aldebaran.
