Battle of Cuito Cuanavale The Battle of Cuito Cuanavale in 1987/88 was an
important episode in the Angolan Civil War (1975 to 2002). Between 9 September
and 7 October 1987, the Angolan Army (FAPLA), in an attempt to finally subdue
the Angolan insurgent movement UNITA in south-eastern Angola, was decisively
repelled in a series of battles at the Lomba River by the South African Army
(SADF), which had once more intervened on UNITAâ€™s behalf. With FAPLA
retreating to their starting point at Cuito Cuanavale, the SADF and UNITA went
on the offensive and started the siege by shelling Cuito with long-range
artillery on 14 October. A major battle ensued and Angola, fearing a defeat,
requested help from Cuba. With Cuban reinforcements, Cuito was held and the
South African advance ended after six unsuccessful attempts to overcome the
FAPLA-Cuban defences between 13 January and 23 March 1988. The SADF withdrew
but continued to shell Cuito from a distance. Background. Independence from
Portugal. For 13 years until 1974, three armed groups fought for Angola's
independence from Portugal: the leftist MPLA (with its armed wing FAPLA), led
by Agostinho Neto; the conservative FNLA, led by Holden Roberto and supported
by Mobutu Sese Seko of ZaÃ¯re; and UNITA, led by Jonas Savimbi (a former Maoist
who broke away from the FNLA, later sponsored by the CIA and South Africa).
After the Carnation Revolution of April 1974 in Portugal, the new revolutionary
government of Portugal let go of Portugal's African overseas possessions,
including Angola. The Treaty of Alvor comprised a series of agreements between
the three rebel factions and Portugal that were to pave the way to
independence. Under its terms, a transitional government was formed, elections
were scheduled for the end of the year, and 11 November 1975 was slated as
Angola's independence day. Fighting between the three rebel factions started
soon after the transitional government took office on 31 January 1975, with
each movement gaining control of their traditional areas of influence by mid-
1975: The MPLA in the capital and central Angola, the FNLA in the north and
UNITA in the south. South Africa and Southwest Africa (Namibia). Since the
termination of the UN-mandate in 1966, South Africa had been illegally
occupying Southwest Africa (Namibia), a territory adjoining Angola to the
south, and extending apartheid rule. 1966 saw the beginning of the armed
resistance by the Southwest African liberation movement SWAPO and South African
counter insurgency. After Angolaâ€™s independence in 1975, SWAPO gained the
support of the Angolan government and operated against the South African forces
from bases in Southern Angola. Thus, in the Angolan civil war, UNITA had become
a welcome and valuable ally to South Africa in its fight against SWAPO. On 9
August the South African Army (SADF) secured the Ruacana hydro-electric complex
on the border with Namibia after engineers were prevented from moving freely by
an unruly and ill-disciplined UNITA force; on 14 October South Africa launched
Operation Savanah in support of UNITA and FNLA advancing on Luanda and coming
within 200Â km of the city. The FNLA, supported by Zairian units, South
Africans and Portuguese mercenaries advanced on Luanda from the east and got as
far as Kifangondo. On 7 November Cuba launched Operation Carlota, intervening
in favour of the MPLA (see Cuba in Angola) with up to 30.000 troops. This
enabled the MPLA to hold Luanda and on 11 November Agostinho Neto proclaimed
the independence of Angola. Cold War. The Angolan Civil War played out against
the backdrop of the Cold War struggle between the Soviet Union and the United
States. Both superpowers tried to influence the outcome of the civil war
through proxies. The African liberation movements, which also opposed apartheid
in South Africa, found mainly support in socialist countries. Angola and SWAPO
were basically supported by Cuba and the Soviet Union and some countries of the
Eastern bloc while the West, foremost the United States supported South Africa,
albeit clandestinely, and their ally, UNITA. After the Cubans had helped the
MPLA gain power in 1975 they found it necessary to stay in the country until
conditions stabilized. The Soviet Union and other Eastern Bloc countries
supplied the Angolan army (FAPLA) with armament, advisors and specialized
technical staff. UNITA managed to rebound and, with South African and US
support, posed a threat to the Angolan government. UNITA also received backing
from the US allies, most notably in the form of Stinger missiles that helped
repel the air superiority of the FAPLA forces. While the U.S. helped with money
and weaponry, South Africa sent around 5000 troops in aid. South Africa's
interests lay in preventing the Angolan government from gaining control of
south-eastern Angola and in UNITA keeping hold of the territory as a buffer
zone. Angola bordered on South African occupied Namibia (at the time called
South West Africa). UNITA and South African control of southern Angola would
make it difficult for SWAPO to fight for Namibian independence from bases in
Angola. The South African government's strategic concern was to ensure
continued UNITA control over regions bordering Namibia, so as to prevent the
SWAPO guerrillas from receiving Angolan support and gaining a springboard in
southern Angola from which to launch attacks into Southwest Africa. Its
security strategy was shaped by the doctrines of pre-emptive interventionism
and counter-revolutionary warfare. After South Africa had been unable to
prevent the leftist MPLA, which it viewed as a Soviet surrogate, from taking
power in Angola in 1975, it regarded the country as a threat to its security.
This view was only confirmed by the deployment of Cuban troops in Angola.
Therefore the apartheid regime's goal was to overthrow and replace the MPLA-
government in Luanda with a â€˜friendlyâ€™ and anti-Communist one. It actively
supported the "de facto" secession of Southern Angola and, in 1979, decided to
install the UNITA as its "de facto" government. After South African operation
"Protea" in August 1981, in which it occupied 50.000Â kmÂ² of Cunene province,
UNITA took effective administrative control of most of Cunene in January 1982.
"OperaÃ§Ã£o Saludando Octubre" ("Operation Greeting October"). Because of
UNITAâ€™s continued insurgency, the central government never managed to gain
control of the whole country; UNITA continued control much of south-eastern
Angola. Whenever it was threatened, South Africa intervened on its behalf.
South Africa itself continuously kept the whole southern border in Angola and,
at times, up to 50.000Â kmÂ² of Cunene province occupied and repeatedly
undertook invasions and raids into the country. In 1987, as part of the Angolan
government's repeated campaigns against UNITA and for the control of south-
eastern Angola, the Angolan army launched campaign "OperaÃ§Ã£o Saludando
Octubre" to drive UNITA forces from their stronghold cities of Mavinga, a
former Portuguese military base and Jamba in the southeast of the country just
above the Caprivi Strip. As in previous campaigns, planning and leadership was
taken over by the Soviets and the higher ranks in the units were taken over by
Soviet officers. Major-General Ryabchenko would command the Angolan forces in
the battle. Soviet command did not include the Cuban forces in Angola and the
Cubans initially did not actively engage in combat, but only took over support
functions. FAPLA's equipment was upgraded including 150 T-55 and T-55B tanks
and Mi-24 helicopters. The Soviets dismissed the advice of the Cubans, as in
the campaigns before, who warned that the operation would create another
opportunity for a South African intervention. It was decided to commence the
attack from Cuito Cuanavale. Taking notice of the massive military build-up,
South Africa warned UNITA. The Angolan campaign was initially successful and
made considerable gains into south-eastern Angola. The South African government
became aware that UNITA would not be able to withhold the onslaught. On 15 June
it decided to intervene and authorised covert support. On 4 August 1987 the
SADF launched Operation Moduler which was to stop the Angolan advance on
Mavinga to prevent a rout of UNITA. The SADF 61 Mechanized Battalion crossed
into Angola from their base at the border town of Rundu. Battle of the Lomba
River. In August the FAPLA 21st, 25th (both light infantry), 47th (armoured)
and the 59th (mechanized) brigades (some sources also include the 16th brigade)
of FAPLA, departed from the Cuito Cuanavale. They received air support from the
airbase at Menongue, including MiG 23s deployed in a ground-attack role. Facing
them were the UNITA forces composed of the 3rd Regular, 5th Regular, 13th Semi-
Regular and 275th Special Forces Battalions On 28 August they reached the
northern banks of the Lomba River near Mavinga, where they were expected by the
SADF. In a series of bitter fights (Battle of the Lomba River II) between 9
September and 7 October, SADF and UNITA prevented the FAPLA, which suffered
heavy losses, from crossing the river. The Soviets withdrew their advisors and
left the FAPLA without senior leadership. On 29 September, South African and
UNITA forces, having gained the upper-hand, launched an offensive (Operation
Hooper). On 3 October they attacked and annihilated a FAPLA-battalion on the
southern banks of the Lomba River near Mavinga and two days later the Angolan
army headed into a retreat over 190Â km back to Cuito Cuanavale, which it
desperately held on to. If Cuito Cuanavale was lost by FAPLA, the next closest
comparable outpost would be Menongue, 300Â km from Mavinga and 500Â km from
UNITA's headquarters at Jamba. In pursuit of the retreating FAPLA units the
SADF and UNITA started the siege of Cuito Cuanavale on 14 October with long-
range shelling by 155Â mm artillery from a distance of 30 to 40Â km. Cuito
Cuanavale. By November, the SADF had cornered the remnants of three FAPLA units
on the east of the Cuito River, across from the town itself and was poised to
destroy them. The quite demoralised 59th FAPLA motorised infantry brigade, 21st
and 25th FAPLA light infantry brigades, in positions near Tumpo and east of the
Cuito River, were effectively cut off due to SADF artillery control of both the
bridge and airstrip and to UNITA guerrilla control of the road from Menongue,
which they had mined and were prepared to ambush. With no functioning armour or
artillery remaining, the FAPLA-units faced annihilation. On 15 November, the
Angolan government requested urgent military assistance from Cuba. Although not
responsible for the dismal situation of the FAPLA Cuba felt impelled to
intervene in order to prevent a total disaster for the Angolans. In Castro's
view, a South African victory would have meant not only the capture of Cuito
and the destruction of the best Angolan military formations, but, quite
probably, the end of Angola's existence as an independent country. Thus, Fidel
Castro responded immediately by sending â€” in what was called ""Maniobra XXXI
Aniversario de las FAR"" â€” materiel and 15 000 elite troops, retaking the
initiative from the Soviets. The first Cuban reinforcements in Cuito arrived by
helicopter on 5 December with about 160â€“200 technicians, advisers, officers,
and special forces. General Arnaldo Ochoa, a veteran of the 1976 Angola
campaign and of tank battles in Ethiopia, was made overall commander of the
forces on the government side. Ochoa and Castro were to have serious
disagreements in the conduct of the war in Angola. These tensions were to have
repercussions both during the war where Castro's interference with defense
plans may have cost the Cubans dozens of lives and in the aftermath of Angolan
hostilities a year later when Ochoa was arrested, tried and executed by firing
squad after being found guilty of treason. General Cintras Frias was made
commander at Cuito Cuanavale. The Cuban's initial priority was securing Cuito
Cuanavale, but while reinforcements were arriving at the besieged garrison they
made preparations for a second front to the west of Cuito Cuanavale in Lubango
where the SADF had been operating unhindered for 8 years. On 25 November the UN
Security Council demanded the SADF's unconditional withdrawal from Angola by 10
December, yet, without threatening any sanctions. Through December the
situation for the besieged Angolans became critical as the SADF tightened the
noose around Cuito Cuanavale. Observers expected it to fall into South African
hands any time soon and UNITA prematurely announced the town had been taken. As
of 21 December the SADF planned the final assault "pick off" the FAPLA units
which were still caught to the east of the Cuito river "before moving in to
occupy the town if the conditions were favourable". On 9 January the SADF
destroyed the important bridge across the Cuito river using a smart bomb. The
Cubans managed to construct a wooden footbridge in its place which they
baptised "Patria o Muerte" (fatherland or death).) They partly buried disabled
tanks so that their turrets could be used as fixed artillery pieces. The SADF
brought up reinforcements and then carried out, beginning 13 January until 23
March, the first of what would prove to be six major ground assaults on the
entrenched FAPLA positions east of the river, none of which delivered tangible
results. A large Cuban and FAPLA column was on the way from Menongue for the
relief of Cuito Cuanavale, but progress in the rainy season was slow due to the
need to clear the UNITA minefields and guard against possible ambushes. They
did not reach Cuito Cuanavale in time to take part in the first engagement.
Although the first attack on 13 January 1988 was successful, spelling near
disaster for a FAPLA brigade, the SADF unable to continue withdrew to its
starting positions. A month later, on 14 February, the SADF withdrew from a
second assault after successfully driving FAPLA-Cuban units off the Chambinga
high ground. Close to a catastrophe, the FAPLA units east of the Cuito River
withdrew to the Tumpo (river) triangle, a smaller area, ideally suited to
defence. In a third assault on 19 February the SADF suffered a first major
setback when it was repelled by FAPLA battalion north of the Dala river; unable
to reach FAPLA's forward positions the SADF had to withdraw. In the following
days the Cubans stepped up their air attacks against South African positions.
On 25 February the FAPLA-Cubans repelled a fourth assault and the SADF had to
return to its positions east of the Tumpo River. The failure of this attack
"proved a turning point of the battle of Cuito Cuanavale, boosting FAPLA's
flagging morale and bringing the South African advance to a standstill." A
fifth SADF-attack was beaten back on 29 February delivering a third consecutive
defeat. After some more preparation the South Africans launched their last and
fourth unsuccessful attack on 23 March. As SADF-Colonel Jan Breytenbach wrote,
the South African assault "was brought to a grinding and definite halt" by the
combined Cuban and Angolan forces. Eventually Cuban troop strength in Angola
increased to about 55,000, with 40,000 deployed in the south. Due to the
international arms embargo since 1977, South Africaâ€™s aging air force was
outclassed by sophisticated Soviet-supplied air defence systems and air-strike
capabilities fielded by the Cubans and Angolans and it was unable to uphold the
air supremacy it had enjoyed for years; its loss in turn proved to be critical
to the outcome of the battle on the ground. The Cuito airstrip was kept in
repair, but since it was under constant observation by the SADF artillery and
air force it could not be safely used by fixed wing aircraft. After the failed
assault on 23 March 1988 under orders from Pretoria the SADF withdrew the bulk
of their forces, initially leaving a 1,500-man "holding force" behind (Combat
Group 20) to continue deception operations and lay mines in order to prevent or
slow any FAPLA offensive operations. For months it continued to shell Cuito
Cuanavale and the airstrip using their long-range G-5 artillery from a distance
of 30 to 40Â km. While the Cubans had purported to be moving south into Namibia
according to comments from Castro they instead moved to cut off elements of the
SADF. The SADF had left much of its powerful G-5 artillery units in place due
to the difficulty in transporting during the rainy season. For whatever
reasonsâ€”possibly not wanting to upset strategic negotiations, willingness to
risk casualties or similar difficulties with mechanized forcesâ€”the Cubans did
not attempt to take the SADF positions and settled for surrounding the small
force. With that manoeuvre, Fidel Castro increased the cost to South Africa of
continuing to fight in Angola and placed Cuba in its most aggressive combat
position of the war, thus fortifying his argument that Cubans were preparing to
leave Angola with their opponents on the defensive. Weapons. The SADF used a
mix of British, French, Israeli, captured Soviet and indigenously developed
weaponry. Their allies, UNITA used a mix of Soviet and South African supplied
weaponry. The United States covertly supplied UNITA guerillas with Stingers for
anti-aircraft defense. The South Africans were hampered by United Nations
Security Council Resolution 418, an international arms embargo that prevented
them from acquiring materiel such as modern aircraft. The Cubans and FAPLA were
armed with Soviet weaponry. Trucks used by FAPLA Engesa-15, Engesa-25, Engesa-
50 (Brazilian) Mercedes (West Germany) Pegaso (Spain) IFAW50 (GDR) GAZ-66, ZIL-
131, URAL-375/URAL-4320 GAZ-51 and GAZ-63 (were used by Cubans outside Cuito)
KAMAZ and ZIL-130 (civil trucks): ZIL-157 (all were used outside Cuito) Jeeps
UAZ-469 UAZ-69 (GAZ-69) (used by Cubans outside Cuito) Niva Land Rover 109 Land
Rover 110 Land Rover Defender Miniubuses RAF-2203 and UAZ-452 Pistols Walther
P38 TT-33 (TT) MP (Makarov) APS (Stechkin) Beretta 92 Aftermath. In the
aftermath of Cuito Cuanavale on the eve of the first round of peace talks in
two years Castro ordered Cuban, FAPLA and SWAPO units under General Cintras
FrÃ­as opened a second front to the west at Calueque (Lubango) with a force of
40,000 Cuban troops and a 30,000 of Angolan forces, and with support from MiG-
23 fighter bombers. The first South African resistance was encountered near
Calueque on 15 March, followed by three months of bloody clashes as the Cubans
slowly progressed towards the Namibian border. On 9 March 1988, the Angolans,
now joined by the Cubans, entered into the first round of US-brokered peace
negotiations. On 3 May 1988 the South Africans returned to the peace
negotiations which they had abandoned two years before. On 26 May, the chief of
the SADF announced that heavily armed Cuban and SWAPO forces had moved south
within of the Namibian border. The remaining SADF forces at Cuito Cuanavale
Combat Group 20 was left in place to construct minefields and carry out
deception operations in order to prevent a FAPLA offensive. A number of
skirmishes occurred while the SADF forces were disengaging, most notably
Operation Hilti/Excite. In response to this 32 Battalion inserted an
intelligence team under the command of Capt. Herman Mulder, who set up a
tactical HQ at Ruacana, supporting two teams doing reconnaissance south-each of
Techipa along the Devangulu Mountains; with the second team operating in the
Handa Rotunda area. After gathering the required intelligence Operation Hilti/
Excite was initiated on 13 June with the deployment of one company from 61
Mechanised Infantry Battalion Group at Dongue, south-west of Xangongo. An
attack was also launched against Ongiva by 32 Battalion. G5 and G2 artillery
pieces were provided to 61 Mechanized Battalion and they engaged the Cuban 50th
Division based at Ongiva. A fierce skirmish took place at Cuamato and 201
Battalion lost one vehicle but held the town on 24 June 1988. Operation
Displace was launched and became the last significant hot engagement of the
entire war at Techipa on 26 June. A running fire fight happened when a platoon
from 32 Battalion was engaged in an action that took place over a distance. On
27 June 61 Mechanised Infantry Battalion engaged a Cuban tank squadron before
they crossed the Cunene River back into Namibia. Cuban MiG-23s bombed Calueque
Dam, causing the last South African loss of life in the conflict when they
killed 10 soldiers from 8 SAI. Two MiG-23s were damaged by ground fire. On 8
June 1988, hoping to send a strong message to the Cubans that they would
respond to any movement into South-West Africa the South African government
called up 140,000 men of the reserves (Citizen Force). This was known as
Operation Desert Fox and it consisted of 81 Armoured Brigade, which positioned
itself on 30 July 1988 just south of Ruacana, tasked with the responsibility of
neutralizing the very aggressive Cuban 50th Brigade if need be. The signing of
the formal peace treaty at Ruacana on 22 August 1988 meant that Operation
Desert Fox could be aborted. By the end of May, Cuba had two divisions in
south-western Angola. By June, they constructed two forward airbases at Cahama
and Xangongo with which Cuban air power could be projected into Namibia. All of
southern Angola was covered by a radar network and SA-8 air defence ending
South African air superiority. In June 1988, the Cubans prepared to advance on
Calueque starting from Xangongo and Tchipa. In case of serious South African
counterattacks, they were prepared to destroy the Ruacana reservoirs and
transformers and attack South African bases in Namibia. The offensive started
from Xangongo on June 23 immediately clashing with the SADF en route to
Cuamato. An SADF screening force encountered the Cuban advance in a firefight
resulting in the withdrawal of the SADF force and the decision of the FAPLA-
Cubans to return to their base. On 26 June the SADF conducted Operation Excite
to test Cuban forces in the area. The SADF sent up decoys to provoke SAM sites
into revealing their positions and shelled Tchipa with long-range artillery
effectively destroying the Cuban's ability to utilize their own artillery. A
series of firefights ensued with SADF tanks launching a spoiling attack on the
initial gathering armor forces then withdrawing fearing being overwhelmed by
Cuban reinforcements. Cuban MiGs carried out the attacks on the SADF positions
around the Calueque dam, north of the Namibian border, also damaging the bridge
and hydroelectric installations. The major force of the Cubans, still on the
way, never saw action and returned to Tchipa. With the withdrawal of the SADF
into Namibia an 27 June the hostilities ceased. The South Africans, impressed
by the suddenness and scale of the Cuban advance and believing that a major
battle "involved serious risks" withdrew. For their part the Cubans were
shocked at the heavy casualties they had suffered and put their troops on alert
to expect a strong South African response. Five days later Pretoria ordered
Combat Group 20 which was still operational east of Cuito Cuanavale to scale
back to avoid any more casualties, effectively withdrawing from all fighting,
and a SADF division was deployed in defence of Namibia's northern border. At
the bargaining table the South Africans agreed to withdraw from Angola by 1
September 1988 and to the implementation of Resolution 435 for Southwest Africa
on 1 November, leading to the independence of Namibia. This agreement was based
on intelligence that indicated the Soviet Union would no longer sustain
surrogate forces in the Third World, and that Cuba was starting to take strain
from the mounting casualties. The Cubans in return would pull troops out of
Angola by 1 July 1991. A peace accord, mediated by Chester Crocker, was finally
signed on 22 December 1988 in New York. Nelson Mandela considered the FAPLA-
Cuban success at Cuito and in Lubango a turning point in the Angolan civil war
as well as in the struggle for Namibian independence. The battle at Cuito,
raging for 6 months, was the biggest battle on African soil since World War
II". Claims of victory in this battle have been made from all sides, depending
on the military, political or moral point of view. According to veteran
reporter Max du Preez, the SADF "fared a lot better than the Cubans expected or
were later prepared to admit." The war cost an estimated half a million lives
and devastated Angola's infrastructure until the conflict finally ended after
Savimbi was shot by government forces in 2002. The Battle of Cuito Cuanavale is
commemorated in several countries in Southern Africa. The 20th anniversary in
2008 was especially celebrated in Namibia.
