Bloody Sunday (1939) Bloody Sunday (; ) was a series of killings that took
place at the beginning of World War II. On September 3, 1939, two days after
the beginning of the German invasion of Poland, highly controversial killings
occurred in and around Bydgoszcz (), a Polish city with a sizable German
minority. The number of casualties and other details of the incident are
disputed among historians. The Nazis exploited the deaths as grounds for a
massacre of Polish inhabitants after the Wehrmacht captured the town.
Background. Bydgoszcz (Bromberg) was part of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth
until 1772, when it was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia during the First
Partition of Poland. As a part of Prussia, the city was affected by the
unification of Germany in 1871 and became part of the German Empire. It would
remain a part of the German Empire until the end of World War I. In February
1920, the Treaty of Versailles awarded the city and the surrounding region to
the Second Polish Republic (the administrative region of Pomeranian
Voivodeship). This resulted in a number of ethnic Germans leaving the region
for Germany. Over the interwar period, the German population decreased even
further. The 1931 Polish Census reported the German population in the city was
117,200; according to the German historian Hugo Rasmus, only about 10,000
Germans remained by 1939. The emergence of the Nazi Party in Germany had an
important impact on the city. Adolf Hitler revitalized the VÃ¶lkisch movement,
making an appeal to the Germans living outside of Germany's post-World War I
borders. It was Hitler's explicit goal to reverse the work of the Treaty of
Versailles and create a Greater German State. By March 1939, these ambitions,
charges of atrocities on both sides of the German-Polish border, distrust, and
rising nationalist sentiment led to the complete deterioration of Polish-German
relations. Hitler's demands for the Polish Corridor and, Polish opposition to
negotiations with him fueled ethnic tensions. For months prior to the 1939
German invasion of Poland, invasion, German newspapers and politicians like
Adolf Hitler had carried out a national and international propaganda campaign
accusing Polish authorities of organizing or tolerating violent ethnic
cleansing of ethnic Germans living in Poland. After armed conflict erupted on
September 1, 1939, statements that persecutions of ethnic Germans had occurred
in Poland, especially in Bydgoszcz, continued to appear in the Nazi press. It
was a part of campaign accusing Polish authorities of organising or tolerating
violent ethnic cleansing of Germans living in Poland. Bloody Sunday. According
to the most widely accepted version, the incident stemmed from groups of German
saboteurs attacking Polish troops behind the front lines. This version holds
that, as a contingent of the Polish Army was withdrawing through Bydgoszcz
(Army Pomorze's 9th, 15th, and 27th Infantry Division) it was attacked by
German irregulars from within the city. According to a British witness, a
retreating Polish artillery unit was shot at by Germans from within a house;
the Poles returned fire and were subsequently shot at from a Jesuit church. In
the ensuing fight both sides suffered some casualties; captured German
nonuniformed armed insurgents were executed on the spot and some mob lynching
was also reported. A Polish investigation concluded in 2004 that Polish troops
had been shot at by members of the German minority and German military
intelligence (Abwehr) agents; around 40â€“50 Poles and between 100 to 300
Germans were killed. The Wehrmacht War Crimes Bureau investigation in
1939â€“1940 concluded that the events were a result of panic and confusion
among the Polish troops. The Wehrmacht investigation included the interrogation
of captive Polish soldiers, ethnic Germans from Bydgoszcz and surrounding
villages, and Polish civilians. The bodies of the victims were exhumed and the
cause of death and the possible involvement of military rifles was assessed.
According to this investigation, a squad of Polish soldiers was sent in to
clarify the situation after hearing shots being fired within the city.
Uniformed Polish soldiers, assisted by the local Polish population, were led to
houses from which shots were allegedly heard. In households where weapons were
found, people were subject to summary executions. German reprisals and further
atrocities. The killings were followed by German reprisals and oppression,
including a "de-Polonisation" campaign. In an act of retaliation for the
killings on Bloody Sunday, a number of Polish civilians were executed by German
military units of the Einsatzgruppen, Waffen SS, and Wehrmacht. According to
German historian Christian Raitz von Frentz, 876 Poles were tried by German
tribunal for involvement in the events of Bloody Sunday before the end of 1939.
87 men and 13 women were sentenced without the right to appeal. Polish
historian CzesÅ‚aw Madajczyk notes 120 executions in relation to Bloody Sunday,
and the execution of 20 hostages after a German soldier was allegedly attacked
by a Polish sniper. According to a German version, Polish snipers attacked
German troops in Bydgoszcz for several days (Polish sources and witnesses do
not confirm this). The German governor, General Walter Braemer, (the commander
of the rear army area), ordered the execution of 80 Polish hostages over the
next few days. By September 8, between 200 to 400 Polish civilians had been
killed. According to Richard Rhodes, a number of Boy Scouts were set up in the
marketplace against a wall and shot; a devoted priest who rushed to administer
the last sacrament was shot too, receiving five wounds. Murders continued all
week; 34 of the leading tradespeople and merchants of the town were shot, as
well as many other leading citizens. Many Poles, particularly members of the
intelligentsia and the Jews, were singled out for deportation, or killed
outright. More than 20,000 Polish citizens of Bydgoszcz (14% of the population)
were either shot or died in concentration camps during the occupation. The
debate in scholarship. The exact number of victims of Bloody Sunday is
disputed. Peter Aurich (a pseudonym of the German journalist Peter Nasarski )
put the number of German civilian deaths in Bydgoszcz at 366, while Hugo Rasmus
estimates it as at least 415. Two Polish historians, WÅ‚odzimierz JastrzÄ™bski
and CzesÅ‚aw Madajczyk, estimate ethnic German deaths at 103 (JastrzÄ™bski),
and about 300 (150 on September 3, the rest in the days after). The Polish
historians point out that since these losses occurred during actual combat,
most of the civilian losses should be attributed to accidents common in urban
combat conditions; they argue that civilian losses might have occurred when the
town was attacked by the German airforce (Luftwaffe). Strafing civilians in the
town by the Luftwaffe is confirmed by German witnesses. Nazi propaganda
reinforced Polish perceptions of the German minority as hostile, and during the
invasion reported that the German minority was aiding the forces. This
contributed Polish misconceptions, as the Poles were expecting the German
minority to be actively hostile. An even bigger debate in the scholarship
concerns the question whetherâ€”as the Polish historiography suggestsâ€”there
were indeed any members of a German fifth column in the city who opened fire on
the Polish troops (and if so, whether they were composed of members of the
Bydgoszcz German minority or not), or whetherâ€”as critics among the German
historiography argueâ€”Polish troops (or panicking civilians) overreacted in
the confusion and targeted innocent German civilians. The account of Peter
Nasarski alias Aurich has been called by Harry Gordon one of the most thorough
German accounts; his work is however generally rejected in Poland, perhaps
because he indiscriminately used witness statements collected by Nazi
officials. According to Nasarski, after police forces retreated from Bydgoszcz,
agitated Polish civilians accused many Germans of assaulting Polish soldiers
and executed them and any Poles who stood up in their defence. Rasmus
attributes the situation to confusion and the disorganised state of the Polish
forces in the city. von Frentz wrote that "In Bydgoszcz, the event was probably
caused by confusion among the rapidly retreating soldiers, a general breakdown
in public order and panic among the Polish majority after two German air raids
and the discovery of a small reconnaissance group of the German Army on the
previous day." He quotes Nazi German reports about the civilian victims and
atrocities, later corroborated by a Red Cross commission that the Nazis invited
to the scene. von Frentz also noted that eyewitness accounts of atrocities
committed against the German population are as unreliable as Polish accounts of
the fifth columnists. No ethnic Germans are known to have spoken of
participation in that event. In the post-war collaboration trials, no ethnic
German was charged in relation to Bloody Sunday. Another counterargument to the
fifth column theory is that Polish troops were being targeted by advance units
of the German regular army (Heer), or that the shots were fired by Polish
soldiers in the confusion of the mass withdrawal. von Frentz claims that Polish
troops and civilians massacred German civilians due to confusion. Polish
historians feel the German historiography is based on Nazi German sources,
ignoring numerous Polish sources. Polish historians, such as Madajczyk,
JastrzÄ™bski, Karol Marian Pospieszalski, Ryszard Wojan, and others claim that
the killings were triggered when the ethnic Germans, dressed up as civilians,
opened fire on the Polish troops. The Poles retaliated, killing many and
executing prisoners afterwards. Polish historians like Pospieszalski and Janusz
Kutta point to a Nazi top secret false flag Operation Himmler (which took place
on August 31Â â€“ September 1) and was designed to create an illusion of Polish
aggression against Germany. Thus there is argument that actions like the
Gleiwitz incident and events in Bydgoszcz were all part of a larger Nazi plan
to discredit the Poles. Polish historians such as Pospieszalski and Wojan argue
that the German fifth column agents (or their higher-ups) might have been
deliberately aiming to produce a situation likely to result in German civilian
casualties as a way to fuel Nazi propaganda. This argument has been criticized:
Harry Gordon questions whether the Germans were willing to sacrifice their
citizens for propaganda gains. In 2003, the director of the Institute of
History of the Academy of Bydgoszcz Wlodzimierz JastrzÄ™bski reversed his
earlier opinion on the subject. He said that there was no German diversion.
Rather, Poles "lost their nerve" and vented their anger on helpless German
civilians. In 2004, historian Tomasz ChinciÅ„ski in a publication of Institute
of National Remembrance (IPN) summarized recent research related to Bloody
Sunday, confirming that the majority of historians agree that an "insurrection"
by agents who had arrived from the Third Reich as well as some German
inhabitants of Bydgoszcz took place. He has published a work detailing new
evidence of German diversionary activity in September 1939 in Poland. There are
numerous Polish eyewitness accounts of action of a German fifth column which
included members of local minority; Pospieszalski cited multiple witnesses for
at least 46 cases of German civilians opening fire on Polish troops. There are
numerous Polish Army reports and German documents confirming the saboteur
actions of armed German Poles in other cities. According to German historians,
any members of the fifth column, if present in the city, were infiltrators from
Germany, not natives of Bydgoszcz. Eyewitness accounts have been criticised by
Richard Blanke. In 2004, ChinciÅ„ski discussed previously unpublished reports
of Polish Army Pomorze, which reported "a large scale diversion" in Bydgoszcz
on September 3 and numerous smaller incidents in surrounding area around that
time. A number of Polish and German historians discussed the problem September
4, 2006, at the German Historical Institute in Warsaw. ChinciÅ„ski discussed
newly discovered documents of the Abwehr that show that there were indeed plans
for fifth column and diversion activities in Bydgoszcz; he discussed the bias
of the Polish communist era historiography, which minimized cases of Polish mob
lynching of ethnic Germans, which did occur in Bydgoszcz. German historian
Hans-Erich Volkmann noted problems with German historiography, outlining some
of the unreliability inherent in early post-war studies, which were still
significantly affected by the Nazi era, and that the Bydgoszcz events were and
still are used for political purposes. Overall, German and Polish historians
continue to argue with one another over the validity of their claims, but a
consensus version is emerging.
