Falkland Islands The Falkland Islands ( or ; ) are an archipelago in the South
Atlantic Ocean, located more than east of the coast of mainland South America.
The archipelago which has an area of 4,700 square miles (12,173Â km2) comprises
East Falkland, West Falkland, and 776 smaller islands. Stanley, the capital and
only city, is on East Falkland. The islands, a British Overseas Territory,
enjoy a large degree of internal self-government with the United Kingdom
guaranteeing good government and taking responsibility for their defence and
foreign affairs. Controversy exists over the Falklands' original discovery and
subsequent colonisation by Europeans. At various times there have been French,
British, Spanish, and Argentine settlements. Britain re-established its rule in
1833, though the islands continue to be claimed by Argentina. In 1982,
following Argentina's invasion of the islands, the two-month-long undeclared
Falklands War between both countries resulted in the surrender of all Argentine
forces and the return of the islands to British administration. The population,
estimated at 3,140, primarily consists of native Falkland Islanders, the
majority being of British descent. Other ethnicities include French,
Gibraltarian, and Scandinavian. Immigration from the United Kingdom, Saint
Helena, and Chile has reversed a former population decline. The predominant and
official language is English. Under the British Nationality Act of 1983,
Falkland Islanders are legally British citizens. The islands lie on the
boundary of the Subarctic maritime climate and Temperate maritime climate zones
with both major islands having mountain ranges reaching to . The islands are
home to large bird populations, although many no longer breed on the main
islands due to introduced species. Major economic activities include fishing,
tourism, sheep farming with an emphasis on high-quality wool exports, and oil
exploration. Oil exploration, licensed by the Falkland Islands Government,
remains controversial as a result of maritime disputes with Argentina.
Etymology. The Falkland Islands took their English name from "Falkland Sound",
the channel between the two main islands, which was in turn named after Anthony
Cary, 5th Viscount of Falkland, by Captain John Strong, who landed on the
islands in 1690. The Spanish name, "las (Islas) Malvinas", is derived from the
French name, "ÃŽles Malouines", named by Louis Antoine de Bougainville in 1764
after the first known settlers, mariners and fishermen from the Breton port of
Saint-Malo in France. The ISO designation is "Falkland Islands (Malvinas)" and
its ISO country code is "FK". As a result of the sovereignty dispute, the use
of many Spanish names is considered offensive in the Falkland Islands,
particularly those associated with the 1982 invasion of the Falkland Islands.
General Sir Jeremy Moore would not allow the use of "Islas Malvinas" in the
surrender document, dismissing it as a propaganda term. History. Prior to the
Falklands War. Controversy exists as to who first discovered the Falkland
Islands, with competing Portuguese, Spanish, and British claims in the 16th
century. While Amerindians from Patagonia could have visited the Falklands, the
islands were uninhabited when discovered by Europeans. The first reliable
sighting is usually attributed to the Dutch explorer Sebald de Weert in 1600,
who named the archipelago the Sebald Islands, a name they bore on Dutch maps
into the 19th century. In 1690, Captain John Strong of the "Welfare" en route
to Puerto Deseado was driven off course and reached the Falkland Islands
instead, landing at Bold Cove. Sailing between the two principal islands, he
called the passage "Falkland Channel" (now Falkland Sound), after Anthony Cary,
5th Viscount of Falkland, who as Commissioner of the Admiralty had financed the
expedition. The island group takes its English name from this body of water. In
1764, French navigator and military commander Louis Antoine de Bougainville
founded the first settlement on Berkeley Sound, in present-day Port Louis, East
Falkland. In 1765, British captain John Byron explored and claimed Saunders
Island on West Falkland, where he named the harbour Port Egmont and a
settlement was constructed in 1766. Unaware of the French presence, Byron
claimed the island group for King George III. Spain acquired the French colony
in 1767, and placed it under a governor subordinate to the Buenos Aires
colonial administration. In 1770, Spain attacked Port Egmont and expelled the
British presence, bringing the two countries to the brink of war. War was
avoided by a peace treaty and the British return to Port Egmont. In 1774,
economic pressures leading up to the American Revolutionary War forced Great
Britain to withdraw from many overseas settlements. Upon withdrawal, the
British left behind a plaque asserting Britain's continued claim. Spain
maintained its governor until 1806 who, on his departure, left behind a plaque
asserting Spanish claims. The remaining settlers were withdrawn in 1811. In
1820, storm damage forced the privateer "HeroÃ­na" to take shelter in the
islands. Her captain David Jewett raised the flag of the United Provinces of
the River Plate and read a proclamation claiming the islands. This became
public knowledge in Buenos Aires nearly a year later after the proclamation was
published in the "Salem Gazette". After several failures, Luis Vernet
established a settlement in 1828 with authorisation from the Republic of Buenos
Aires and from Great Britain. In 1829, after asking for help from Buenos Aires,
he was instead proclaimed Military and Civil Commander of the islands.
Additionally, Vernet asked the British to protect his settlement if they
returned. A dispute over fishing and hunting rights resulted in a raid by the
US warship USS "Lexington" in 1831. The log of the "Lexington" reports only the
destruction of arms and a powder store, but Vernet made a claim for
compensation from the US Government stating that the settlement was destroyed.
(Compensation was rejected by the US Government of President Cleveland in
1885.) The islands were declared free from all government, the seven senior
members of the settlement were arrested for piracy and taken to Montevideo,
where they were released without charge on the orders of Commodore Rogers. In
November 1832, Argentina sent Commander Mestivier as an interim commander to
found a penal settlement, but he was killed in a mutiny after four days. The
following January, British forces returned and requested the Argentine garrison
leave. Don Pinedo, captain of the ARA "Sarandi" and senior officer present,
protested but ultimately complied. Vernet's settlement continued, with the
Irishman William Dickson tasked with raising the British flag for passing
ships. Vernet's deputy, Matthew Brisbane, returned and was encouraged by the
British to continue the enterprise. The settlement continued until August 1833,
when the leaders were killed in the so-called Gaucho murders. Subsequently,
from 1834 the islands were governed as a British naval station until 1840 when
the British Government decided to establish a permanent colony. A new harbour
was built in Stanley, and the islands became a strategic point for navigation
around Cape Horn. A World War I naval battle, the Battle of the Falkland
Islands, took place in December 1914, with a British victory over the smaller
Imperial German Asiatic Fleet. During World War II, Stanley served as a Royal
Navy station and serviced ships which took part in the 1939 Battle of the River
Plate. Sovereignty over the islands became an issue in the second half of the
20th century, when Argentina saw the creation of the UN as an opportunity to
pursue its claim. Talks between British and Argentine foreign missions took
place in the 1960s but failed to come to any meaningful conclusion. A major
sticking point in all the negotiations was that the inhabitants preferred that
the islands remain British territory. A result of these talks was the
establishment of the islands' first air link. In 1971, the Argentine state
airline LADE began a service between Comodoro Rivadavia and Stanley. A
temporary strip was followed by the construction of a permanent airfield and
flights between Stanley and Comodoro Rivadavia continued until 1982. Further
agreements gave YPF, the Argentine national oil and gas company, a monopoly
over the supply of the islands' energy needs. Falklands War and its aftermath.
On 2 April 1982, Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands and other British
territories in the South Atlantic. The military junta which had ruled Argentina
since 1976 sought to maintain power by diverting public attention from the
nation's poor economic performance and the growing internal opposition and
exploiting the long-standing feelings of the Argentines towards the islands.
Several British writers hold that the United Kingdom's reduction in military
capacity in the South Atlantic also encouraged the invasion. The United Nations
Security Council issued Resolution 502, calling on Argentina to withdraw forces
from the islands and for both parties to seek a diplomatic solution.
International reaction ranged from support for Argentina in Latin American
countries (except Chile and Colombia), to opposition in the Commonwealth and
Western Europe (apart from Spain). A divided United States administration,
initially publicly neutral, eventually came out in support of the United
Kingdom. The British sent an expeditionary force to retake the islands, leading
to the Falklands War. After short but fierce naval and air battles, the British
landed at San Carlos Water on 21 May, and a land campaign followed leading to
the British taking the high ground surrounding Stanley on 11 June. The
Argentine forces surrendered on 14 June 1982. The war resulted in the deaths of
255 British and 649 Argentine soldiers, sailors and airmen, as well as 3
civilian Falklanders. After the war, the British increased their military
presence on the islands, constructing RAF Mount Pleasant and increasing the
military garrison. Although the United Kingdom and Argentina resumed diplomatic
relations in 1990, no further negotiations on sovereignty have taken place.
Between 18,000 and 25,000 Argentine land mines remain from the 1982 war
dispersed in a number of minefields around Stanley, Port Howard, Fox Bay and
Goose Green. Information is available from the Explosive Ordnance Disposal
Operation Centre in Stanley. In 2009 mine clearance began at Surf Bay, and
further clearances took place at Sapper Hill, Goose Green and Fox Bay. Further
clearance work was due to begin in 2011. Sovereignty dispute. Although the
United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization includes the Falkland
Islands on the United Nations list of Non-Self-Governing Territories, it has
been asserted that the Falkland Islands is one of 16 territories which have too
small a population "to survive as viable, fully independent state." Both the
United Kingdom and the Argentine governments claim responsibility for the
islands. The United Kingdom bases its claim on continuous administration of the
islands since 1833 (apart from the Argentine military occupation in 1982) and
the islandersâ€™ "right to self determination, including their right to remain
British if that is their wish". Argentina claims that it acquired the islands
from Spain when Argentina became independent in 1816 and that the United
Kingdom exceeded their authority by allegedly expelling the Argentine settlers
in 1833. The islanders reject the Argentine sovereignty claim. Before the
Falklands War. Shortly after the formation of the United Nations in 1945,
Argentina asserted its right to sovereignty over the Falkland Islands and its
dependencies. In 1947, the United Kingdom offered to submit the case over the
Falkland Islands Dependencies to the International Court of Justice at The
Hague, but Argentina refused the offer. A unilateral application by the United
Kingdom in 1955 to the Court in respect of Argentine encroachment ended in
deadlock when Argentina announced that it would not respect the decision of the
court. In the late 1960s, as part of the United Kingdom's decolonisation
policy, secret discussions were held by the British and Argentine governments
to identify a means by which the United Kingdom could cede the islands to
Argentina while protecting the rights and way of life of the islanders. Details
of the talks were leaked and the islanders protested against the talks having
taken place. Subsequently however, economic and transport links between
Argentina and the islands were established, but the political situation
remained unchanged. In April 1982 Argentine military forces invaded the
islands, leading to the Falklands War. After the Falklands War. The dispute
over control of the islands has continued since the Falklands War, although
diplomatic relations between Argentina and the UK were resumed in 1990. In 1994
Argentina added its claim to the islands to the Argentine constitution, stating
that this claim must be pursued in a manner "respectful of the way of life of
their inhabitants and according to the principles of international law". Since
the war, successive Argentine governments have stated their intention to pursue
their claim to the islands by peaceful means. Kirchner, campaigning for
president in 2003, regarded the islands as a top priority, taking actions such
as banning flights to the Falklands from Argentine airspace. In June 2003 the
issue was brought before a United Nations committee, and attempts have been
made to open talks with the United Kingdom to resolve the issue of the islands.
In 1998, in retaliation for the arrest in London of the former Chilean
president Augusto Pinochet, the Chilean government banned flights between Punta
Arenas and Stanley, thus isolating the islands from the rest of the world.
Uruguay and Brazil refused to authorise direct flights between their
territories and Stanley. This forced the islands' government to enter
negotiations with the Argentine government and led to Argentina authorising
direct flights between its territory and Stanley, on condition that Argentine
citizens be allowed on the islands. In 2007, 25 years after the war, Argentina
reasserted its claim over the Falkland Islands, asking for the UK to resume
talks on sovereignty. In March 2009, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown stated
in a meeting with Argentine President Cristina FernÃ¡ndez that there would be
no talks over the future sovereignty of the Falkland Islands. As far as the
governments of the UK and of the Falkland Islands are concerned, there is no
issue to resolve. The Falkland Islanders consider themselves as almost entirely
British and maintain their allegiance to the United Kingdom. In October 2007 a
British spokeswoman confirmed that Britain intended to submit a claim to the UN
to extend seabed territory around the Falklands and South Georgia, in advance
of the expiry of the deadline for territorial claims following Britain's
ratification of the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention. This claim would enable
Britain to control activities such as fishing within the zone, in areas not
conflicting with the Antarctic Treaty. Argentina has indicated it will
challenge any British claim to Antarctic territory and the area around the
Falkland Islands and South Georgia. Argentina made a similar claim in 2009, and
the United Kingdom quickly protested against these claims. In 2009, when
delegates from the Falkland Islands were invited to the World Summit on Fishing
Sustainability, the Argentine delegation protested and walked out of the
conference. In February 2010, the Argentine government announced that ships
traversing Argentine territorial waters en route to the Falklands, South
Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands would require a permit, as part of a
dispute over British oil exploration near the Falklands. The British and
Falkland governments stated that Falklands-controlled waters were unaffected.
On 12 June 2012, the Falkland Islands government announced it would hold a
referendum on the political status of the islands in the first half of 2013.
Politics and government. The islands are a British Overseas Territory which,
under the 2009 Constitution, enjoys a large degree of internal self-government,
with the United Kingdom guaranteeing good government and taking responsibility
for defence and foreign affairs. Executive authority is vested in the Queen and
is exercised by the Governor on her behalf. The Governor is also responsible
for the administration of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, as
these islands have no native inhabitants. The governor acts on the advice of
the Executive Council, composed of himself as chairman, the Chief Executive,
Director of Finance and three elected Legislative Assembly Members. The current
Governor Nigel Haywood took office in October 2010. The Legislative Assembly
consists of the Chief Executive, Director of Finance and the eight members
elected for four-year terms by universal suffrage, of whom five are from
Stanley and three from Camp. There are no political parties, and no formal
opposition. It is presided over by the Speaker, currently Keith Biles. The last
election, the first under the 2009 constitution, took place on Thursday 5
November 2009. Justice is administered by a resident senior magistrate and a
non-resident Chief Justice of the islands who visits the islands at least once
a year. The senior magistrate handles petty criminal cases, civil, commercial,
admiralty and family cases and is also the island's coroner. The Chief Justice
handles serious criminal cases and hears appeals. The constitution binds the
judiciary to comply with decisions of the European Court of Human Rights when
hearing cases related to human rights. Freedom of expression in the Falkland
Islands is guaranteed by the constitution, with the United Kingdom's superior
courts explicitly empowered to hear appeals. Freedom of the press is comparable
to that of the United Kingdom; which, in turn, in the view of many
commentators, is significantly better than that of any other South American
country. Military. A British military garrison is stationed on the Falkland
Islands, and the islands also have a company-sized light infantry unit (FIDF)
that is completely funded by the Falklands government (Â£400,000 in 2009). The
unit is trained under a secondment arrangement with the MOD â€“ the FIDF
employed a Royal Marine WO2 as a permanent staff instructor and a major as
commanding officer; the rest of the force are part-timers. It is equipped with
quad bikes, inflatable boats and Land Rovers and is armed with heavy
machineguns, grenade launchers and sniper rifles. In addition to defence
duties, the force provides a mountain rescue service and has been trained by
the Royal Navy in mounting armed deterrence against illegal fishing activity.
Education. There are approximately 380 children between the ages of 5 and 16 on
the islands (excluding families of military personnel). Their education, which
follows the English system, is free and compulsory. Primary education is
available at Stanley where there are boarding facilities, at RAF Mount Pleasant
for children of service personnel and at a number of rural settlements where
remote learning is supported by the Stanley based Camp Education Unit. The
Islands' only secondary school is in Stanley and offers boarding facilities and
12 subjects to GCSE level. After 16, suitably qualified students may study at
two colleges in England for their A-levels or for vocational qualifications.
The government pays for older students to attend higher education, usually in
the UK. Medical care. The Falkland Islands Government Health and Social
Services Department provides medical and dental care for the islands. The King
Edward VII Memorial Hospital (KEMH), completed in 1987, is Stanley's only
hospital. It is run jointly by the Falkland Islands Government and the UK
Ministry of Defence. Specialist medical care is provided by visiting
ophthalmologists, gynaecologists, ENT surgeons, orthopaedic surgeons, oral
surgeons and psychiatrists from the United Kingdom. Patients needing emergency
treatment are air-lifted to the United Kingdom or to Santiago (Chile).
Geography. The Falkland Islands are located in the South Atlantic Ocean on a
projection of the Patagonian continental shelf about from the Patagonia
coastline and slightly to the north of the southerly tip of Cape Horn and of
its undersea extension, the Scotia Arc. In ancient geological time this shelf
was part of Gondwana, which around 400 million years ago broke from what is now
Africa and drifted westwards relative to Africa. The Falklands, which have a
total land area of 4,700 square miles (12,173Â km2) and a coastline estimated
at 800Â miles (1288Â km), comprise two main islands, West Falkland and East
Falkland and about 776 small islands. The islands are heavily indented by
sounds and fjords and have many natural harbours. The two main islands are
separated by the Falkland Sound. East Falkland, which contains the capital
Stanley and the British military base at Mount Pleasant, is the more populous
of the two main islands. Both West Falkland and the northern part of East
Falkland have mountain ranges that are underlaid with Palaeozoic rock, which,
as a result of secondary forces associated with continental drift are at 120Â°
to each other. The highest point of the islands is Mount Usborne, on East
Falkland, while Mount Adam on West Falkland is only lower. The southern part of
East Falkland, the Lafonia Peninsula, which is connected to the rest of the
island by a 4Â km narrow isthmus, is dissimilar to the rest of the island. Most
of Lafonia is a flat plain underlain by younger Mesozoic rock, but in the north
west is Permian rock which is similar to that of parts of Ecca Pass in South
Africa. Climate. The Falkland Islands lie on the boundary of the Subarctic
maritime climate and Temperate maritime climate zones (KÃ¶ppen "Cfc" and "Cfc")
that is very much influenced by the proximity of the Andes, the cool South
Atlantic ocean with its northerly Patagonian current and the Antarctic
Peninsula land mass some to the south giving the islands a narrow annual
temperature range. The January average maximum temperature is about 13Â°C
(55Â°F), and the July maximum average temperature is about 4Â°C (39Â°F). The
average rainfall in Stanley is , East Falkland as a whole and West Falkland as
a whole with the flat areas, and in particular Lafonia being much drier than
the mountainous areas. Humidity and winds are however constantly high. Snow and
sleet are frequent in winter, although snowfall is rarely deep. Gales are very
frequent, particularly in winter. Weather conditions are known to be extremely
changeable, with it not being unusual to face all four seasons in one
afternoon. The reason for this is the many wind directions resulting in many
air masses mixing at the Drake Passage, which is often an area of low
pressures. Whilst being located as far south as the U.K is north, the absence
of a warming current like the Gulf Stream means temperatures are considerably
colder than comparable areas in North West Europe. Weather forecasts are given
by a local branch of the UK's Met Office. Biodiversity. Biogeographically, the
Falkland Islands are classified as part of the Antarctic ecozone and Antarctic
Floristic Kingdom. Strong connections exist with the flora and fauna of
Patagonia in South America. The only terrestrial mammal upon the arrival of
Europeans was the warrah, a kind of fox found on both major islands. It became
extinct in the mid 19th century. 14 species of marine mammals frequent the
surrounding waters. The elephant seal, the fur seal, and the sea lions all
breed on the islands, and the largest elephant seal breeding site has over 500
animals in it. 227 bird species have been seen on the islands, over 60 of which
are known to breed on the islands. There are two endemic species of bird, and
14 endemic subspecies. There are five penguin species breeding on the islands,
and over 60% of the global black-browed albatross population also breed in the
area. There are no native reptiles or amphibians on the islands. Over 200
species of insects have been recorded, along with 43 spider species and 12 worm
species. Only 13 terrestrial invertebrates are recognised as endemic, although
information on many species is lacking and it is suspected up to two thirds of
species found are actually endemic. Due to the island environment, many insect
species have developed reduced or absent wings. There are around 129 freshwater
invertebrates, the majority being rotifer; however, the identification of some
species remains in dispute. Six species of fish are found in freshwater areas,
including zebra trout and falklands minnows. Different species of krill are
found in Falkland waters, with Lobster Krill inhabiting the warmer waters in
the north. There are no native tree species on the archipelago, although two
species of bushes, fachine and native box are found. Other vegetation consists
of grasses and ferns. Around 363 species of vascular plants, 21 species of
ferns and clubmosses and 278 species of flowering plants have been recorded on
the islands. Of the vascular plants, 171 are believed to be native and 13 to be
endemic. Some bogs and fens exist and support some freshwater plant species,
but these are not common on the islands. Tussac grass, which averages in height
but can reach up to , is found within 300Â m (1,000Â ft) of the coast where it
forms bands around larger islands. The dense canopies formed create an
insulated micro-climate suitable for many birds and invertebrates. The Pale
Maiden ("Sisyrinchium jubatum") is the islands' national flower. There is
little long-term data on habitat changes, so the extent of human impact is
unclear. Vegetation such as tussac grass, fachine, and native box have been
heavily impacted by introduced grazing animals. Many breeding birds similarly
only live on offshore islands, where introduced animals such as cats and rats
are not found. Virtually the entire area of the islands is used as pasture for
sheep. There is also an introduced reindeer population, which was brought to
the islands in 2001 for commercial purposes. Rats and Grey foxes have been
introduced and are having a detrimental impact on birds that nest on the
shores, as are feral cats. 22 introduced plant species are thought to provide a
significant threat to local flora. Economy. Except for defence, the islands are
self sufficient with annual exports of $125Â million and imports of
$90Â million (2004 estimate). The Falkland Islands use the Falkland pound,
which circulates interchangeably with the pound sterling and which is backed by
the pound sterling on a one-for-one basis. Falkland coins are produced in the
United Kingdom; coins are identical in size to the United Kingdom currency but
with local designs on the reverse. The Falkland Islands also issue their own
stamps. Both the coins and stamps are a source of revenue from overseas
collectors. Farmland accounts for , more than 90% of the Falklands land area.
Since 1984, efforts to diversify the economy have made fishing the largest part
of the economy and brought increasing income from tourism. Sheep farming was
formerly the main source of income for the islands and still plays an important
part with high quality wool exports going to the UK. According to the Falklands
Government Statistics there are over 500,000 sheep on the islands with roughly
60% on East Falkland and 40% on West Falkland. The government has operated a
fishing zone policy since 1986 with the sale of fishing licences to foreign
countries. These licences have recently raised only Â£12 to 15Â million a year
in revenue, as opposed to Â£20m to Â£25m annually during the 1990s. Locally
registered fishing boats are also in operation. More than 75% of the annual
catch of 200,000 tonnes (220,000 short tons) is squid. Tourism has grown
rapidly. The islands have become a regular port of call for the growing market
of cruise ships with more than 36,000 visitors in 2004. A 1995 agreement
between the UK and Argentina had set the terms for exploitation of offshore
resources including oil reserves as geological surveys had shown there might be
up to 60Â billion barrels (9.5Â billion cubic metres) of oil under the seabed
surrounding the islands. However, in 2007 Argentina unilaterally withdrew from
the agreement; Falklands Oil and Gas Limited then signed an agreement with BHP
Billiton to investigate the potential exploitation of oil reserves. Due to the
difficult climatic conditions of the southern seas exploitation will be
difficult, though economically viable; the continuing sovereignty dispute with
Argentina is also hampering progress. In February 2010 exploratory drilling for
oil was begun by Desire Petroleum, but the results from the first test well
were disappointing. Two months later, on 6 May 2010, Rockhopper Exploration
announced that "it may have struck oil". Subsequent tests showed it to be a
commercially viable find; an appraisal project was launched and on 14 September
2011 Rockhopper Exploration announced that plans were under way for oil
production to commence in 2016, through the use of floating production storage
and offloading (FPSO) technology. Demographics. The population of the Falkland
Islands is primarily of British descent (about 70 percent of the population),
mainly as a result of Scottish and Welsh immigration to the islands. In the
2006 census, some Islanders identified themselves as of French, Gibraltarian,
and Scandinavian descent. Other minorities include those from Chile and Saint
Helena, many of whom have become assimilated. Among the few Argentines
currently residing in the islands is Maria Strange, wife of the author and
historian Ian Strange. Residents of the Falklands are often called "Kelpers" or
"Islanders". The legal term for having the right of residence is "belonging to
the islands". From 1 January 1983, as provided in the British Nationality
(Falkland Islands) Act 1983, the islanders have been full British citizens. A
population decline leading up to the Falklands War has reversed, with the
population bolstered by immigration from the British island of Saint Helena,
and Chile though figures for immigration are skewed by including children born
to Falkland Islander women who for medical reasons travelled abroad for their
confinement as being "born abroad". Historical census figures show that the
population rose from an estimate of 287 in 1851 to 2,272 in 1911. The
population was 2,094 in 1921 and 2,392 in 1931, but it then declined to 1,813
in 1980. However, the population recorded in the 2001 census was higher than at
any previous point in history. The population later rose to 2,955 (2006
census). The 2006 census recorded 2,115 people in Stanley and 477 in Mount
Pleasant, 194 in the rest of East Falkland, 127 in West Falkland and 42 people
in all the other islands. These figures exclude all military personnel and
their families, but include 477 people who were present in the Falkland Islands
in connection with the military garrison. The age distribution of the islands
residents is skewed towards people of working age â€“ 65% as opposed to 21%
aged below 20 and 14% aged above 60. Males outnumber females by 53% to 47% with
the deviation being most prominent in the age group. In the 2006 census, 67.2%
of the islanders identified themselves as being Christians, 31.5% either
declined to answer or had no religious affiliation and the remaining 1.3% (39
individuals) identified themselves as adherents of other faiths. The islands
have three churches, one for each of the Church of England, Roman Catholic and
United Free Church communities. Infrastructure. Media. The islands have two
weekly newspapers â€“ "The Penguin News", published by Mercopress and the
"Teaberry Express" published by Falkland Islands News Network. Falkland Islands
technical standards for radio and television are identical to those in the
United Kingdom or, in the case of Medium Wave broadcasts, the Americas. There
are approximately 1000 television sets and 1000 radio receivers on the islands.
Two terrestrial television channels are broadcast by the British Forces
Broadcasting Service (BFBS) while KTV Ltd. relay a number of satellite services
such as BBC, CNN via cable to subscribers in Stanley. Radio broadcasting is
supported by seven FM radio stations and one AM radio station. The first
broadcasting service, the Falkland Islands Broadcasting Service, established in
1929 used landlines connected to a speaker in people's homes. This was upgraded
to wireless in 1942 and a 5Â kW medium wave transmitter installed in 1954. VHF
was introduced in 1999. In 2005 the service was privatised and renamed Falkland
Islands Radio Service (FIRS). Telephone. The first telephones in the Falklands
were installed by the Falkland Island Company in 1880, with lines to all
settlements in Camp being installed by 1907. In 1911, Marconi built a telegraph
office that permitted telegrams to be sent to Montevideo. In 1950, the fixed
line telephone service to Camp was replaced by a radio service; the 2006 census
showed that of the 307 2-metre radio receivers in the islands, 129 were located
in Camp. In 1989, Cable and Wireless won the contract to provide the Island's
national and international telephone services. In 2006, a GSM 900 mobile
network was installed, In 2006, broadband was successfully implemented in
Stanley and Mount Pleasant Complex, and was rolled out across the islands in
2008/09. The International Telecommunication Union figures for 2011 identified
the Falkland Islands as having the highest proportion of internet users in the
world â€“ 96.38%. Transport. In 1982, the Falkland Islands had no roads outside
Stanley, only tracks. By 2007, the Falkland Islands had a road network of
Â miles (786Â km) which in 2012 had been extended to Â miles (862Â km) linking
to all occupied mainland settlements. Speed limits are 25Â mph (40Â km/h) in
built-up areas and 40Â mph (64Â km/h) elsewhere. , the Falkland Islands had 67
motor vehicles per 100 people, with 4x4 vehicles accounting for 66% of the
total. The Falkland Islands have two airports with paved runways â€“ the main
international airport RAF Mount Pleasant, west of Stanley. opened in 1986 and
the smaller Port Stanley Airport on the outskirts of Stanley, opened in 1979
following the 1971 Anglo-Argentine agreement regarding an air link between the
countries. Mount Pleasant is used for military purposes and for heavy aircraft
that require long runways, whereas Stanley is used for internal flights and
smaller aircraft. The Royal Air Force operates flights from RAF Mount Pleasant
to RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire, England, with a refuelling stop at RAF
Ascension Island. RAF flights are on TriStars although charter aircraft are
often used if the TriStars are required for operational flights. Local military
air support â€“ moving of personnel, equipment and supplies around the islands
is carried out under contract by British International (BRINTEL) who operate
two Sikorsky S61N helicopters. The principal civilian air operator at Mount
Pleasant is LAN Airlines who operate weekly flights to Santiago, Chile via
Punta Arenas with an additional stop once a month at RÃ­o Gallegos, Argentina.
The main operator at Port Stanley Airport is the Falkland Islands Government
Air Service (FIGAS) that operates Islander aircraft which can use the grass
airstrips at most settlements. Flight schedules, which are broadcast on the
radio every evening, are planned on a daily basis according to passenger needs.
Private operators from Stanley include the British Antarctic Survey who operate
an air link to the Rothera Research Station on the Antarctic Peninsula and also
serve other British bases in the British Antarctic Territory using a de
Havilland Canada Dash 7.
