Jesus Jesus (; ; 7‚Äì2 BC/BCE to 30‚Äì36 AD/CE), also referred to as Jesus of
Nazareth, is the central figure of Christianity, whom a majority of Christian
denominations believe to be the Son of God. Virtually all scholars of antiquity
agree that Jesus existed. While there is little agreement on the historicity of
gospel narratives and their theological assertions of his divinity most
scholars agree that Jesus was a Jewish teacher from Galilee in Roman Judaea,
was baptized by John the Baptist, and was crucified in Jerusalem on the orders
of the Roman Prefect, Pontius Pilate. Carson (1992) et al., pp.¬ 50‚Äì56.
Crossan (1993), pp.¬ xi‚Äìxiii. Fredriksen (1999), . Meier (1991), . Meier
(1994), pp.¬ 12‚Äì13. Vermes (1973), p.¬ 37.  Scholars have offered various
portraits of Jesus, which at times share a number of overlapping attributes,
such as the leader of an apocalyptic movement, Messiah, a charismatic healer, a
sage and philosopher, or a social reformer who preached of the "Kingdom of God"
as a means for personal and egalitarian social transformation. Scholars have
correlated the New Testament accounts with non-Christian historical records to
arrive at an estimated chronology of Jesus' life. Christians hold Jesus to be
the awaited Messiah of the Old Testament and refer to him as Jesus Christ or
simply as Christ, a name that is also used secularly. Christians believe that
Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of a virgin, performed miracles,
founded the Church, died sacrificially by crucifixion to achieve atonement,
rose from the dead, and ascended into heaven, from which he will return. The
majority of Christians worship Jesus as the incarnation of God the Son, and the
Second Person of the Holy Trinity. A few Christian groups reject
Trinitarianism, wholly or partly, as non-scriptural. In Islam, Jesus (commonly
transliterated as ) is considered one of God's important prophets. In Islam,
Jesus is a bringer of scripture, and the product of a virgin birth, but not the
victim of crucifixion. Judaism rejects the belief that Jesus was the awaited
Messiah, arguing that he did not fulfill the Messianic prophecies in the
Tanakh. Bah√°'√≠ scripture almost never refers to Jesus as the Messiah, but
calls him a Manifestation of God. Etymology of name. "Jesus" is a
transliteration, occurring in a number of languages and based on the Latin
"Iesus", of the Greek (""), itself a hellenization of the Aramaic/Hebrew
("Yƒì≈°√ªƒÉ‚Äò") which is a post-Exilic modification of the Hebrew
("Yƒïh≈ç≈°uƒÉ‚Äò", Joshua) under influence from Aramaic. In the Quran, it is
(‚Äòƒ™sa). The etymology of the name Jesus in the context of the New Testament
is generally expressed as "Yahweh saves", "Yahweh is salvation" The name Jesus
appears to have been in use in Judaea at the time of the birth of Jesus. The
first century works of historian Flavius Josephus refer to at least twenty
different people with the name Jesus. Philo's reference ("Mutatione Nominum"
item 121) indicates that the etymology of the name Joshua was known outside
Judaea at the time. In the New Testament, in , the angel Gabriel tells Mary to
name her child "Jesus", and in an angel tells Joseph to name the child "Jesus".
The statement in Matthew 1:21 "you are to give him the name Jesus, because he
will save his people from their sins" associates salvific attributes to the
name Jesus in Christian theology. "Christ" () is derived from the Greek
("Khrƒ´stos"), meaning "the anointed" or "the anointed one", a translation of
the Hebrew (""), usually transliterated into English as "Messiah" (). In the
Septuagint version of the Hebrew Bible (written well over a century before the
time of Jesus), the word "Christ" () was used to translate the Hebrew word
"Messiah" () into Greek. In , the apostle Peter's profession "You are the
Christ" identifies Jesus as the Messiah. In postbiblical usage, "Christ" became
viewed as a name, one part of "Jesus Christ", but originally it was a title
("Jesus the Anointed"). Chronology. Although a few scholars have questioned the
existence of Jesus as an actual historical figure, and some early Christian
sects denied that Jesus existed as a physical being (see below), most scholars
involved with historical Jesus research believe he existed, but that the
supernatural claims associated with him cannot be established using documentary
and other evidence. As discussed in the sections immediately below, the
estimation of the year of death of Jesus places his lifespan around the
beginning of the 1st century AD/CE, in the geographic region of Roman Judaea.
Roman involvement in Judaea began around 63 BC/BCE and by 6 AD/CE Judaea had
become a Roman province. From 26-37 AD/CE Pontius Pilate was the governor of
Roman Judaea. In this time period, although Roman Judaea was strategically
positioned in the Near East, close to Arabia and North Africa, it was not
viewed as a critically important province by the Romans. At the time the Romans
were highly tolerant of other religions and allowed the local populations such
as the Jews to practice their own faiths. Year of birth. Two independent
approaches have been used to estimate the year of the birth of Jesus, one
involving analysis of the Nativity accounts in the Gospels of Luke and Matthew
along with other historical data, and the other working backwards from the
estimation of the start of the ministry of Jesus, as also discussed in the next
section. In its Nativity account, the Gospel of Matthew associates the birth of
Jesus with the reign of Herod the Great, who is generally believed to have died
around 4 BC/BCE. states that: "Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the
days of Herod the king" and mentions the reign of Herod shortly before the
birth of Jesus. Luke's gospel also describes the birth as taking place during
the first census, which is generally believed to have occurred in 6 AD/CE. Most
scholars generally assume a date of birth between 6 and 4 BC/BCE. Other
scholars assume that Jesus was born sometime between 7 and 2 BC/BCE.Grant
(1977) p. 71.Meier (1991) p. 214.Sanders (1993), pp. 10‚Äì11Witherington (1998)
No. 3:12‚Äì20. The year of Jesus' birth has also been estimated in a manner
that is independent of the Nativity accounts, by using information in the
Gospel of John to work backwards from the statement in that Jesus was "about 30
years of age" at the start of his ministry. As discussed in the section below,
by combining information from and with the writings of Flavius Josephus, it has
been estimated that around 27‚Äì29 AD/CE, Jesus was "about thirty years of
age". Some scholars thus estimate the year 28 AD/CE to be roughly the 32nd
birthday of Jesus and the birth year of Jesus to be around 6‚Äì4 BC/BCE.
Although Christian feasts related to the Nativity have had specific dates (e.g.
December 25 for Christmas) there is no historical evidence for the exact day or
month of the birth of Jesus. Years of ministry. There have been different
approaches to estimating the date of the start of the ministry of Jesus. One
approach, based on combining information from the Gospel of Luke with
historical data about Emperor Tiberius yields a date around 28‚Äì29 AD/CE,
while a second independent approach based on statements in the Gospel of John
along with historical information from Josephus about the Temple in Jerusalem
leads to a date around 27‚Äì29 AD/CE. A third method uses the date of the death
of John the Baptist and the marriage of Herod Antipas to Herodias based on the
writings of Josephus, and correlates it to . The estimation of the date based
on the Gospel of Luke relies on the statement in that the ministry of John the
Baptist which preceded that of Jesus began "in the fifteenth year of the reign
of Tiberius Caesar". Given that Tiberius began his reign in 14 AD/CE, this
yields a date about 28‚Äì29 AD/CE. The estimation of the date based on the
Gospel of John uses the statements in that Jesus went to the Temple in
Jerusalem around the start of his ministry and in that "Forty and six years was
this temple in building" at that time. According to Josephus (Ant 15.380) the
temple reconstruction was started by Herod the Great in the 15th-18th year of
his reign at about the time that Augustus arrived in Syria (Ant 15.354). Temple
expansion and reconstruction was ongoing, and it was in constant reconstruction
until it was destroyed in 70 AD/CE by the Romans. Given that it took 46 years
of construction, the Temple visit in the Gospel of John has been estimated at
around 27-29 AD/CE. Scholars estimates that John the Baptist's imprisonment
probably occurred around AD/CE 30-32. The death of John the Baptist relates to
the end of the "major Galilean ministry" of Jesus, just before the half way
point in the gospel narratives. states that at the start of his ministry Jesus
was "about 30 years of age". The length of the ministry is subject to debate,
based on the fact that the synoptic gospels mention only one passover during
Jesus' ministry, often interpreted as implying that the ministry lasted
approximately one year, whereas the Gospel of John records multiple passovers,
implying that his ministry may have lasted at least three years. Year of death.
A number of approaches have been used to estimate the year of the death of
Jesus, including information from the canonical gospels, the chronology of the
life of Paul the Apostle in the New Testament correlated with historical
events, as well as different astronomical models, as discussed below. The 4
gospels report that Jesus was crucified by Pontius Pilate, who governed Judaea
from 26 to 36 AD/CE. Jewish historian Josephus, writing in "Antiquities of the
Jews" ("c." 93 AD/CE), and the early 2nd century Roman historian Tacitus,
writing in "The Annals" ("c." 116 AD/CE), also state that Pilate ordered the
execution of Jesus. The estimation of the date of the conversion of Paul places
the death of Jesus before this conversion, which is estimated at around 33‚Äì36
AD/CE. The estimation of the year of Paul's conversion relies on a series of
calculations working backwards from the well established date of his trial
before Gallio in Achaea Greece () around 51‚Äì52 AD/CE, the meeting of
Priscilla and Aquila which were expelled from Rome about 49 AD/CE and the 14-
year period before returning to Jerusalem in . The remaining period is
generally accounted for by Paul's missions (at times with Barnabas) such as
those in and , resulting in the 33‚Äì36 AD/CE estimate. Isaac Newton was one of
the first astronomers to estimate the date of the crucifixion and suggested
Friday, April 23, 34 AD/CE. In 1990 astronomer Bradley E. Schaefer computed the
date as Friday, April 3, 33 AD/CE. In 1991, John Pratt stated that Newton's
method was sound, but included a minor error at the end. Pratt suggested the
year 33 AD/CE as the answer. Using the completely different approach of a lunar
eclipse model, Humphreys and Waddington arrived at the conclusion that Friday,
April 3, 33 AD/CE was the date of the crucifixion. Life and teachings in the
New Testament. Although the four canonical gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John, are the main sources for the biography of Jesus‚Äô life, other parts of
the New Testament, such as the Pauline epistles which were likely written
decades before them, also include references to key episodes in his life such
as the Last Supper, as in . The Acts of the Apostles ( and ) refers to the
early ministry of Jesus and its anticipation by John the Baptist. And says more
about the Ascension episode (also mentioned in ) than the canonical gospels.
According to the majority viewpoint, the Synoptic Gospels are the primary
sources of historical information about Jesus. and of the religious movement he
founded, but not everything contained in the gospels is considered to be
historically reliable. Elements whose historical authenticity are disputed
include the two accounts of the Nativity of Jesus, as well as the resurrection
and certain details about the crucifixion. On one extreme, some Christian
scholars maintain that the gospels are inerrant descriptions of the life of
Jesus. On the other extreme, some scholars have concluded that the gospels
provide no historical information about Jesus' life. Canonical gospel accounts.
Three of the four canonical gospels, namely Matthew, Mark, and Luke, are known
as the synoptic Gospels, from the Greek œÉœçŒΩ (syn "together") and ·ΩÑœàŒπœÇ
(opsis "view"), given that they display a high degree of similarity in content,
narrative arrangement, language and paragraph structure. The presentation in
the fourth canonical gospel, i.e. John, differs from these three in that it has
more of a thematic nature rather than a narrative format. Scholars generally
agree that it is impossible to find any direct literary relationship between
the synoptic gospels and the Gospel of John. However, in general, the authors
of the New Testament showed little interest in an absolute chronology of Jesus
or in synchronizing the episodes of his life with the secular history of the
age. The gospels were primarily written as theological documents in the context
of early Christianity with the chronological timelines as a secondary
consideration. One manifestation of the gospels being theological documents
rather than historical chronicles is that they devote about one third of their
text to just seven days, namely the last week of the life of Jesus in
Jerusalem. Although the gospels do not provide enough details to satisfy the
demands of modern historians regarding exact dates, it is possible to draw from
them a general picture of the life story of Jesus. However, as stated in the
gospels do not claim to provide an exhaustive list of the events in the life of
Jesus. Since the 2nd century attempts have been made to "harmonize" the gospel
accounts into a single narrative; Tatian's Diatesseron perhaps being the first.
Although there are differences in specific temporal sequences, and in the
parables and miracles listed in each gospel, the flow of the key events such as
Baptism, Transfiguration and Crucifixion and interactions with people such as
the Apostles are shared among the gospel narratives. Key elements and the five
major milestones. The five major milestones in the gospel narrative of the life
of Jesus are his Baptism, Transfiguration, Crucifixion, Resurrection and
Ascension. These are usually bracketed by two other episodes: his Nativity at
the beginning and the sending of the Holy Spirit at the end. The gospel
accounts of the teachings of Jesus are often presented in terms of specific
categories involving his "works and words", e.g. his ministry, parables and
miracles. The gospels include a number of discourses by Jesus on specific
occasions, e.g. the Sermon on the Mount or the Farewell Discourse, and also
include over 30 parables, spread throughout the narrative, often with themes
that relate to the sermons. Parables represent a major component of the
teachings of Jesus in the gospels, forming approximately one third of his
recorded teachings, and positions them as the revelations of God the Father.
The gospel episodes that include descriptions of the miracle of Jesus also
often include teachings, providing an intertwining of his "words and works" in
the gospels. Genealogy and Nativity. The accounts of the genealogy and Nativity
of Jesus in the New Testament appear only in the Gospel of Luke and the Gospel
of Matthew. While there are documents outside of the New Testament which are
more or less contemporary with Jesus and the gospels, many shed no light on the
more biographical aspects of his life and these two gospel accounts remain the
main sources of information on the genealogy and Nativity. Matthew begins his
gospel in with the genealogy of Jesus, and presents it before the account of
the birth of Jesus, while Luke discusses the genealogy in chapter 3, after the
Baptism of Jesus in when the voice from Heaven addresses Jesus and identifies
him as the Son of God. At that point Luke traces Jesus' ancestry through Adam
to God. The Nativity is a prominent element in the Gospel of Luke. It comprises
over 10% of the text, and is three times the length of the nativity text in
Matthew. Luke's account takes place mostly before the birth of Jesus and
centers on Mary, while Matthew's takes place mostly after the birth of Jesus
and centers on Joseph. According to Luke and Matthew, Jesus was born to Joseph
and Mary, his betrothed, in Bethlehem. Both support the doctrine of the Virgin
Birth in which Jesus was miraculously conceived in his mother's womb by the
Holy Spirit, when his mother was still a virgin. In Mary learns from the angel
Gabriel that she will conceive and bear a child called Jesus through the action
of the Holy Spirit. When Mary is due to give birth, she and Joseph travel from
Nazareth to Joseph's ancestral home in Bethlehem to register in the census of
Quirinius. In . Mary gives birth to Jesus and, having found no place in the
inn, places the newborn in a manger. An angel visits the shepherds and sends
them to adore the child in . After presenting Jesus at the Temple, Joseph and
Mary return home to Nazareth. Following his betrothal to Mary, Joseph is
troubled in because Mary is pregnant, but in the first of Joseph's three dreams
an angel assures him not be afraid to take Mary as his wife, because her child
was conceived by the Holy Spirit. In , the Wise Men or Magi bring gifts to the
young Jesus as the King of the Jews. King Herod hears of Jesus' birth, but
before the Massacre of the Innocents Joseph is warned by an angel in his dream
and the family flees to Egypt, after which they return and settle in Nazareth.
Early life and profession. In the Gospels of Luke and Matthew, Jesus‚Äô
childhood home is identified as the town of Nazareth in Galilee. Joseph,
husband of Mary, appears in descriptions of Jesus‚Äô childhood and no mention
is made of him thereafter. The New Testament books of Matthew, Mark, and
Galatians mention Jesus‚Äô brothers and sisters, but the Greek word "adelphos"
in these verses, has also been translated as brother or kinsman. In Jesus is
called a "tekton" (œÑŒ≠Œ∫œÑœâŒΩ in Greek), usually understood to mean
carpenter. says he was the son of a "tekton". "Tekton" has been traditionally
translated into English as "carpenter", but it is a rather general word (from
the same root that leads to "technical" and "technology") that could cover
makers of objects in various materials, even builders. Beyond the New Testament
accounts, the specific association of the profession of Jesus with woodworking
is a constant in the traditions of the 1st and 2nd centuries and Justin Martyr
(d. ca. 165) wrote that Jesus made yokes and ploughs. Baptism and temptation.
In the gospels, the accounts of the Baptism of Jesus are always preceded by
information about John the Baptist and his ministry. In these accounts, John
was preaching for penance and repentance for the remission of sins and
encouraged the giving of alms to the poor (as in ) as he baptized people in the
area of the River Jordan around Perea about the time of the commencement of the
ministry of Jesus. The Gospel of John () specifies "Bethany beyond the Jordan",
i.e. Bethabara in Perea, when it initially refers to it and later refers to
further baptisms in √Ünon "because there was much water there". The four
gospels are not the only references to John's ministry around the River Jordan.
In , Peter refers to how the ministry of Jesus followed "the baptism which John
preached". In the Antiquities of the Jews (18.5.2) 1st century historian
Josephus also wrote about John the Baptist and his eventual death in Perea. In
the gospels, John had been foretelling (as in ) of the arrival of a someone
"mightier than I". Apostle Paul also refers to this anticipation by John in .
In , upon meeting Jesus, the Baptist states: "I need to be baptized by you."
However, Jesus pers¬≠es John to baptize him nonetheless. In the baptismal
scene, after Jesus emerges from the water, the sky opens and a voice from
Heaven states: "This is my beloved Son with whom I am well pleased". The Holy
Spirit then descends upon Jesus as a dove in , , . In rather than a direct
narrative, the Baptist bears witness to the episode. This is one of two cases
in the gospels where a voice from Heaven calls Jesus "Son", the other being in
the Transfiguration of Jesus episode. After the baptism, the synoptic gospels
proceed to describe the Temptation of Jesus, but narrates the first encounter
between Jesus and two of his future disciples, who were then disciples of John
the Baptist. In this narrative, the next day the Baptist sees Jesus again and
calls him the Lamb of God and the "two disciples heard him speak, and they
followed Jesus". The Temptation of Jesus is narrated in the three synoptic
gospels after his baptism. Ministry. states that Jesus was "about 30 years of
age" at the start of his ministry. The date of the start of his ministry has
been estimated at around 27‚Äì29 AD/CE, based on independent approaches which
combine separate gospel accounts with other historical data. The end of his
ministry is estimated to be in the range 30‚Äì36 AD/CE. The gospel accounts
place the beginning of Jesus' ministry in the countryside of Judaea, near the
River Jordan. Jesus' ministry begins with his Baptism by John the Baptist (, ),
and ends with the Last Supper with his disciples (, ) in Jerusalem. The gospels
present John the Baptist's ministry as the precursor to that of Jesus and the
Baptism as marking the beginning of Jesus' ministry, after which Jesus travels,
preaches and performs miracles. The "Early Galilean ministry" begins when Jesus
goes back to Galilee from the Judaean desert after rebuffing the temptation of
Satan. In this early period Jesus preaches around Galilee and in his first
disciples encounter him, begin to travel with him and eventually form the core
of the early Church. This period includes the Sermon on the Mount, one of the
major discourses of Jesus. The "Major Galilean ministry" which begins in
Matthew 8 refers to activities up to the death of John the Baptist. It includes
the Calming the storm and a number of other miracles and parables. The "Final
Galilean ministry" includes the Feeding the 5000 and Walking on water episodes,
both in . The end of this period (as Matthew 16 and Mark 8 end) marks a turning
point is the ministry of Jesus with the dual episodes of Confession of Peter
and the Transfiguration. As Jesus travels towards Jerusalem, in the "Later
Perean ministry", about one third the way down from the Sea of Galilee along
the Jordan, he returns to the area where he was baptized, and in . The "Final
ministry in Jerusalem" is sometimes called the "Passion Week" and begins with
the Jesus' triumphal entry into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday. In that week Jesus
drives the money changers from the Temple, and Judas bargains to betray him.
This period culminates in the Last Supper, and the Farewell discourse. The
accounts of the ministry of Jesus generally end with the Last Supper. Teachings
and preachings. In the New Testament the teachings of Jesus are presented in
terms of his "words and works". The words of Jesus include a number of sermons,
as well as parables that appear throughout the narrative of the synoptic
gospels (the Gospel of John includes no parables). The works include the
miracles and other acts performed during his ministry. Although the canonical
gospels are the major source of the teachings of Jesus, the Pauline epistles,
which were likely written decades before the gospels, provide some of the
earliest written accounts of the teachings of Jesus. The New Testament does not
present the teachings of Jesus as merely his own preachings, but equates the
words of Jesus with divine revelation, with John the Baptist stating in : "he
whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God" and Jesus stating in : "My
teaching is not mine, but his that sent me" and again re-asserting that in :
"the words that I say unto you I speak not from myself: but the Father abiding
in me doeth his works." In Jesus claims divine knowledge, stating: "No one
knows the Son except the Father and no one knows the Father except the Son",
asserting the mutual knowledge he has with the Father. Parables represent a
major component of the teachings of Jesus in the gospels, the approximately
thirty parables forming about one third of his recorded teachings. The parables
may appear within longer sermons, as well as other places within the narrative.
Jesus' parables are seemingly simple and memorable stories, often with imagery,
and each conveys a teaching which usually relates the physical world to the
spiritual world. The gospel episodes that include descriptions of the miracle
of Jesus also often include teachings, providing an intertwining of his "words
and works" in the gospels. Many of the miracles in the gospels teach the
importance of faith, for instance in Cleansing ten lepers and Daughter of
Jairus the beneficiaries are told that they were healed due to their faith.
Proclamation as Christ and Transfiguration. At about the middle of each of the
three synoptic gospels, two related episodes mark a turning point in the
narrative: the Confession of Peter and the Transfiguration of Jesus. These
episodes begin in Caesarea Philippi just north of the Sea of Galilee at the
beginning of the final journey to Jerusalem which ends in the Passion and
Resurrection of Jesus. These episodes mark the beginnings of the gradual
disclosure of the identity of Jesus to his disciples; and his prediction of his
own suffering and death. Peter's Confession begins as a dialogue between Jesus
and his disciples in , and . Jesus asks his disciples: "But who do you say that
I am?" Simon Peter answers him: "You are the Christ, the Son of the living
God". In Jesus blesses Peter for his answer, and states: "flesh and blood hath
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father who is in heaven." In blessing Peter,
Jesus not only accepts the titles "Christ" and "Son of God" which Peter
attributes to him, but declares the proclamation a divine revelation by stating
that his Father in Heaven had revealed it to Peter. In this assertion, by
endorsing both titles as divine revelation, Jesus unequivocally declares
himself to be both Christ and the Son of God. The account of the
Transfiguration of Jesus appears in , , . Jesus takes Peter and two other
apostles with him and goes up to a mountain, which is not named. Once on the
mountain, Matthew (17:2) states that Jesus "was transfigured before them; his
face shining as the sun, and his garments became white as the light." A bright
cloud appears around them, and a voice from the cloud states: "This is my
beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; listen to him". The Transfiguration
not only supports the identity of Jesus as the Son of God (as in his Baptism),
but the statement "listen to him", identifies him as the messenger and mouth-
piece of God. Final week: betrayal, arrest, trial, and death. The description
of the last week of the life of Jesus (often called the Passion week) occupies
about one third of the narrative in the canonical gospels. The narrative for
that week starts by a description of the final entry into Jerusalem, and ends
with his crucifixion. The last week in Jerusalem is the conclusion of the
journey which Jesus had started in Galilee through Perea and Judea. Just before
the account of the final entry of Jesus into Jerusalem, the Gospel of John
includes the Raising of Lazarus episode, which builds the tension between Jesus
and the authorities. At the beginning of the week as Jesus enters Jerusalem, he
is greeted by the cheering crowds, adding to that tension. During the week of
his "final ministry in Jerusalem", Jesus visits the Temple, and has a conflict
with the money changers about their use of the Temple for commercial purposes.
This is followed by a debate with the priests and the elder in which his
authority is questioned. One of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, decides to
betray Jesus for thirty pieces of silver. Towards the end of the week, Jesus
has the Last Supper with his disciples, during which he institutes the
Eucharist, and prepares them for his departure in the Farewell Discourse. After
the supper, Jesus is betrayed with a kiss while he is in agony in the garden,
and is arrested. After his arrest, Jesus is abandoned by most of his disciples,
and Peter denies him three times, as Jesus had predicted during the Last
Supper. Jesus is first questioned by the Sanhedrin, and is then tried by
Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor of Judea. During these trials Jesus says
very little, and is mostly silent. After the scourging of Jesus, and his
mocking as the King of the Jews Pilate orders the crucifixion. Thus the final
week that begins with his entry into Jerusalem, concludes with his crucifixion
and burial on that Friday, as described in the next 5 sub-sections. The New
Testament accounts then describe the resurrection of Jesus three days later, on
the Sunday following his death. Final entry into Jerusalem. In the four
canonical gospels, Jesus' Triumphal entry into Jerusalem takes place at the
beginning of the last week of his life, a few days before the Last Supper,
marking the beginning of the Passion narrative. While at Bethany Jesus sent two
disciples to retrieve a donkey that had been tied up but never ridden and rode
it into Jerusalem, with Mark and John stating Sunday, Matthew Monday, and Luke
not specifying the day. As Jesus rode into Jerusalem the people there lay down
their cloaks in front of him, and also lay down small branches of trees and
sang part of . In the three synoptic gospels, entry into Jerusalem is followed
by the Cleansing of the Temple episode, in which Jesus expels the money
changers from the Temple, accusing them of turning the Temple to a den of
thieves through their commercial activities. This is the only account of Jesus
using physical force in any of the gospels. includes a similar narrative much
earlier, and scholars debate if these refer to the same episode. The synoptics
include a number of well known parables and sermons such as the Widow's mite
and the Second Coming Prophecy during the week that follows. In that week, the
synoptics also narrate conflicts between Jesus and the elders of the Jews, in
episodes such as the Authority of Jesus Questioned and the Woes of the
Pharisees in which Jesus criticizes their hypocrisy. Judas Iscariot, one of the
twelve apostles approaches the Jewish elders and performs the "Bargain of
Judas" in which he accepts to betray Jesus and hand him over to the elders.
Matthew specifies the price as thirty silver coins. Last Supper. In the New
Testament, the Last Supper is the final meal that Jesus shares with his twelve
apostles in Jerusalem before his crucifixion. The Last Supper is mentioned in
all four canonical gospels, and Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians (),
which was likely written before the gospels, also refers to it. In all four
gospels, during the meal, Jesus predicts that one of his Apostles will betray
him. Jesus is described as reiterating, despite each Apostle's assertion that
he would not betray Jesus, that the betrayer would be one of those who were
present. In and Judas is specifically singled out as the traitor. In , , Jesus
takes bread, breaks it and gives it to the disciples, saying: "This is my body
which is given for you". Although the Gospel of John does not include a
description of the bread and wine ritual during the Last Supper, most scholars
agree that (the Bread of Life Discourse) has a Eucharistic nature and resonates
with the "words of institution" used in the synoptic gospels and the Pauline
writings on the Last Supper. In all four gospels Jesus predicts that Peter will
deny knowledge of him, stating that Peter will disown him three times before
the rooster crows the next morning. The synoptics mention that after the arrest
of Jesus Peter denied knowing him three times, but after the third denial,
heard the rooster crow and recalled the prediction as Jesus turned to look at
him. Peter then began to cry bitterly. The Gospel of John provides the only
account of Jesus washing his disciples' feet before the meal. John's Gospel
also includes a long sermon by Jesus, preparing his disciples (now without
Judas) for his departure. of the Gospel of John are known as the "Farewell
discourse" given by Jesus, and are a rich source of Christological content.
Agony in the Garden, betrayal and arrest. In , , and , immediately after the
Last Supper, Jesus takes a walk to pray, Matthew and Mark identifying this
place of prayer as Garden of Gethsemane. While in the Garden, Judas appears,
accompanied by a crowd that includes the Jewish priests and elders and people
with weapons. Judas gives Jesus a kiss to identify him to the crowd who then
arrests Jesus. One of Jesus' disciples tries to stop them and uses a sword to
cut off the ear of one of the men in the crowd. Luke states that Jesus
miraculously healed the wound and John and Matthew state that Jesus criticized
the violent act, insisting that his disciples should not resist his arrest. In
Jesus makes the well known statement: "all who live by the sword, shall die by
the sword". Prior to the arrest, in Jesus tells the disciples: "All ye shall be
offended in me this night" and in that: "But after I am raised up, I will go
before you into Galilee." After his arrest, Jesus' disciples go into hiding.
Trials by the Sanhedrin, Herod and Pilate. In the narrative of the four
canonical gospels after the betrayal and arrest of Jesus, he is taken to the
Sanhedrin, a Jewish judicial body. Jesus is tried by the Sanhedrin, mocked and
beaten and is condemned for making claims of being the Son of God. He is then
taken to Pontius Pilate and the Jewish elders ask Pilate to judge and condemn
Jesus‚Äîaccusing him of claiming to be the King of the Jews. After questioning,
with few replies provided by Jesus, Pilate publicly declares that he finds
Jesus innocent, but the crowd insists on punishment. Pilate then orders Jesus'
crucifixion. Although the gospel accounts vary with respect to various details,
they agree on the general character and overall structure of the trials of
Jesus. In, , and Jesus was taken to the high priest's house where he was mocked
and beaten that night. The next day, early in the morning, the chief priests
and scribes lead Jesus away into their council. In , however, Jesus is first
taken to Annas, the father-in-law of Caiaphas, and then to Caiaphas. All four
gospels include the "Denial of Peter" narrative, where Peter denies knowing
Jesus three times, at which point the rooster crows as predicted by Jesus. In
the gospel accounts Jesus speaks very little, mounts no defense and gives very
infrequent and indirect answers to the questions of the priests, prompting an
officer to slap him. In the lack of response from Jesus prompts the high priest
to ask him: "Answerest thou nothing?" In the high priest then asked Jesus: "Are
you the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" And Jesus said, "I am" ‚Äî at which
point the high priest tore his own robe in anger and accused Jesus of
blasphemy. In when asked: "Are you then the Son of God?" Jesus answers: "You
say that I am" affirming the title Son of God. Taking Jesus to Pilate's Court,
the Jewish elders ask Pontius Pilate to judge and condemn Jesus‚Äîaccusing him
of claiming to be the King of the Jews. In Pilate realizes that Jesus is a
Galilean, and is thus under the jurisdiction of Herod Antipas. Pilate sends
Jesus to Herod to be tried. However, Jesus says almost nothing in response to
Herod's questions. Herod and his soldiers mock Jesus, put a gorgeous robe on
him, as the King of the Jews, and sent him back to Pilate. Pilate then calls
together the Jewish elders, and says that he has "found no fault in this man."
The use of the term king is central in the discussion between Jesus and Pilate.
In Jesus states: "My kingdom is not of this world", but does not directly deny
being the King of the Jews. Pilate then writes "Jesus of Nazareth, King of the
Jews" as a sign (abbreviated as INRI in depictions) to be affixed to the cross
of Jesus. The trial by Pilate is followed by the flagellation episode, the
soldiers mock Jesus as the King of Jews by putting a purple robe (that
signifies royal status) on him, place a Crown of Thorns on his head, and beat
and mistreat him in , and . Jesus is then sent to Calvary for crucifixion.
Crucifixion and burial. Jesus' crucifixion is described in all four canonical
gospels, and is attested to by other sources of that age (e.g. Josephus and
Tacitus), and is regarded as an historical event. After the trials, Jesus made
his way to Calvary (the path is traditionally called via Dolorosa) and the
three synoptic gospels indicate that he was assisted by Simon of Cyrene, the
Romans compelling him to do so. In Jesus tells the women in multitude of people
following him not to cry for him but for themselves and their children. Once at
Calvary (Golgotha), Jesus was offered wine mixed with gall to drink¬ ‚Äî
usually offered as a form of painkiller. Matthew's and Mark's gospels state
that he refused this. The soldiers then crucified Jesus and cast lots for his
clothes. Above Jesus' head on the cross was the inscription King of the Jews,
and the soldiers and those passing by mocked him about the title. Jesus was
crucified between two convicted thieves, one of whom rebuked Jesus, while the
other defended him. Each gospel has its own account of Jesus' last words,
comprising the seven last sayings on the cross. In Jesus entrusts his mother to
the disciple he loved and in he states: "Father, forgive them; for they know
not what they do", usually interpreted as his forgiveness of the Roman soldiers
and the others involved. The Roman soldiers did not break Jesus' legs, as they
did to the other two men crucified (breaking the legs hastened the crucifixion
process), as Jesus was dead already. One of the soldiers pierced the side of
Jesus with a lance and water flowed out. In , impressed by the events the Roman
centurion calls Jesus the Son of God. Following Jesus' death on Friday, Joseph
of Arimathea asked the permission of Pilate to remove the body. The body was
removed from the cross, was wrapped in a clean cloth and buried in a new rock-
hewn tomb, with the assistance of Nicodemus. In the Jews go to Pilate the day
after the crucifixion and ask for guards for the tomb and also seal the tomb
with a stone as well as the guard, to be sure the body remains there.
Resurrection and ascension. The New Testament accounts of the resurrection and
ascension of Jesus, state that the first day of the week after the crucifixion
(typically interpreted as a Sunday), his followers encounter him risen from the
dead, after his tomb is discovered to be empty. The resurrected Jesus appears
to them that day and a number of times thereafter, delivers sermons and
commissions them, before ascending to Heaven. Two of the canonical gospels
(Luke and Mark) include a brief mention of the Ascension, but the main
references to it are elsewhere in the New Testament. In the four canonical
gospels, when the tomb of Jesus is discovered empty, in , , and his
resurrection is announced and explained to the followers who arrive there early
in the morning by either one or two beings (either men or angels) dressed in
bright robes who appear in or near the tomb. and indicate that Jesus appeared
to the Magdalene first, and states that she was among the Myrrhbearers. After
the discovery of the empty tomb, the gospels indicate that Jesus made a series
of appearances to the disciples. These include the well known Doubting Thomas
episode and the Road to Emmaus appearance where Jesus meets two disciples. The
catch of 153 fish appearance includes a miracle at the Sea of Galilee, and
thereafter Jesus encourages Peter to serve his followers. The final post-
resurrection appearance in the gospel accounts is when Jesus ascends to Heaven.
states that Jesus "was carried up into heaven". The ascension account is
elaborated in and mentioned . In , forty days after the resurrection, as the
disciples look on, "he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their
sight." describes Jesus as being on "the right hand of God, having gone into
heaven". The Acts of the Apostles also contain "post-ascension" appearances by
Jesus. These include the vision by Stephen just before his death in , and the
road to Damascus episode in which Apostle Paul is converted to Christianity.
The instruction given to Ananias in Damascus in to heal Paul is the last
reported conversation with Jesus in the Bible until the Book of Revelation was
written. Historical views. Existence. The Christian gospels were written
primarily as theological documents rather than historical chronicles. However,
the question of the existence of Jesus as a historical figure should be
distinguished from discussions about the historicity of specific episodes in
the gospels, the chronology they present, or theological issues regarding his
divinity. A number of historical non-Christian documents, such as Jewish and
Greco-Roman sources, have been used in historical analyses of the existence of
Jesus. Virtually all scholars of antiquity agree that Jesus existed and regard
events such as his baptism and his crucifixion as historical. Robert E. Van
Voorst states that the idea of the non-historicity of the existence of Jesus
has always been controversial, and has consistently failed to convince scholars
of many disciplines, and that classical historians, as well as biblical
scholars now regard it as effectively refuted. Referring to the theories of
non-existence of Jesus, Richard A. Burridge states: "I have to say that I do
not know any respectable critical scholar who says that any more." Separate
non-Christian sources used to establish the historical existence of Jesus
include the works of 1st century Roman historians Josephus and Tacitus.
Josephus scholar Louis H. Feldman has stated that "few have doubted the
genuineness" of Josephus' reference to Jesus in and it is only disputed by a
small number of scholars. Bart D. Ehrman states that the existence of Jesus and
his crucifixion by the Romans is attested to by a wide range of sources,
including Josephus and Tacitus. The historical existence of Jesus as a person
is a separate issue from any religious discussions about his divinity, or the
theological issues relating to his nature as man or God. Leading scientific
atheist Richard Dawkins specifically separates the question of the existence of
Jesus from the attribution of supernatural powers to him, or the accuracy of
the Christian gospels. Dawkins does not deny the existence of Jesus, although
he dismisses the reliability of the gospel accounts. This position is also held
by leading critic G. A. Wells, who used to argue that Jesus never existed, but
has since changed his views and no longer rejects it. In antiquity, the
existence of Jesus was never denied by those who opposed Christianity and
neither pagans nor Jews questioned his existence. Although in Dialogue with
Trypho, the second century Christian writer Justin Martyr wrote of a discussion
about "Christ" with Trypho, most scholars agree that Trypho is a fictional
character invented by Justin for his literary apologetic goals. While
theological differences existed among early Christians regarding the nature of
Jesus (e.g. monophysitism, miaphysitism, Docetism, Nestorianism, etc.) these
were debates in Christian theology, not about the historical existence of
Jesus. A very small number of modern scholars argue that Jesus never existed,
but that view is a distinct minority and virtually all scholars view theories
that Jesus' existence was a Christian invention as implausible. Language, race
and appearance. Jesus grew up in Galilee and much of his ministry took place
there. The languages spoken in Galilee and Judea during the 1st century AD/CE
include the Semitic Aramaic and Hebrew languages as well as Greek, with Aramaic
being the predominant language. Most scholars agree that during the early part
of 1st century AD/CE Aramaic was the mother tongue of virtually all women in
Galilee and Judae. Most scholars support the theory that Jesus spoke Aramaic
and that he may have also spoken Hebrew and Greek. James D. G. Dunn states that
there is "substantial consensus" that Jesus gave most of his teachings in
Aramaic. In a review of the state of modern scholarship, Amy-Jill Levine
stated: "Beyond recognizing that 'Jesus was Jewish' rarely does scholarship
address what being 'Jewish' means." The New Testament includes no description
of the physical appearance of Jesus before his death and its narrative is
generally indifferent to racial appearances and does not refer to the features
of the people it discusses. The synoptic gospels include the account of the
Transfiguration of Jesus during which he was glorified with "his face shining
as the sun" but do not provide details of his everyday appearance. The Book of
Revelation describes the features of a glorified Jesus in a vision (), but the
vision refers to Jesus in heavenly form, after his death. By the 19th century
theories that Jesus was of Aryan descent, in particular European, were
developed and later appealed to those who wanted nothing Jewish about Jesus,
e.g. Nazi theologians. These theories usually also include the reasoning that
Jesus was Aryan because Galilee was an Aryan region, but have not gained
scholarly acceptance. By the 20th century, theories had also been proposed that
Jesus was of black African descent, e.g. based on the argument that Mary his
mother was a descendant of black Jews. Depictions. Despite the lack of biblical
references or historical records, for two millennia a wide range of depictions
of Jesus have appeared, often influenced by cultural settings, political
circumstances and theological contexts. As in other Christian art, the earliest
depictions date to the late 2nd or early 3rd century, and survivors are
primarily found in the Catacombs of Rome. The Byzantine Iconoclasm acted as a
barrier to developments in the East, but by the 9th century art was permitted
again. The Transfiguration of Jesus was a major theme in the East and every
Eastern Orthodox monk who had trained in icon painting had to prove his craft
by painting an icon of the Transfiguration. The Renaissance brought forth a
number of artists who focused on the depictions of Jesus and after Giotto, Fra
Angelico and others systematically developed uncluttered images. The Protestant
Reformation brought a revival of aniconism in Christianity, though total
prohibition was atypical, and Protestant objections to images have tended to
reduce since the 16th century, and although large images are generally avoided,
few Protestants now object to book illustrations depicting Jesus. On the other
hand, the use of depictions of Jesus is advocated by the leaders of
denominations such as Anglicans and Catholics and is a key element of the
doxology of the Eastern Orthodox tradition. Relics associated with Jesus. A
number of relics associated with Jesus have been claimed and displayed
throughout the history of Christianity. Some people believe in the authenticity
of some relics; others doubt the authenticity of various items. For instance,
the sixteenth century Catholic theologian Erasmus wrote sarcastically about the
proliferation of relics, and the number of buildings that could have been
constructed from the wood claimed to be from the cross used in the Crucifixion
of Christ. Similarly, while experts debate whether Christ was crucified with
three or with four nails, at least thirty Holy Nails continue to be venerated
as relics across Europe. Some relics, such as purported remnants of the Crown
of Thorns, receive only a modest number of pilgrims, others such as the Shroud
of Turin (which is associated with an approved Catholic devotion to the Holy
Face of Jesus) receive millions of pilgrims, which in recent years have
included Pope John Paul II and Pope Benedict XVI. Analysis of the gospels. The
historical-critical method (or higher criticism) is used to examine the Bible
for clues about the historical Jesus, whereby sayings and events that are more
likely to be genuine in the opinion of scholars are used to construct their
portraits of Jesus. Standard historical methods are used to discern the
authorship of each book, and its likely date of composition. The earliest
extant texts which refer to Jesus are Paul's letters (mid-1st century), which
affirm Jesus' crucifixion. Keulman and Gregory hold that the Gospel of Thomas,
a collection of 114 sayings of Jesus, predates the four orthodox gospels, and
believe it may have been composed around mid-1st century. Biblical scholars
hold that the works describing Jesus were initially communicated by oral
tradition, and were not committed to writing until several decades after Jesus'
crucifixion. After the original oral stories were written down in Greek, they
were transcribed, and later translated into other languages. The books of the
New Testament had mostly been written by 100 AD/CE, making them, at least the
synoptic gospels, historically relevant. The Gospel tradition certainly
preserves several fragments of Jesus' teaching. The Markan priority hypothesis
holds that the Gospel of Mark was written first "c." 70 AD/CE. Matthew is
placed at being sometime after this date and Luke is thought to have been
written between 70 and 100 AD/CE. According to the Q source hypothesis
supported by a majority of modern scholars, the gospels were written not by the
four evangelists themselves but derived from other sources. A minority of
prominent scholars, such as J. A. T. Robinson, have maintained that the writers
of the gospels of Matthew, Mark and John were either apostles and eyewitness to
Jesus' ministry and death, or were close to those who had been. Scholars use
textual criticism to determine which variants among manuscripts is original and
how much they may have changed. Contemporary textual critic Bart D. Ehrman
cites numerous places where he maintains that the gospels, and other New
Testament books, were apparently altered by Christian scribes. Craig Blomberg,
F. F. Bruce and Gregory Boyd view the evidence as conclusive that very few
alterations were made by Christian scribes, while none of them (three or four
in total) were important. According to Normal Geisler and William Nix, "The New
Testament, then, has not only survived in more manuscripts than any other book
from antiquity, but it has survived in a purer form than any other great
book‚îÄa form that is 99.5% pure" Historical analysis. Historicity of events.
Modern scholars consider the baptism of Jesus and his crucifixion to be the two
historically certain facts about him, James Dunn stating that these "two facts
in the life of Jesus command almost universal assent". Dunn states that these
two facts "rank so high on the 'almost impossible to doubt or deny' scale of
historical facts" that they are often the starting points for the study of the
historical Jesus. Bart Ehrman states that the crucifixion of Jesus on the
orders of Pontius Pilate is the most certain element about him. John Dominic
Crossan states that the crucifixion of Jesus is as certain as any historical
fact can be. Craig Blomberg states that most scholars in the third quest for
the historical Jesus consider the crucifixion indisputable. Although scholars
agree on the historicity of the crucifixion, they differ on the reason and
context for it, e.g. both E.P. Sanders and Paula Fredriksen support the
historicity of the crucifixion, but contend that Jesus did not foretell of his
own crucifixion, and that his prediction of the crucifixion is a Christian
story. Geza Vermes also views the crucifixion a historical event but provides
his own explanation and background for it. John P. Meier views the crucifixion
of Jesus as historical fact and states that based on the "criterion of
embarrassment" Christians would not have invented the painful death of their
leader. Meier states that a number of other criteria, e.g. the criterion of
"multiple attestation" (i.e. confirmation by more than one source), the
"criterion of coherence" (i.e. that it fits with other historical elements) and
the "criterion of rejection" (i.e. that it is not disputed by ancient sources)
help establish the crucifixion of Jesus as a historical event. Portraits of
Jesus. Although scholars agree on basic historical facts such as the
crucifixion of Jesus, the various "portraits of Jesus" they construct often
differ from each other, and from the descriptions found in the gospels. The
portraits of Jesus constructed by scholars often share a number of common, and
at times overlapping building blocks, such as healer, philosopher, sage,
apocalyptic preacher, or social reformer. However, Bart Ehrman and separately
Andreas K√∂stenberger contend that given the scarcity of historical sources, it
is generally difficult for any scholar to construct a portrait of Jesus that
can be considered historically valid beyond the basic elements of his life.
However, some scholars have suggested caution when reading modern meanings into
terms such as rabbi at Jesus' time. At the time of Jesus the title rabbi was
merely a general title for "teachers of the Law" and did not involve an
official appointment. Martin Hengel states that as a "teacher of Wisdom", Jesus
was not a typical representatives of the official establishment of the time.
William Herzog states that although Jesus was called a rabbi and a teacher he
rejected the title rabbi in the synoptic gospels and did not identify himself
with the established notion of rabbi at the time. An attribute used by many
scholars to describe Jesus is a healer, a number of the same scholars also
stating that he preached the restoration of God's kingdom. Many scholars also
hold that the movement Jesus led (and his eschatology) were apocalyptic, as
were the preachings of John the Baptist, but some scholars makes a distinction
between John's apocalyptic ministry and Jesus' ethical teachings. Another
attribute used to describe Jesus are a sage who preached the wisdom of God,
offering new interpretations of Old Testament teachings. Two other views of
Jesus are as a cynic philosopher and a social reformer who renounced material
possessions and taught a new form of egalitarianism, social justice and
equality among men and women as well as the abandonment of social class
hierarchies. Some historians argue that Jewish and Roman authorities in
Jerusalem were wary of Galilean patriots, and that Jesus' preachings were
regarded as troubling, and he was hence executed on political charges. Role of
archaeology. No documents written by Jesus exist, and no specific
archaeological remnants are directly attributed to him. The 21st century has
witnessed an increase in scholarly interest in the integrated use of
archaeology as an additional research component in arriving at a better
understanding of the historical Jesus by illuminating the socio-economic and
political background of his age. James Charlesworth states that few modern
scholars now want to overlook the archaeological discoveries that clarify the
nature of life in Galilee and Judea during the time of Jesus. Jonathan Reed
states that chief contribution of archaeology to the study of the historical
Jesus is the reconstruction of his social world. First century Jewish religious
movements. Scholars refer to the religious background of the early 1st century
to better reconstruct Jesus' life. Some scholars identify him with one or
another group. Pharisees were a powerful force in 1st-century Judaea. Early
Christians shared several beliefs of the Pharisees, such as resurrection,
retribution in the next world, angels, human freedom, and Divine Providence.
After the fall of the Temple, the Pharisaic outlook was established in Rabbinic
Judaism. Some scholars speculate that Jesus was himself a Pharisee. In Jesus'
day, the two main schools of thought among the Pharisees were the House of
Hillel, which had been founded by the eminent Tanna, Hillel the Elder, and the
House of Shammai. Jesus' assertion of hypocrisy may have been directed against
the stricter members of the House of Shammai, although he also agreed with
their teachings on divorce. Jesus also commented on the House of Hillel's
teachings (Babylonian Talmud, Shabbat 31a) concerning the greatest commandment
and the Golden Rule. Historians do not know whether there were Pharisees in
Galilee during Jesus' life, or what they would have been like. Sadducees were
particularly powerful in Jerusalem. They accepted the written Law only,
rejecting the traditional interpretations accepted by the Pharisees, such as
belief in retribution in an afterlife, resurrection of the body, angels, and
spirits. After Jesus caused a disturbance at the Temple, it was to have been
the Sadducees who had him arrested and turned over to the Romans for execution.
After the fall of Jerusalem, they disappeared from history. Essenes were
apocalyptic ascetics, one of the three (or four) major Jewish schools of the
time, though they were not mentioned in the New Testament. Some scholars
theorize that Jesus was an Essene, or close to them. Among these scholars is
Pope Benedict XVI, who supposes in his book on Jesus that "it appears that not
only John the Baptist, but possibly Jesus and his family as well, were close to
the Qumran community." Zealots were a revolutionary party opposed to Roman
rule, one of those parties that, according to Josephus inspired the fanatical
stand in Jerusalem that led to its destruction in the year 70 AD/CE. Luke
identifies Simon, a disciple, as a "zealot", which might mean a member of the
Zealot party (which would therefore have been already in existence in the
lifetime of Jesus) or a zealous person. The notion that Jesus himself was a
Zealot does not do justice to the earliest Synoptic material describing him.
Mythical view. The term "Christ myth theory" is an umbrella term that applies
to a range of arguments that in one way or another question the authenticity of
the existence of Jesus or the essential elements of his life as described in
the Christian gospels. One viewpoint is that there was no real historical
figure Jesus and that he was invented by Christians. Another viewpoint is that
there was a person called Jesus, but much of the teachings and miracles
attributed to him were either invented or symbolic references. Yet another view
holds that the Jesus portrayed in the gospels is a composite character
constructed from multiple people over a period of time. Supporters of the
various Christ myth theories point to the lack of any known written references
to Jesus during his lifetime and the relative scarcity of non-Christian
references to him in the 1st century, and dispute the veracity of the existing
accounts about him. Among the variants of the Jesus myth theory, the notion
that Jesus never existed has little scholarly support, and although some modern
scholars adhere to it, they remain a distinct minority; most scholars involved
with historical Jesus research believe that his existence can be established
using documentary and other evidence. In the context of historical theories,
the hypothesis that Jesus never existed is a rather recent topic, and in
antiquity his existence was never doubted, even by those who were critical of
Christian teachings. In the early 18th century, friction between the church
establishment and some theologians, coupled with the growing emphasis on
rationalism, resulted in discord between the English deists and the church, and
John Toland, Anthony Collins and Thomas Woolston planted the seeds of
discontent. The beginnings of the formal denial of the existence of Jesus can
be traced to late 18th-century France, and the works of Constantin-Volney and
Charles Dupuis. The more methodical writings of David Friedrich Strauss caused
an uproar in Europe in 1835, and Strauss became known as the founder of Christ
myth theory, his approach having been influenced by the epistemological views
of Leibniz and Spinoza. Strauss did not deny the existence of Jesus, but
believed that very few facts could be known about him and characterized the
miraculous accounts in the gospels as "mythical". At about the same time in
Berlin, Bruno Bauer supported somewhat similar ideas. Although both Strauss and
Bauer drew on Hegel, their views did not coincide, and often conflicted. Karl
Marx, a student and at the time a close friend of Bauer, was significantly
influenced by him, as well as Hegel and Strauss, setting the stage for the
denial of Jesus within communism. By the beginning of the 20th century, Arthur
Drews, William B. Smith and John M. Robertson became the most recognized
proponents of the Christ myth theory. However, these authors were not
performing purely atheist attacks on Christianity, e.g. Drew did not consider
religion as outdated, but argued for a different form of religious
consciousness. W. B. Smith argued for a symbolic interpretation of gospel
episodes and contended that in a parable such as Jesus and the rich young man
the rich young man never existed and symbolically referred to the land of
Israel. Smith also argued that Jesus never healed anyone physically, but only
spiritually cured them of their paganism. J. M. Robertson on the other hand
viewed the gospel accounts as a collection of myths gathered by a large number
of anonymous authors, over time. When Marxist‚ÄìLeninist atheism became part of
the state ideals in communist Russia in 1922, the theories of Arthur Drew
gained prominence there. The communist state not only supported the Christ myth
theory but embellished it with scientific colloquialisms, and school textbooks
began to teach that Jesus never existed, making Russia a bastion of Jesus
denial. These ideas were rebuffed in Russia by Sergei Bulgakov and Alexander
Men, copies of whose book began to circulate underground via typewriters in the
1970s to reintroduce Christianity to Russia. In the 20th century, scholars such
as G. A. Wells, Alvar Elleg√•rd, and Robert M. Price produced a number of
arguments to support the Christ myth theory. Non-scholarly works on the Jesus
myth theory have since been published by mass-media authors such as Doherty,
Freke and Gandy. In parallel, a number of historians and biblical scholars such
as Paula Fredriksen, Geza Vermes, E.P. Sanders and others involved in the quest
for the historical Jesus performed detailed analyses of historical and biblical
documents. Almost all of these scholars accept the existence of Jesus, but
differ on the accuracy of the details of his life within the biblical
narratives. Robert Van Voorst stated that among "New Testament scholars and
historians the theory of the non-existence of Jesus remains effectively dead as
a scholarly question". The Christ myth theory is still being debated in the
21st century, with Graham Stanton stating in 2002 that the most thorough
analysis of the theory had been by G. A. Wells. But Wells' book "Did Jesus
Exist?" was criticized by James D.G. Dunn in his book "The Evidence for Jesus".
And the debates continue, e.g. Wells changed his views over time and while he
used to argue that there was no historical evidence supporting the existence of
Jesus, he later modified his position, and in his later book "The Jesus Myth"
accepted the possible existence of Jesus based on historical sources, although
still disputing the gospel portrayals of his life. Religious perspectives.
Apart from his own disciples and followers, the Jews of Jesus' day generally
rejected him as the Messiah, as do Jews today. For their part, Christian Church
Fathers, Ecumenical Councils, Reformers, and others have written extensively
about Jesus over the centuries. Christian sects and schisms have often been
defined or characterized by competing descriptions of Jesus. Meanwhile,
Manichaeans, Gnostics, Muslims, Baha'is, and others have found prominent places
for Jesus in their own religious accounts. Christian views. Although Christian
views of Jesus vary, it is possible to summarize key elements of the shared
beliefs among major denominations based on their catechetical or confessional
texts. Christian views of Jesus are derived from various sources, but
especially from the canonical Gospels, and New Testament letters, such as the
Letters of Paul and Johannine writings. These documents outline the key beliefs
held by Christians about Jesus, including his divinity, humanity, and earthly
life. Generally speaking, adhering to the Christian faith requires a belief
that Jesus is the Son of God and the "Christ". In the New Testament Jesus
indicates that he is the Son of God by calling God his father. However, not all
Christian denominations agree on all doctrines, and both major and minor
differences on teachings and beliefs have persisted throughout Christianity for
centuries. Christians consider Jesus the Christ and believe that through his
death and resurrection, humans can be reconciled to God and thereby are offered
salvation and the promise of eternal life. These teachings emphasize that as
the willing Lamb of God, Jesus "chose to" suffer in Calvary as a sign of his
full obedience to the will of the Eternal Father, as an "agent and servant of
God". The choice Jesus made thus counter-positions him as a the new and last
Adam, new man of morality and obedience, in contrast to Adam's disobedience.
Most Christians believe that Jesus was both human and the Son of God. While
there have been theological debate over the nature of Jesus, Trinitarian
Christians generally believe that Jesus is the Logos, God incarnate, God the
Son, and "true God and true man" (or both fully divine and fully human).
Nontrinitarian Christians reject the notion of the Holy Trinity, do not adhere
to the ecumenical councils and believe that their interpretations of the Bible
take precedence over the Christian creeds. Christians generally believe that
Jesus having become fully human, suffered the pains and temptations of a mortal
man, yet he did not sin, but defeated death and rose to life after his
crucifixion. According to the Bible, God raised him from the dead. He ascended
to heaven, to sit at the "Right Hand of God," and he will return to earth again
for the Last Judgment and the establishment of the Kingdom of God in the World
to Come. Christians not only attach theological significance to the works of
Jesus, but also to his name. Devotions to the Holy Name of Jesus go back to the
earliest days of Christianity. These devotions and feasts exist both in Eastern
and Western Christianity. Jewish views. Classic texts of Rabbinic Judaism
reject any notion of an anthropomorphic God. Tractate Ta'anit of the Jerusalem
Talmud states explicitly that ‚Äúif a man claims to be God, he is a liar.‚Äù
Furthermore Exodus Rabba 29 says, "'I am the first and I am the last, and
beside Me there is no God' I am the first, I have no father; I am the last, I
have no brother. Beside Me there is no God; I have no son." Judaism rejects the
idea of Jesus being God, or a person of a Trinity, or a mediator to God.
Judaism also holds that Jesus is not the Messiah, arguing that he had not
fulfilled the Messianic prophecies in the Tanakh nor embodied the personal
qualifications of the Messiah. According to Jewish tradition, there were no
prophets after Malachi, who delivered his prophesies about 420 BC/BCE. The
Talmud includes stories which some consider accounts of Jesus in the Talmud,
although there is a spectrum from scholars, such as Maier (1978), who considers
that only the accounts with the name "Yeshu" refer to the Christian Jesus, and
that these are late redactions, to scholars such as Klausner (1925), who
suggested that accounts related to Jesus in the Talmud may contain traces of
the historical Jesus. However the majority of contemporary historians disregard
this material as providing information on the historical Jesus. Many
contemporary Talmud scholars view these as comments on the relationship between
Judaism and Christians or other sectarians, rather than comments on the
historical Jesus. The "Mishneh Torah", an authoritative work of Jewish law,
provides the last established consensus view of the Jewish community, in
"Hilkhot Melakhim" 11:10‚Äì12 that Jesus is a "stumbling block" who makes "the
majority of the world err to serve a divinity besides God". According to
Conservative Judaism, Jews who believe Jesus is the Messiah have "crossed the
line out of the Jewish community". Reform Judaism, the modern progressive
movement, states "For us in the Jewish community anyone who claims that Jesus
is their savior is no longer a Jew and is an apostate". Islamic views. In
Islam, Jesus ( "") is considered to be a Messenger of God and the "Masih"
(Messiah) who was sent to guide the Children of Israel ("banƒ´ isrƒÅ'ƒ´l") with
a new scripture, the "Injƒ´l" or Gospel. The belief in Jesus (and all other
messengers of God) is required in Islam, and a requirement of being a Muslim.
The Qur'an mentions Jesus twenty-five times, more often, by name, than
Muhammad. There is no mention of Joseph in the Quran, but it includes the
annunciation to Mary (Arabic: Maryam) by an angel that she is to give birth to
Jesus while remaining a virgin, a miraculous event which occurred by the will
of God (Arabic: Allah). The details of the Mary's conception are not discussed
during the angelic visit, but elsewhere the Quran states (21:91 and 66:12) that
God breathed "His Spirit" into Mary while she was chaste. In Islam, Jesus is
called the "Spirit of God" because he was born through the action of the
spirit, but that belief does not include the doctrine of his pre-existence, as
it does in Christianity. Numerous other titles are given to Jesus in Islamic
literature, the most common being "al-Masƒ´·∏•" ("the messiah"). Jesus is also,
at times, called "Seal of the Israelite Prophets", because, in general Muslim
belief, Jesus was the last prophet sent by God to guide the Children of Israel.
Jesus is seen in Islam as a precursor to Muhammad, and is believed by Muslims
to have foretold the latter's coming. To aid in his ministry to the Jewish
people, Jesus was given the ability to perform miracles, all by the permission
of God rather than of his own power. The Qur'an emphasizes that Jesus was a
mortal human being who, like all other prophets, had been divinely chosen to
spread God's message. Islamic texts forbid the association of partners with God
("shirk"), emphasizing a strict notion of monotheism ("tawhƒ´d"). Like all
prophets in Islam, Jesus is considered to have been a "Muslim" (i.e., one who
submits to the will of God), as he preached that his followers should adopt the
"straight path" as commanded by God. Islam rejects the Christian view that
Jesus was God incarnate or the son of God, that he was ever crucified or
resurrected, or that he ever atoned for the sins of mankind. The Qur'an says
that Jesus himself never claimed any of these things, and it furthermore
indicates that Jesus will deny having ever claimed divinity at the Last
Judgment, and God will vindicate him. According to Muslim traditions, Jesus was
not crucified but instead, he was raised up by God unto the heavens. This
"raising" is understood to mean through bodily ascension. Muslims believe that
Jesus will return to earth near the day of judgment to restore justice. In the
19th century Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, the founder of the Ahmadiyya Movement, wrote
that Jesus survived his ordeal on the cross. According to Ahmad Jesus fled
Palestine after his apparent death and resurrection and migrated eastwards to
further teach the gospels, reaching India. Bah√°'√≠ views. In the teachings of
the Bah√°'√≠ Faith, Jesus is considered to be a Manifestation of God, a concept
in the Bah√°'√≠ Faith that refers to what are commonly called prophets. In
Bah√°'√≠ thought, Manifestations of God are the intermediary between God and
humanity, serving as messengers and reflecting God's qualities and attributes.
The Bah√°'√≠ concept also emphasizes the simultaneously existing qualities of
humanity and divinity. In the station of divinity, they show forth the will,
knowledge and attributes of God; in the station of humanity, they show the
physical qualities of common man. This concept is most similar to the Christian
concept of incarnation. In Bah√°'√≠ thought, Jesus incarnated God's attributes
as they were perfectly reflected and expressed, however Bah√°'√≠ teachings
reject the Christian belief that Divinity was contained with a single human
body because the Bah√°'√≠ teachings state that the essence of God is
transcendent above the physical reality. Bah√°'u'll√°h, the founder of the
Bah√°'√≠ Faith, wrote that since each Manifestation of God has the same divine
attributes they can be seen as the spiritual "return" of all the previous
Manifestations of God, and the appearance of each new Manifestation of God
inaugurates a religion that supersedes the former ones, a sequence known as
progressive revelation. Through this process Bah√°'√≠'s believe God's plan
unfolds gradually as mankind matures and some of the Manifestations arrive in
specific fulfilment of the missions of previous ones. Bah√°'√≠'s believe that
in this sense, Bah√°'u'll√°h is the promised return of Christ. Bah√°'√≠
teachings confirm many, but not all, aspects of the historical Jesus as
portrayed in the Gospels. They believe in the Virgin Birth, and the
crucifixion, but see the resurrection and the miracles he performed as
symbolic. Bah√°'√≠ thought also accepts Jesus' Sonship. Other views. Buddhist
views of Jesus differ. Some Buddhist views on Jesus including Tenzin Gyatso,
the 14th Dalai Lama regard Jesus as a bodhisattva who dedicated his life to the
welfare of human beings. It was recorded in 101 Zen Stories that the 14th
century Zen master Gasan J≈çseki, on hearing some of the sayings of Jesus in
the Gospels, remarked that he was "an enlightened man", and "not far from
Buddhahood". In a letter to his daughter Indira Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru wrote,
"All over Central Asia, in Kashmir and Ladakh and Tibet and even farther north,
there is a strong belief that Jesus or Isa travelled about there." However,
Robert Van Voorst states that modern scholarship has "almost unanimously
agreed" that claims of the travels of Jesus to Tibet, Kashmir or India contain
"nothing of value". Marcus Borg states that the suggestions that an adult Jesus
traveled to Egypt or India and came into contact with Buddhism are "without
historical foundation". Although modern parallels between the teachings of
Jesus and Buddha have been drawn, these comparisons emerged after missionary
contacts in the 19th century, and there is no historically reliable evidence of
contacts between Buddhism and Jesus during his life. John Dominic Crossan
states that none of the theories presented to fill the 15‚Äì18 year gap between
the early life of Jesus and the start of his ministry have been supported by
modern scholarship. Manichaeism (which at one point included Augustine of Hippo
as a follower, who later opposed it) accepted Jesus as a prophet, along with
Gautama Buddha and Zoroaster. More recently, the New Age movement entertains a
wide variety of views on Jesus. The New Age movement generally teaches that
Christhood is something that all may attain. Theosophists, from whom many New
Age teachings originated, refer to Jesus as the Master Jesus and believe the
Christ, after various incarnations occupied the body of Jesus. U.S. President
Thomas Jefferson, a deist, created the Jefferson Bible, an early (but not
complete) gospel harmony that included only Jesus' ethical teachings because he
did not believe in Jesus' divinity or any of the other supernatural aspects of
the Bible. Criticism. Criticism of Jesus has existed since the earliest days of
Christianity. The New Testament states that Jesus was criticized by the Jewish
authorities of his time, e.g. the Pharisees and scribes who criticized Jesus
and his disciples for not observing the Mosaic Law, not washing their hands
before eating (, ), or gathering grain on the Sabbath (). Later critics
included Celsus in the 2nd century and Porphyry who wrote a 15 volume attack on
Christianity as a whole. Jesus continued to be criticized by Judaism, and in
the early 12th century, the Mishneh Torah (the last established consensus of
the Jewish community) called Jesus a "stumbling block" who makes "the majority
of the world err to serve a divinity besides God". Criticism of Jesus continued
into the 19th century, with Nietzsche being highly critical of Jesus. For
instance, Nietzsche considered Jesus' teachings anti-natural in their treatment
of topics such as sexuality. In the 20th century Bertrand Russell was also
critical of Jesus and in "Why I Am Not a Christian" stated that Jesus was "not
so wise as some other people have been, and He was certainly not superlatively
wise."
