Legality of cannabis The legality of cannabis concerns laws which in most
countries regulate the use, possession, cultivation, transfer, and trade in
cannabis. Since the beginning of widespread cannabis prohibition around the mid
20th century, most countries have not re-legalized it for personal use,
although more than 10 countries tolerate (or have decriminalized) its use and/
or its cultivation in limited quantities. Medicinal use of cannabis is legal in
a number of countries, including Canada, the Czech Republic and Israel. While
federal law in the United States bans all sale and possession of cannabis,
enforcement varies widely at the state level and some states have established
medicinal marijuana programs in violation of federal law. In the Netherlands
cannabis is formally illegal, but Justice guidelines show that no action is to
be taken in case of possession of a small amount and sale under strict
conditions. Some countries have laws that are not as vigorously prosecuted as
others but, apart from the countries that offer access to medical marijuana,
most countries have various penalties ranging from lenient to very severe. Some
infractions are taken more seriously in some countries than others in regard to
the cultivation, use, possession or transfer of cannabis for recreational use.
A few jurisdictions have lessened penalties for possession of small quantities
of cannabis, making it punishable by confiscation and a fine, rather than
imprisonment. Some jurisdictions/drug courts use mandatory treatment programs
for young or frequent users, with freedom from narcotic drugs as the goal and a
few jurisdictions permit cannabis use for medicinal purposes. There are also
changes in a more restrictive direction as in Canada. Drug tests to detect
cannabis are increasingly common in many countries and have resulted in jail
sentences and people losing their jobs. However, simple possession can carry
long jail sentences in some countries, particularly in parts of East Asia and
Southeast Asia where the sale of cannabis may lead to a sentence of life in
prison or even execution. Under the name cannabis, 19th century medical
practitioners sold the drug (usually as a tincture), popularizing the word
amongst English-speakers. It was rumoured that Queen Victoria's menstrual pains
were treated with cannabis; her personal physician, Sir John Russell Reynolds,
wrote an article in the first edition of the medical journal "The Lancet" about
the benefits of cannabis. In 1894, the "Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs
Commission" commissioned by the UK Secretary of State and the government of
India, was instrumental in the decision not to criminalize the drug in those
countries. From 1860 different states in the United States started to implement
regulations for sales of "Cannabis sativa." In 1925 a change of the
International Opium Convention banned exportation of "Indian hemp" to countries
that have prohibited its use. Importing countries were required to issue
certificates approving the importation and stating that the shipment was to be
used "exclusively for medical or scientific purposes". In 1937 the F.D.
Roosevelt administration crafted the 1937 Marihuana Tax Act, the first US
national law making cannabis possession illegal via an unpayable tax on the
drug. The name "marijuana" (Mexican Spanish "marihuana", "mariguana") is
associated almost exclusively with the plant's psychoactive use. The term is
now well known in English largely due to the efforts of American drug
prohibitionists during the 1920s and 1930s. Mexico itself had passed
prohibition in 1925, following the International Opium Convention. The
prohibitionists deliberately used a Mexican name for cannabis in order to turn
the US populace against the idea that it should be legal by playing to negative
attitudes towards that nationality. ("See 1937 Marihuana Tax Act"). Those who
demonized the drug by calling it marihuana omitted the fact that the "deadly
marihuana" was identical to "Cannabis sativa", which had at the time a
reputation for pharmaceutical safety. However, due to variations in the potency
of the preparations, "Cannabis indica" in the 1930s had lost most of its former
popularity as a medical drug. Many advocate legalization of cannabis, believing
that it will eliminate the illegal trade and associated crime, yield a valuable
tax-source and reduce policing costs. Many consider the uninhibited
abbreviation of standard deviation that effects the aforementioned provision of
developed and synthesized domestic narcotics is a fundamental notion of a
global social aggregate. Cannabis is now available as a palliative agent, in
Canada, with a medical prescription. In 1969, only 16% percent of voters in the
USA supported legalization, according to a poll by Gallup. According to the
same source, that number had risen to 36% by 2005. More recent polling
indicates that the number has risen even further since the financial crisis of
2007-2009: in 2009, between 46% and 56% of US voters would support
legalization. In Europe has the development turned in the opposite direction in
the Netherlands where the last few years certain strains of cannabis with
higher concentrations of THC and drug tourism have challenged the former policy
with legal sales of cannabis and led to more restrictive approach; e.g. ban of
all sales of cannabis to tourists in coffee shops from the end of 2011 onward.
In 2012, the Netherlands dropped all proposals to ban the sale of cannabis to
foreigners. Detection and the law. As cannabis and its cultivation are illegal
in most parts of the world, considerable resources and effort are committed to
both interdiction and counter-interdiction of cultivation. Thermal imaging
helicopters (to detect hot lighting), inspection of trash (to find evidence of
cultivation including waste plant matter), examination of credit card purchases
(to find purchases from hydroponic equipment vendors), and analysis of energy
bills (to detect energy usage patterns of marijuana growers), have been used in
prosecutions. In the US, thermal imaging cameras are considered to violate
civil liberties embedded in the United States Constitution. This has resulted
in significant changes to domestic growing trends and has increased
availability. =By country= Australia. It is legal to use, possess, grow or sell
cannabis in Australia, but penalties differ for each state or territory. In the
Australian Capital Territory, South Australia, Western Australia and the
Northern Territory there are differing degrees of decriminalization for minor
offenses. In New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and Queensland the possession
of cannabis is considered a criminal offense. In the ACT a civil penalty system
for possession of small amounts of cannabis was introduced in 1993. Possession
of up to 25g or two non-hydroponic plants attracts a fine of A$100 to be paid
within 60 days. Offenders can choose to attend the Alcohol and Drug Program. In
South Australia possession of small quantities of cannabis is decriminalized
attracting fines similar to a parking ticket. However, penalties for
cultivation of marijuana have become harsher since the widespread advent of
large scale cultivation. There is much confusion on the subject, with many
people believing that possession of a certain amount is legal. The Northern
Territory, since 1996, adults found in possession of up to 50Â grams of
marijuana, one gram of hash oil, 10Â grams of hash or cannabis seed, or two
non-hydroponic plants can be fined $200 with 28 days to expiate rather than
face a criminal charge. In Western Australia, as of August 2011: A person found
in possession of 10Â grams or less of cannabis will receive a Cannabis
Intervention Requirement notice to attend a mandatory one on one counselling
session. Quantities larger than this attract a penalty of A$2000 or two years
in jail, or both. A person found in possession of more than 100g of cannabis
would be deemed to have that quantity for supply and could face a penalty of
A$20,000 or two years in jail. It is also illegal for cannabis smoking
implements to be displayed in shops or sold, with fines up to A$10,000 for
sales to adults and jail for up to two years or a fine of up to A$24,000 for
selling to minors. Opposing political sides have accused the government of
changing the laws to appear tough on drugs in response to an increased public
fear of clandestine drug labs following a number of them exploding in suburban
areas. In New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and Tasmania first-time
offences for possession and use of small amounts of cannabis or cannabis
products (e.g. cannabis oil or resin) can be dealt with by diversion programs,
which aim to divert offenders into education, assessment and treatment
programs. In New South Wales if you are caught with up to 15g of cannabis, at
the police's discretion, up to two cautions can be issued. In Tasmania up to
three cautions can be issued for possession of up to 50g of cannabis, with a
hierarchy of referrals for treatment then intervention for each caution.
Similarly in Victoria up to 50g of cannabis will attract a caution and the
opportunity to attend an education program; only two cautions will be dealt
out. In Queensland possession of cannabis or any schedule 1 or 2 drug specified
in the Drugs Misuse Regulation 1987 carries a maximum prison sentence of 15
years, however, jail terms for minor possessions are very rare. Possession of
smoking utensils or anything used to smoke cannabis is also a criminal offense
in Queensland. However, under the Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000 a
person who admits to carrying not more than 50Â grams (and is not committing
any other offence) must be offered a drug diversion program. With the rapid
expansion in hydroponic cannabis cultivation, the Australian Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act (1985) was amended in 2006, reducing the amount of cannabis
grown indoors under hydroponic conditions that qualifies as a 'commercial
quantity' or as a 'large quantity'. Bangladesh. Cannabis is grown throughout
the Bengal region, which is currently split between Bangladesh and the Indian
state of West Bengal. In both parts of Bengal, cannabis (Bengali:
à¦à¦¾à¦à¦à¦¾ "gÃ£ja") has been widely used for centuries. Cannabis was
banned in Northern Bangladesh in 1984. As of now, cannabis is still illegally
available in the underground markets of Bangladesh, and is in somewhat common
use among people. It is known as ganja or hashish, and drunk in bhang. Belgium.
Individual or solo use by adults has the lowest priority to police and
government instances, if the use doesn't cause any problems to their
environment. This basically means only the use in public places, possession of
more than 3Â grams, or the sale of the drug are pursued in court. However, the
use in the presence of minors is strictly forbidden. The cultivation of one
female cannabis plant for personal use is decriminalized. Other than
cultivating a female cannabis plant, there is no legal way of obtaining
cannabis. Brazil. On June 15, 2011, the eight ministers of Brazil's Supreme
Court (STF) that participated in the trial were unanimous in free
demonstrations for the legalization of drugs, such as the Marcha da Maconha (,
"Marijuana Walk") in Brazil (part of the Global Marijuana March), in which they
decided that the demonstrations are an exercise of freedom of expression and
not incitement to crime, as argued judges who have banned the march in the
past. The discussion of the "Marcha da Maconha" reached the Supreme Court in
June 2009 when the Deputy Attorney General of the Republic Deborah Duprat filed
the claim of breach of fundamental precept, ADPF 187. In the lawsuit, the
attorney states that the legal prohibition of the demonstrations in favor of
marijuana and other narcotics have been based on misinterpretation of the
Criminal Code. She said that it is "wrong" to say that the realization of these
events are an "apology to crime". The practice of smoking marijuana was bought
to Brazil from its African slaves, and with the eugenic positivist intellectual
and political status quo of the Western civilization in the early 20th century,
its use was deemed as a signal of decadence by its stigmatized use as a
recreational drug of the poor, the rural people and the Afro-Brazilian. It was
deemed to cause serious harm both to the physical and to the mental health of
smokers and blamed recreational cannabis use for multiple problems such as
"idiocy, violence, unbridled sensuality, madness and racial degeneration". In
fact, little knowledge about cannabis was generalized, with many likening its
effects to those produced by opium, and also considered to be immensely
addictive in similar levels. Its association with the counterculture and left-
wing youths during the highly anti-Communist military dictatorship, initially a
strong ally of the United States' government, fortified its negative
perceptions both by the authorities and the masses, and many myths relative to
marijuana and its users circulate up to day, even being the topic by far not a
taboo as it was in the past decades. Nevertheless, since the neoliberal centre-
right government of Fernando Henrique Cardoso (1994â2002), position
strengthened in the so-called "Era Lula" (2003â2010), individual marijuana
use by adults started to have no major importance to police and government
instances â though not, ironically (since the country has major crime
problems with drug dealers), its domestic cultivation for own consumption. One
can see and smell people smoking the so-called "maconha" openly in Brazil's
Centre-Southern half as well as in the Northeastern states, and recreational
use of cannabis in private became more accepted among large sectors of the
middle classes since the early 1990s. The academic milieu is no exception and,
today, a sizeable minority of Brazilian University lecturers, students and
researchers smoke cannabis. Canada. Cannabis is currently illegal in Canada,
with exceptions only for medical usage. The marijuana laws in Canada are
currently under review as an Ontario court judge deemed the laws
unconstitutional thus giving the government 90 days, as of April 13, 2011, to
revamp the law. As of June 22, 2011, the prosecutor and federal government was
granted a stay on the 90 day deadline, extending it by an additional 6 months,
pushing the deadline back to November. In October 2007, Prime Minister Harper
announced a new National Anti-Drug Strategy. A proposed Bill would have dealers
facing one-year mandatory prison sentences if theyâre operating for organized
crime purposes, or if violence is involved. Dealers would also face a two-year
mandatory jail sentence if theyâre selling to youth, or dealing drugs near a
school or an area normally frequented by youth. Additionally, people in Canada
who run a large marijuana grow operation of at least 500 plants would risk
facing a mandatory two-year jail term. Maximum penalties for producing cannabis
would increase from 7 to 14 years. Perhaps the biggest proposed policy change
is mandatory six-month sentencing for those growing as little as one marijuana
plant for the purposes of trafficking. If the Bill passes, this is also likely
to be felt by small-time distributors who are not linked to the ring of
organized crime, and who usually face no more than a fine if caught. The
Conservative Party now holds a majority government, with the NDP (New
Democratic Party) as the official opposition. Previous attempts by past Liberal
Governments in the late 1990s and early 2000s to decriminalize marijuana for
personal use have failed to become law. On September 20, 2011, the newly-
elected Conservative majority government re-introduced an omnibus crime bill,
Bill C-10. (formely known as the "Safe Streets and Communities Act") The bill
combines more than 10 different pieces of previously unpassed criminal
legislation, as well as proposing to amend the Criminal Code of Canada with
respect to drug offences. This bill specifically targets growers, dealers and
consumers of cannabis, introducing mandatory minimum sentences for the
cultivation of modest amounts of cannabis. This proposed legislation has come
under substantial criticism and scrutiny from opposition party MPs as well as
numerous experts and intellectuals, particularly from the US. The position of
the Harper government is notably in defiance of credible evidence of the harm
caused by the decades of drug prohibition, contrary to many US states (most
notably Texas), which are relaxing drug laws. The provinces of Ontario, Quebec
and British Columbia have expressed their opposition towards bearing the likely
great costs and other effects the bill will bring, particularly since the
government has not yet disclosed the costs as well as some other information
associated with the proposed legislation. Costa Rica. Cannabis is used in Costa
Rica, in spite of it being illegal. Police officers might not arrest someone
unless the amount carried is seemingly for distribution or selling. Much of it
is grown in the rain forest reserves, as no person can be prosecuted for that,
but more potent strains are grown hydroponically in small grow-ops in San
JosÃ©. There is a small percentage coming from Jamaica, but the most popular
kind is grown locally. Laura Chinchilla, the president of Costa Rica
(2010â2014) stated -"It must be approached very rigorously based on empiric
evidence and the experiences other countries have had when boarding widely the
concept of legalization [...]" after a meeting with JosÃ© Miguel Insulza,
Secretary General of the Organization of American States, regarding the fight
against hard drug smuggling from Colombia to the USA. Czech Republic. In 1938
production and possession (but not the consumption) of drugs became a
punishable crime in Czechoslovakia. The law did not distinguish between
different types of drugs. Until the Velvet Revolution (1989) narcotics were
only a minor problem in Czech society. A law from 1992 stopped criminalization
of drug possession for personal use. This changed in 1998, ""possession of more
than a small amount of drugs"" (the amount was not defined) became a criminal
offence again. The limits were defined later through internal research by Czech
law enforcers making the possession of under 15Â grams not a crime. The owner
could be fined. Consumption was not punishable. Enforcement of the law was
spotty and sometimes inconsistent. The impact of this change was reviewed by a
Czech Government report which found the availability of illicit drugs did not
decrease and there had been no reduction in prevalence of illicit drug use as a
result of the 1998 re-criminalisation. Possession of âlarger than a small
amountâ of marijuana can result in a jail sentence of up to one year. For
other illicit drugs, the sentence is two years. Trafficking offenses carry
stiffer sentences. The Czech Republic now joins Portugal as a European country
that has decriminalized drug possession. Young people are the most frequent
users of marijuana: a poll from 2007 estimated that almost 30% of Czechs under
24 had tried it. In 2007 the Supreme Court of the Czech Republic ruled that
mere cultivation of hemp should not be punishable unless production of the drug
is proven; an officer from the Czech anti-drug unit was quoted saying that
"this decision is irrelevant to our work." As of 2007 several initiatives
towards either decriminalization of marijuana or creating a more tolerated
category of "soft drugs." Denmark. In Denmark, despite a general public
tolerance towards cannabis for private consumption, cannabis remains illegal.
Possession of less than 10Â grams (.35 oz) cannabis is punishable by a fine of
2000DKK (370USD) for a first-time offender, 3000DKK for a second-time offender,
and 4000DKK for a third-time offender. However, possession of small quantities
of cannabis, or public use, often is tolerated by the police and people
involved in it go away with a verbal warning. Denmark's capital, Copenhagen is
home to a self-proclaimed autonomous neighborhood called Christiania, where
cannabis and hashish are both sold openly. In a display of Denmarkâs
tolerance, this sale, which has fueled an alternative, freewheeling, culture in
Christiania, was allowed largely unhindered until 2004, when sanctions were
imposed to moderate it. Since 2004, a number of raids led by Danish authorities
have led to unrest and tension between Christiania's residents and the Danish
government. In recent years, Copenhagen Municipality has been in favor of
legalizing cannabis via state-run coffee-shops, in order to take over the
control of the substance which is currently mostly supplied by criminal gangs.
The proposal could make the city the first to fully legalise marijuana
consumption, but it still has to be approved by the Folketing. Estonia. It is
illegal to grow, possess or trade cannabis in Estonia. Consumption and
possession in small amounts will lead to a fine. Larger amounts than 10Â grams
is considered trafficking and can lead to a maximum jail sentence of 5 years.
Growing is illegal and can lead to a jail sentence, which can also be up to 5
years. Possession of seeds is legal, import and export is illegal. Finland.
Possession, manufacture and use of cannabis products were prohibited by law in
Finland in 1972. The parliamentary discussion and the following vote resulted
in a stalemate, so the issue was resolved by drawing lots - which resulted in
cannabinoid products becoming illegal. In practice, possession or manufacture
of cannabis products is considered to be a minor misdemeanor punishable by a
minor fine (normally in the range of 60-500 euros). A supreme court decision of
2004 set up a "half a dozen" precedent: Cultivation of up to 6 plants for
personal use is subject to the same penalties as personal use. The same applies
to distribution and use within a "closed circle of users". However, open
distribution is generally punished very severely. Aside from criminal
penalties, users are often persecuted by welfare authorities on the pretext of
child welfare (if the user has offspring); withdrawal of driving license is
also commonplace. In 2010 police first time used the law passed in 2006, which
makes selling equipment for creating or growing drugs illegal. This resulted in
closing of a gardening store Viherpeukku and 200 home searches through the
customer register. The owners of Viherpeukku were charged for selling gardening
equipment with knowledge, that they could be used in home growing of Cannabis.
Some controversy rose from the home searches due many of them being done into
legal chili farmers houses. Those charges were later dropped by the supreme
court. The court saw that although the owners might have known that some of the
fertilizers may have been used for cultivation of cannabis, they are not
directly aiming at that market. France. In France the law prohibits "any
presentation in a favorable light" of narcotic substances. Because of this law,
organizations seeking to promote the decriminalization (as the collective
information and research cannabis) are often put off-the-law and therefore risk
severe penalties for incitement to drug use. In addition, a public body, MILDT
(Interministerial Mission for the fight against drugs and addiction) informs
extensively (website, brochures, etc..) On the hard drugs, placing cannabis in
the midst of them, the compared to drugs such as cocaine or LSD. Harm reduction
is recognized by French law since 2004. The law allows the movement of hemp
(cannabis seeds) and their trade between the Member States of the European Free
Trade Area (EU + Norway, Switzerland and Iceland). Individuals can use hemp
legal (with a certificate of compliance) for personal use only; their
production, use and cultivation for commercial or professional activity is
subject to authorization. These varieties are in fact non-psychoactive hemp.
Individuals are required to retain certificates of conformity provided for sale
of hemp or, failing that, the package that lists the references, in order to
prove that the variety planted or owned is allowed. These varieties of cannabis
on the list issued by the European Union, must be a decree that requires their
permission. All imports from countries not members of the European zone of free
exchange can be performed by an importer licensed by the European Union. The
specificity of the French law led to a formal speech that can seem quite
confusing to most other European nationals. Besides the debate, French law bans
the production, possession, sale, purchase and use of drugs, with penalties
more or less severe depending on the act. Traffic, that is to say, the
possession, transport, supply, transfer or acquisition of narcotic, is punished
with imprisonment for a term exceeding ten years or a fine up to 7.5 million
euros The simple use is normally punished by a maximum sentence of one year
imprisonment or a fine of up to 3 750 euros. However, the consumer can simply
be treated as a trafficker and therefore be liable to the same penalties.
Indeed, cannabis necessarily implies to hold, and thus to buy or to produce,
leaving free the judge to penalize the user on the basis of the Code of Public
Health (use ) or the Penal Code (possession / trafficking / production).
Specifically, the judge's decision will depend mainly seizures, history of the
accused, etc.. As for production, even for personal use, it is punishable by a
maximum sentence of twenty years'imprisonment or a fine of up to 7.5 million
euros. Germany. While illegal, possession is generally not fined for first time
offenders, as long as a certain maximum amount (so called "geringe Menge" =
English "small amount") is not exceeded. This maximum amount varies between 6
and 15Â grams depending on which particular federal state the person is in. The
person caught will have the cannabis confiscated. Until 2002 one could have
one's driver's license taken away because of cannabis possession, even if
driving a car was not involved. This still happens today, especially in
Bavaria. In the southern states, especially in Bavaira, sometimes homes are
being searched without warrants, even when only traces of cannabis are found on
suspects. "Use" of cannabis is not illegal in Germany. Law enforcement in the
city of Berlin and many other major cities currently places a very low priority
on enforcement of cannabis laws; many people smoke openly in parks and bars
throughout the central city. Honduras. In Honduras it is illegal to grow,
plant, harvest, collect or possess cannabis. Violators can face 9 to 12 years
in prison and a fine of 5,000 Lps. (US$265) to 25,000 Lps. (US$1,323). It is
also illegal to own cannabis seeds. Traffickers can face 15 to 20 years in
prison and a fine of 1,000,000 Lps. to 5,000,000 Lps. Hong Kong. Mainland China
has a different legal system from Hong Kong. India. Often seen as the country
where the plant originates from, throughout India it is illegal to grow,
consume, or traffic cannabis since 1980, although bhang is sold legally in some
states. Usage of cannabis, also locally known as ganja (Sanskrit "ganjika") or
"bhang" (when made into a drink) is common during some religious festivals.
Sadhus openly smoke "ganja" and there are government licensed "bhang" shops in
some regions. Furthermore, on the festival of Holi, cannabis is widely consumed
in the open in its numerous forms. Charas, bhang and ganja (with seeds in it)
are by far the most common forms of the drug in India; it is widely available
and bhang and ganja are relatively inexpensive. Charas on the other hand is
quite expensive and not available all over the country. Ireland. The most
recent Misuse of Drugs (Designation) Order (S.I. No. 69/1998) lists cannabis,
cannabis resin, cannabis and its derivatives as Schedule 1 drugs under the
Misuse of Drugs Acts of 1977 and 1984. As a consequence manufacture,
production, preparation, sale, supply, distribution and possession of cannabis
is unlawful for any purpose, except under license from the Minister for Health.
The gardaÃ­ (Irish police) have a level of discretion when dealing with
recreational cannabis users. To procure a conviction any cannabis seized has to
be sent for analysis to the Garda Forensic Science Laboratory. This, along with
the time needed to process the arrest, means that individual gardaÃ­ may decide
not to arrest for small amounts, GardaÃ­ cannot arrest for simple possession if
they are satisfied with the name and address of the offender. If there are
enough drugs for sale or supply then GardaÃ­ can arrest but the drug will be
seized and the name and address of the individual will be taken. Possession of
cannabis is an arrestable offense and, in 2003, 53 per cent of all drug
confiscations and 70 per cent of all drug-related prosecutions were for
cannabis. Trafficking or possession with intent to supply are serious offenses
under Irish law. There is no law against possession or sale of cannabis seeds.
However, the growing of cannabis, even for medicinal benefits by genuine
sufferers, is often treated harshly by the courts. Various movements have been
founded to legalize the drug, including an attempt at starting a cannabis
legalization political party. Current DÃ¡il member Luke Flanagan the former
mayor of Roscommon is known for his long running campaign to legalise cannabis.
Israel. Israel considers cannabis illegal; however, punishment is not severe
for "personal use". The amount defined by the law as "for personal use" is 15g
of marijuana and hashish. Due to the popularity of nargila in Israel, smoking
using paraphernalia is a common sight at popular street cafes. Consequently,
there is little social stigma attached to smoking using marijuana
paraphernalia. A medical marijuana program is existent; however patients must
meet certain prerequisites. The categories include patients suffering from
nausea induced by chemotherapy or those in the later stages of HIV. Trials have
been conducted by the IDF for soldiers experiencing Posttraumatic stress
disorder. Italy. Cannabis is illegal in Italy. Current legislation establishes
quantitative limits of active ingredient: within those limits it is considered
an administrative offense, over them it is regarded as pushing; whoever is
considered to produce, sell, give or traffic every kind of substance is
punished with 6â20 years of imprisonment. The years are reduced to 1-3 if the
cultivation is for personal use only. However, jurisprudence is contradictory
concerning growing for personal use. Medical use of substances prepared with
marijuana are legal, if provided by medical prescription. In July 2008,
however, the Italian Supreme Court ruled that Rastafari may be allowed to
possess greater amounts of cannabis legally, owing to its use by them as a
sacrament. Japan. Penalties for possession or use of marijuana in Japan are
severe, and convicted offenders can expect long jail sentences and fines.
Possession of any amount, as little as 0.1Â g, is punishable by jail sentence
for up to 5Â years and/or a fine of up to 30,000,000Â yen (USD 344 790).
Moreover, the defendant has to stay in police custody for at least a few weeks
until a court decision is made. Mexico. On April 29, 2006, the Congress of
Mexico passed a bill decriminalizing possession of small amounts of drugs
intended for recreational use (up to 5g for marijuana). The new bill was hoped
to relieve cartel-related crime as well as reduce drug-related arrests. A
possibly unintended consequence would have been increased tourism. The move
caused many in the US government to question Mexico's commitment to the War on
Drugs. However, President Fox sent the legislation back, asking that the
decriminalization be removed. This action showed the U.S. government's
influence over the Mexican Government's decisions, sparking broad controversy
over the bill. On October 14, 2008 a bill was proposed in Mexico City's
Congress to legalize the consumption, possession and commerce of Marijuana. The
bill states that only a person over 18 can have access to the drug, the places
where marijuana is sold cannot also sell alcoholic drinks, and must be at least
1000 meters away from schools. The Government would issue special licenses for
the distribution of marijuana in special places, similar to the legislation in
the Netherlands. On August 21, 2009, Mexico decriminalized "personal use"
possession of up to 5Â grams of marijuana, half a gram of cocaine, 50
milligrams of heroin, 40 milligrams for methamphetamine and 0.015 milligrams of
LSD. Nepal. Marijuana was made illegal in Nepal in mid 70's but it was never
really enforced. It is widely tolerated: in some parts of the country - mostly
in rural areas - it is a way of life. Law against marijuana is rarely enforced
although selling and transporting of hashish could be taken seriously. It has
been a very popular destination for teenagers from countries like Israel for
the same reason. Netherlands. The possession/purchase of Cannabis is tolerated
in small amounts. One can purchase cannabis in special shops (called
"coffeeshops") if one is aged eighteen and over. Sale and purchase of cannabis
anywhere else is illegal. Cultivation and wholesale of cannabis is likewise
"tolerated" in small amounts (guidelines here are no more than five plants at
home or the possession of 5Â grams per adult max.). The tolerance guidelines
appear in appendix of the Opium Act. The Opium Act states very clearly that
every part of the hemp plant is banned except for the seeds â this is in
accordance with many of the international treaties which the Netherlands have
signed. It is for this reason Cannabis cannot be legalised in the Netherlands.
Thus, it remains illegal but it is "tolerated." A recent court decision allowed
a medical cannabis patient to avoid legal prosecution for possession of a small
number of cannabis plants; however, the state is appealing the decision. By
2009, 27 "coffee shops" selling cannabis in Rotterdam, Netherlands, all within
250 meters from schools must close down. This is nearly half of the coffeeshops
that currently operate within its municipality. This is due to a new policy of
city mayor Ivo Opstelten and the town council as a result of increased use of
"soft drugs" among pupils. Although outdoor use is prohibited this is also
"tolerated" in most places. Since January 2006 certain areas in the district
"De Baarsjes" in Amsterdam have been declared official cannabis-free zones
because of nuisance to inhabitants of the areas. A special road sign was chosen
out of 3 designs by Hans Bos to designate the areas. This sign is not a
recognized traffic sign however as it is not used outside of Amsterdam. For a
while the municipality of Amsterdam sold the signs in an effort to curtail
theft of traffic sign. Higher concentrations of THC and drug tourism have
challenged the current policy and led to a re-examination of the current
approach; e.g. ban of all sales of cannabis to tourists in coffee shops from
end of 2011 was proposed but currently only the border city of Maastricht has
adopted the measure in order to test out its feasibility. In May 2011 the
government decided that, starting in 2012, each coffee shop must operate like a
private club with some 1,000 to 1,500 members. In order to qualify for a
membership card, applicants have to be adult Dutch resident, membership will
only to be allowed in one club. As of October, 2012 the Dutch government has
scrapped the plan to require club membership, instead leaving it up to
individual cities to decide who is allowed in their coffeshops. New Zealand.
Possession of cannabis is illegal in New Zealand and can result in a fine of up
to $500 or even a 3-month prison sentence (though the latter is rarely used).
Anyone caught in possession of more than 28Â grams of cannabis or 100 cannabis
joints is classed as a dealer unless s/he can prove they are not. Cannabis is a
class C drug in New Zealand, of which the penalty for dealing can result in a
maximum prison sentence of 8 years under the New Zealand Misuse of Drugs Act
1975. There have been many public campaigns to decriminalise cannabis but so
far none have succeeded. Norway. Any consumption, possession, buying or selling
of cannabis is prohibited by law in Norway. Possession of up to 15Â grams of
cannabis will be punished by fines and anything above 15Â grams can be punished
by jail. Jail penalties may vary due to the amount of cannabis involved but
they range from 6 months to 21 years. There have recently been some political
discussion whether or not to decriminalize marijuana, but so far (as of
September 2011), only two political parties, the youth rally of the party
Venstre (a liberal party) (the party itself states decriminalization) and The
Greens state legalization or decriminalization as a goal. The political parties
themselves are often internally split on this matter. Peru. In Peru usage of
marijuana and possession of up to 8Â grams is legal if no other drugs are
carried. Poland. Cannabis is a controlled substance in Poland and its
possession remains a criminal offence which can be punished with imprisonment
up to 3 years, or up to 8 years if the quantity in possession is considered
'large' upon current law. No specific measurements are given to determine if an
amount is to be considered 'small' or 'large'. Cultivation is also illegal and
is threatened with up to 3 years of imprisonment and up to 8 years if
considered 'large'. On 1st April 2011, the Polish parliament passed an
amendment to the 2005 'Ustawa o przeciwdziaÅaniu narkomanii' ("Drug-dependence
Counteract Law") to create a possibility of dropping prosecution for possession
of small amounts of drugs for personal use. The law introduces the possibility
when a person caught possesses negligible amounts of drugs for personal use
only and the 'social harmfulness' of the case is considered to be low (i.e.-
negligible). Nonetheless the "small amounts" are still undetermined and a
temporary detention and house search by the police continues to apply in
virtually every case. At the same time the reformed law raised the maximum
applicable penalties for possession of large amounts of controlled substances
(including cannabis) from 8 to 10 years of imprisonment and from 10 to 12 years
for trafficking of large amounts of controlled substances, among other related
crimes. This implies hardening the law without eliminating the ambiguous terms
'small amounts'/'large amounts'. These amendments entered into legal force on
8th December 2011. Portugal. Personal consumption of cannabis is limited in the
range of 2.5Â gram marijuana, 0.5Â gram hashish and 0.25 of hash oil per day.
One may possess no more than 10 daily doses, otherwise it may be categorized as
trafficking. The consumption still entails a penalty and fine. Cultivation
however, is still completely illegal and even cultivation of a single plant is
assumed to indicate involvement with trafficking. Possession of seeds is also
illegal and despite there being several "head shops" or "grow shops" in
Portugal, they, too, are forbidden to market cannabis seeds. At the same time,
the number of grow shops has increased over the past few years, which seems to
indicate that cultivation for personal use (in Portuguese: auto-cultivo) is
becoming a more common practice. The 2006 Global Marijuana March () was
celebrated for the first time in Lisbon and in 2007 both Lisbon and Porto
celebrated it. Romania. Romania is a leader in hemp fiber, second only to
China. However, possession of any quantity is punishable by law. Marijuana is
considered high risk drug. Law no. 143/2000 on combating illicit drug
trafficking and use. Chapter II sanctioning illicit trafficking and other
operations with controlled substances national Article 4. Cultivation,
production, manufacture, testing, extraction, preparation, processing, purchase
or possession of drugs for personal use, without law, shall be punished with
imprisonment for 2â5 years. Decriminalization is proposed, but it doesn't
have any political support (only 2 politicians are public known to be pro-
decriminalization). The media is totally against any kind of pro-marijuana
manifestations and therefore has a big impact on the population, as most of the
mid-age and elderly people cannot distinguish between soft and hard drugs. The
possession of seeds is not banned by law (it is not illegal, but neither
legal), but if caught possessing seeds, they are usually confiscated without
any other consequence. Hashish is considered a high-risk drug, therefore even
the possession of very small quantities is usually punished with jail time.
Russia. Possession of up to 6Â grams (dry weight) of cannabis or 2Â grams of
hashish is punishable by fine 4000-5000 roubles or administrative detention of
up to 15 days (KoAP 6.8). Possession of more than this amount is punishable by
prison term (UK 228). Growing more than 20 plants is punishable by prison term
(UK 231). Consumption is not criminalized, punishable, or technically subject
to fining. In practice carrying any amount of illegal drugs is considering in
court as "transfer" and is punishable by 4 to 8 years of imprisonment (UK
228.1). However, "intoxicated in public" fines (approximately $10) can be and
are applied to those visibly under influence in public places. Note that, for
intoxication in public fines to be applied, the offending substance does not
have to be identified (or illegal, for that matter), and the fine is applied
for being in a state of influence that is a potential or actual public
nuisance, not for the fact of consumption. South Africa. The use, possession,
cultivation and supply of cannabis remains illegal in the Republic of South
Africa. South Africa was the first country to enact anti-cannabis legislation
at the turn of the 20th century in 1908. NORML ZA (the National Organization
for the Reform of Marijuana Laws in South Africa) is currently the largest
cannabis advocacy group and claims to represent the country's estimated 2-
3 million regular cannabis users. "The Dagga Couple" are gaining prominence for
their bid to have cannabis 're-legalized' in the country's Constitutional
Court. They have launched a nationwide campaign aimed at educating the public
about the real reasons as to why cannabis was made illegal and why these laws
should be overturned. The Dagga Couple are also producing a blueprint, which
will indicate how the government could go about regulating a cannabis market in
the event that it should be legalized Spain. In Spain the possession and use of
cannabis in public places is classed as a misdemeanour under public health laws
and is punishable by fines and confiscation. Trafficking is a criminal offense.
One can be denounced for doing so by neighbors or ill-wishers, and the burden
is then effectively on the user or grower to prove that the material is for
personal use only. In recent years a number of members' associations have been
established throughout the country in an attempt to extend the boundary of the
Spanish citizen's constitutional rights. In an association cannabis is grown
and shared among the members. The association may not promote or be seen to
encourage the use of cannabis and it must be a closed group for existing adult
consumers only, distributing only small amounts regularly to each member
(typically 10Â grams per week) so as to prevent the possibility of trafficking.
As well as a membership fee, members must pay for what they consume and prices
may not be much different than on the black market. Where the associations have
come under legal challenge they have been able to surmount this, and in at
least one case have secured the return of several kilos of confiscated plants.
The umbrella group for cannabis associations in Spain is the FederaciÃ³n de
Asociaciones CannÃ¡bicas: http://www.fac.cc/ and Politic Group:RCN-NOK
Representacion Cannabica de Navarra: http://www.rcnavarra.org/ However, the
autonomous Basque Country in the northern region of Spain has announced it is
to legalise the sale and cultivation of cannabis to persons over the age of 18.
Sweden. It is illegal to purchase, possess, sell, transfer or consume any
amount of cannabis in Sweden. If police suspect someone has consumed cannabis
they could be ordered to take a drug test, which is seen as a way to prove
consumption. Minor offenses, such as simple consumption generally renders a 30
day-fine (a day-fine is currently between 50 to 1000 SEK, depending on salary)
while possession and even occasional cultivation of plants for personal use
attracts higher fines (up to 150 day-fines) as long as they are under the
threshold for minor drug offenses. For the purchase, smuggling and possession
of larger amounts, organized cultivation or sale, the punishments range from 6
months to 10 years imprisonment The combined sentence can be even longer, for
example when a series of crimes are added up into one sentence. Depending on
the circumstances 14 or 18 years is the maximum penalty before limitation rules
set in. Every time reasonable suspicion arises, the police are obliged to
intervene under a zero tolerance strategy even though mere police intuition is
legally insufficient. The expressed aim of government is the creation of a
""drug-free society"" and the police are to give high priority towards drug
crimes. However, as a condition of largely being a victimless crime, the
police's own efforts are essential to apprehend cannabis offenders. That is, as
opposed to many other crimes where a victim will report it to the police, they
must apprehend the drug users and more advanced criminals for themselves.
Influenced by the practices in the US, all police officers in external duty are
to receive training to become Drug Recognition Experts (DRE) to better detect
persons under the influence of drugs. Something that have led to increasing
numbers of apprehended drug users. The traffic police especially, have
integrated DRE-practices to test suspected drivers into their every day
routine. With the exemption of Khat, Cannabis has the least "penal value" per
effective dose. Even with the general exemption for drug offences, among
juveniles this is of special priority regardless of what drugs are involved.
When juveniles are apprehended, the police are obliged to report the young user
to the municipal social care. Although the charges often are dropped in
consideration of their youth, the social service may then take various measures
ranging from just talking to the adolescent and their parents to placing the
delinquent in forced treatment for substance abuse. In 2011 the Swedish
government has given 48 MSEK (6 million USD) extra to a campaign against
smoking of cannabis among young men in the biggest cities. What this budget
will entail is still under debate but it is administrated by other authorities
than the Police. Cannabis seeds are not legally classified as cannabis and mere
possession of seeds is not illegal. Growing cannabis for industrial use is
legal for farmers with at least 4 ha land if the grower has applied for area-
based support for the crop and grows EU certified seeds (that have a very low
percentage of THC). Switzerland. As of 1/1/12 home grown cannabis is legal up
to 4 plants each. The sale of cannabis is illegal. Cannabis is classified as an
illegal narcotic in Switzerland. The production and sale of illegal narcotics
is punishable by a monetary penalty or by imprisonment of up to three years, as
are public incitements to the consumption of illegal narcotics. The enforcement
of the prohibition on cannabis is spotty, because around 500,000 Swiss people
are believed to use cannabis regularly or occasionally. In a health poll
conducted in 1997, 7% of people aged 15 to 39 stated that they were currently
consuming cannabis. Also, in 1998, some 250 hectares of land were used in
Switzerland to grow cannabis, yielding more than 100 tons of cannabis per year.
The product is sold mostly on the street and (in "scent bags" or covertly)
through "cannabis shops" clustered in the urban centers. These shops, of which
there were about 135 in 1999 and which authorities believe earn about 85-95% of
their income with illegal narcotics, are the target of irregular police
crackdowns in some cities, while in others they are tolerated to some degree.
Overall, enforcement varies substantially depending on the canton. Some
tolerate limited public consumption while others periodically attempt to limit
it. Nationwide, police registered some 27,000 cannabis-related infractions in
1999. Breaking News: [16.11.2011] Cannabis plants can flourish freely in the
lounge or on the balcony of individuals, provided they are four in number, and
they are not marketed. This authorization derives from Latin Concordat on
culture and commerce of hemp, which was ratified this year by the cantons of
Vaud, NeuchÃ¢tel, Geneva and Fribourg. The Jura, Valais and Ticino, have yet to
decide. This text, which should come into force on 1 January 2012, aims to
harmonize the regulation of culture and commerce of hemp in the different
cantons. As noted in today's Le Matin, the heads of the Departments of Justice
and Police also hope that this arrangement will play a preventive role.
"Avoiding anarchy" "This is a regulation to prevent anarchy and tourism between
the cantons," said State Councilor Jean Studer NeuchÃ¢tel in the daily Romand.
Thus, each person who wishes to grow more than four plants has an obligation to
announce it to the competent authorities in order to receive authorization. In
addition, recent reserve the right to control nuisance, including homes. If the
text has attracted the majority of speaking cantons, the Valais. In The Morning
Rothen Michel, president of the PDC of Valais, said that his party will oppose
the ratification of the Concordat, discussed today at the Grand Council of
Valais. "We have always been against the decriminalization of consumption, we
can not accept that the law allows each to grow four plants of hemp home."
Syria. Under the laws of the government of Bashar al-Assad, cannabis use
carries harsh penalties, up to life imprisonment. However, in some Kurdish
areas cleared of government forces during the Syrian civil war, cannabis
cultivation has emerged as a common way of earning income in the war-torn
region. Turkey. The THC-containing cannabis is totally forbidden in Turkey.
Persons carrying less than 12.5Â grams of cannabis are required to attend rehab
once a week and are subjected to mandatory drug screenings for a six month
period if it is a first time offense. If it is not, the punishment is one year
of prison. Drug trafficking is punished with long term imprisonment. United
Kingdom. Cannabis is illegal in the United Kingdom but punishments are usually
minor, resulting in a confiscation and a "cannabis warning" for small amounts.
A record of the warning is retained on police information databases for
intelligence purposes (effectively so the police can check to see if someone
has previously been given a warning) and a crime is recorded under the Home
Office Counting Rules but this is not disclosable to third parties. A cannabis
warning will not show up on a CRB check, though a police caution for cannabis
possession would do (which is usually the next step if someone already with a
warning is caught and arrested). Technically there is nothing to prevent the
police from giving an individual with personal use amounts of cannabis repeated
cannabis warnings, but most forces operate along guidelines that if someone has
been caught once (sometimes twice) within a 12 month period then they are
arrested if caught again. Cannabis warnings can only be given to persons aged
18 and over. Due to international agreements the UK is signatory to, the
cannabis warning process could not be extended to those under 18, who have to
either be dealt with unofficially by confiscation and parental disclosure or by
means of arrest. In 1928: Cannabis became illegal in the United Kingdom as a
class B drug. In 2004, cannabis was downgraded to a class C substance.
Consequently there was a "significant fall in its use" and a "50 per cent rise
in the number of people" seeking "medical treatment after using the drug". In
2008, the government commissioned a study into the effects of downgrading
cannabis from a class B to a class C. On May 7, 2008: Against the advice of the
government's own commissioned report, the Home Secretary, Jacqui Smith,
announced the governmentâs intention to once again reclassify cannabis as a
class B drug. Then-prime minister Gordon Brown announced that the government
would set aside the findings of the committee. On 26 January 2009: Cannabis was
reclassified as a Class B substance. In November 2009: Professor David Nutt was
asked to resign from his position as chairman of the Government's Advisory
Council on the Misuse of Drugs by the then Home Secretary (Alan Johnson), after
publishing in a professional journal figures which indicated that cannabis was
less harmful than both alcohol and tobacco. Several other members of the
Advisory Council resigned in protest. Afterwards, discussions were being
focused towards imposing a new 'code of conduct'; in order to avoid any similar
action in future, rather than of the issue at hand (that being the legality of
the plant cannabis itself) also this is not under Common law offences, the
basis for Statutory law in the UK. On 17 August 2010: Professor Sir Ian Gilmore
criticised prohibition, revitalising the topic in hand. On 14 September 2010:
Professor Roger Pertwee suggests that "policymakers should consider the setting
up of a committee to license the sale of recreational cannabis." On 18
September 2010: "Tim Hollis, chairman of the Association of Chief Police
Officersâ drugs committee" says that he "does not want to criminalise people
caught with minor amounts of substances such as cannabis." On 20 September
2010: "Ewan Hoyle, founder of Liberal Democrats for Drug Policy Reform, says
his party should support legalisation [of cannabis". On 3 October 2010:
Presenter Evan Davis compared âhaving a spliffâ with potentially risky
activities (like skiing), whilst interviewing Lord Young. On 11 October 2010:
Welsh actor and musician, Rhys Ifans "calls for cannabis decriminalisation" or
legalisation within the United Kingdom. On the same day: An editorial in the
British Medical Journal, written by Professor Robin Room, suggested "that the
sale of cannabis should be licensed like cigarettes because banning it had not
worked". On 1 November 2010: Professor David Nutt publishes a paper which
classes alcohol as being more dangerous than cannabis or heroin under a new
'points system'. On 7 November 2010: Lord Taverne asked at question time in the
House of Lords: "If the Government believes in evidence-based policy, is it not
obvious in light of this Nutt's report and many other reports that make similar
conclusions that the present classification of Ecstasy in class A and cannabis
in class B is not in any way based on evidence of the physical or the social
impact? On 10 November 2010: Cartrain manages to smuggle in and light up a
joint in the House of Commons, shouting "decriminalise cannabis" whilst being
hauled out by the police. On 16 December 2010, Bob Ainsworth, the former
minister and Home Office Parliamentary Under-Secretary with responsibility for
Drugs and Organised Crime explained why he thinks certain illicit substances
should be legalised. On the same day: Peter Lilley, the former Tory deputy
leader, said that he favoured legalising cannabis, while continuing the ban on
hard drugs. On 27 December 2010: Liam Smith labels Bob Ainsworth a "coward" for
refusing to act when he had the power to do so. In defence Bob Ainsworth says:
âIf I had put forward the views that I was slowly developing as a minister
then, I would have had to resign." On 9 March 2011: The House of Lords "heard
calls for the establishment of a royal commission to examine decriminalising
drug use." On 21 March 2011: "War on drugs has failed, say former heads of MI5,
CPS and [the BBC", who have helped create (with several Lords and MPs) "a new
All-Party Parliamentary Group on Drug Policy Reform are calling for new
policies to be drawn up on the basis of scientific evidence." On 2 June 2011:
"Several high profile figures" "signed an open letter urging Prime Minister
David Cameron to consider decriminalising drugs." (including Judi Dench, Sir
Richard Branson, Sting, an ex-drugs minister and three former chief
constables.) On 14 June 2011: "A senior policeman in Brighton and Hove" said
that "the government should consider decriminalising personal drug use." and
"Brighton Pavilion MP Caroline Lucas said the âwar on drugs has failedâ."
On 29 June 2011: "During Prime Ministerâs questions", "Liberal Democrat MP
Julian Huppert asked:" "Does the Prime Minister believe that drugs policy has
been failing for decades, as he said in 2005, and does he agree that the
Government should initiate a discussion of alternative ways including the
possibility of legalisation regulation to tackle the global drugs dilemma as he
voted for in 2002." On 21 July 2011: Former MP, Evan Harris, "said that every
scientific advisor had agreed it was a good idea to declassify cannabis from
category B to C. But because of a story in the Mail on Sunday, the Labour
government broke the law." On 27 July 2011: Liberal Democrat MP Julian Huppert
wrote "Britain's drug policy has failed" and "It's time for a radical
overhaul"; affirming his belief(s). On 24 January 2012: The Sentencing Council
issued 'Update 6' of their sentencing guidelines. In the update it states that
for the cultivation of cannabis, when the offender has a 'Lesser role'
(including things like growing solely for personal use, being forced to do it
etc.) and the offence is category 4 (the production of 9 plants or less,
assuming 40g or less per plant) the starting point for sentencing is a 'band c
fine' (150% of your weekly income, after tax), decreasing to 'discharge' or
increasing to 'low level community order' (community service, curfew,
attendance centre or similar for a small amount of time) depending on other
mitigating or aggravating factors such as theft of electricity, the presence of
children or whether the offender has grown the plants for use in the treatment
of a valid medical condition. United States. In November 2012, voters in the
State of Colorado and Washington State legalized recreational use of marijuana,
putting those 2 states in contention with federal law pertaining to marijuana,
particularly the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. Federal. Recreational.
Cannabis is classified as a Schedule I drug under the federal Controlled
Substances Act of 1970 and is deemed to have a high potential for abuse and no
legitimate medical uses. As such, it prohibits the possession, usage, purchase,
sale, and/or cultivation of marijuana. United States federal courts have
interpreted numerous state laws on multiple occasions. The United States
Supreme Court ruled in United States v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers' Coop and
Gonzales v. Raich that the federal government has the authority to regulate and
criminalize cultivation and distribution of cannabis under the interstate
commerce clause, as even purely intrastate sales will affect the market price
in other states by altering nationwide supply and demand patterns. Medical.
Colonel Joseph Franklin Siler, MD (1875â1960) U.S. Army, performed the first
controlled clinical studies of marijuana use by soldiers. Siler et al.,
"Marihuana Smoking in Panama," The Military Surgeon, 73: 269-280, 1933. In
April 2012, the Obama Administration stated that the Justice Department will
not crack down on legal medical marijuana users in states where medical
marijuana is permitted. This stance however does not include dispensaries
particularly "large-scale producers and operators of marijuana". California. In
1996 California voters passed Proposition 215, later renamed the Compassionate
Use Act, by means of popular initiative. It allows patients with a valid
doctor's recommendation, and the patient's designated Primary Caregivers, to
possess and cultivate marijuana for personal medical use, and has since been
expanded to protect a growing system of collective and cooperative
distribution. It was the first such law in the nation, and was followed by
similar laws in Alaska, Colorado, Hawaii, Maine, Michigan, Montana, Nevada, New
Jersey, New Mexico, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Washington. California
state common law has interpreted the initiative on multiple occasions. In 2007
the courts upheld a decision of a trial court in "City of Garden Grove v.
Superior Court" to "the Garden Grove Police Department to give [Felix Kha back
his marijuana" because "it is not the job of local police to enforce the
federal drug law". In 2010 the California Supreme Court struck down limits on
how much marijuana people could grow or possess in "People v. Kelly", stating
that it was acceptable for people with doctors' permission to grow or possess
"reasonable amounts". In California there are designated shops for people who
are permitted by law to purchase and use marijuana. Today there are even
marijuana bakeries that make a wide variety of treats that range from chocolate
bars to foods such as nachos and baked goods. These shops are made for people
who have illnesses which allow them to purchase medical marijuana to go to if
they do not wish to smoke in order to get the needed marijuana into their
system. However, California is not the only state that has legalized cannabis
for medical use. 18 states and the District of Columbia have also legalized it
for medical purposes. Besides California, the states that have legalized
marijuana for medical purposes are Arizona, Alaska, Colorado, Connecticut,
Delaware, Hawaii, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Montana, Nevada, New Jersey,
New Mexico, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Washington. Colorado. Marijuana
was legalized in Colorado via Amendment 64 in November 2012. Washington.
Marijuana was legalized in Washington via Initiative 502 in November 2012.
Proposals. Back in 1972, during the presidential campaign, Democratic candidate
George McGovern made a bold move to legalize marijuana. In early 2009,
California state representative Tom Ammiano introduced a bill, titled Marijuana
Control, Regulation, and Education Act, to legalize, regulate, and tax the
recreational use of cannabis in California. According to the Wall Street
Journal, Ammiano, a Democrat, estimates that marijuana legalization "would
generate more than $1 billion annually for the cash-strapped state". Currently,
marijuana is California's biggest cash crop, with annual sales reaching $14
billion. The bill "proposes a tax of $50 on an ounce of marijuana, which sells
for a few hundred dollars on the street". On January 16, 2009, a pair of bills
(House Bill 2929 and Senate Bill 1801) were introduced into the Massachusetts
legislature. Its stated objectives are "the reduction of cannabis abuse, the
elimination of marijuana-related crime and the raising of public revenue." The
bill proposes an excise on all cannabis sold that would range from $150 per
ounce to $250 per ounce depending on the levels of THC present. Multiple
attempts at rescheduling cannabis at a federal level have failed in the past.
In June 2009, the Personal Use of Marijuana by Responsible Adults Act of 2009
was introduced into the US House of Representatives by Barney Frank co-
sponsored by Ron Paul and three other congressmen. If enacted, the bill "would
eliminate federal penalties for the personal possession of up to 100 grams
(over three and one-half ounces)". This would effectively leave the legality of
cannabis possession for states to decide. In 2010, Proposition 19, titled the
"Regulate, Control, and Tax Cannabis Act of 2010", qualified for the November
California ballot. Rejected by 54% of voters, this initiative would have
legalized the recreational use of cannabis and its related activities in the
State of California. It would also have allowed local governments to regulate
and tax the newly created cannabis market. Supporters of the initiative
received funding from many sources, most notably, a founder of Facebook.com and
George Soros. On June 23, 2011, Congressmen Barney Frank (D-MA) and Ron Paul
(R-TX) introduced a bill in the House of Representatives that would end the
federal prohibition on the cultivation, sale, and use of marijuana. The bill
would limit the federal government's role in marijuana regulation to
international and interstate smuggling. Debate. A majority of Americans (56%)
are in favor of marijuana legalization, believing that marijuana should be
regulated in a way similar to tobacco and cigarettes, and that it should not be
a criminal offense to consume marijuana in the home, based on a national survey
of 1,000 citizens of voting age. A September 2009 article in "Fortune Magazine"
notes that President Barack Obamaâs stance regarding marijuana, expressed by
the U.S. Attorney Generalâs Office. The U.S. Attorney General, has all but
decriminalized its use in the United States. Eric Holder, confirmed at a press
conference that his Office would no longer subject individuals who were
complying with state medical marijuana laws to federal drug raids and
prosecutions. However, these raids are still taking place as of 2012 and
marijuana use is not even close to being decriminalized. The article likens
Obamaâs policy toward marijuana, in terms of its eventual outcome, to the
Twenty-First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which repealed the federal
prohibition on alcoholic beverage sales. However, the official response to the
petitions on the White House's website to legalize and regulate marijuana can
be seen here: https://wwws.whitehouse.gov/petitions?_escaped_fragment_=/
responses#!/response/what-we-have-say-about-legalizing-marijuana Uruguay.
Uruguayan law and government agree that drug use should be considered a complex
multifactorial issue. The law does not consider the user or consumer as the
problem. Drug consumption is legal and is not criminalized in Uruguay. As of
April 26, 2011, Cannabis is legal to grow in small amounts for home
consumption. The law prohibits traffic, distribution, and production of drugs.
Police acts are generally oriented towards the reduction of large-scale drug
trafficking. The state takes a public health approach in regards to the
population of users or potential users. These include offering free healthcare
services at public events where drug consumption is likely to occur (e.g., rock
concerts) and voluntary rehabilitation services. Policy is based on
epidemiological evidence regarding demonstrable public harm. Thus, government
efforts over the past decade to reduce drug consumption have been largely
oriented towards tobacco and alcohol, and more recently coca-paste. In June
2012, the Uruguayan government presided by JosÃ© Mujica announced plans to
legalize state-controlled sales of marijuana in order to fight drug-related
crimes and health issues. The government stated that they will ask global
leaders to do the same. Time Magazine featured an article where it considers
that Uruguay's proposal to legalize marijuana sales and make its government the
sole seller reflects a growing worldwide urge to find new and less violent
solutions to the drug war. Nobel prize winner Mario Vargas Llosa praised the
decision as "courageous". "Monocle" magazine expressed its admiration for the
bold step taken by President JosÃ© Mujica. Mujica's plan would allow users to
cultivate the plant for non-commercial use and grant licenses to professional
farmers for larger scale production. The plan includes a system of user
registry, a tax, and quality control, all coordinated through the existing
agency that monitors tobacco, alcohol and pharmaceuticals. He estimates that
with 70,000 monthly users, the country will have to produce more than 5,000
pounds each month. Use of capital punishment against the cannabis trade.
Several countries have either carried out or legislated capital punishment for
cannabis trafficking. Non-drug purposes. Hemp is the common name for cannabis
and is the English term used when this annual herb is grown for non-drug
purposes. These include industrial purposes for which cultivation licenses may
be issued in the European Union (EU). When grown for industrial purposes hemp
is often called industrial hemp, and a common product is fibre for use in a
variety of different ways. Fuel is often a by-product of hemp cultivation. Hemp
may be grown also for food (the edible seeds), though in the UK Defra (the UK's
Department for the Environment, Food and the Rural Affairs) will not issue
cultivation licenses for this purpose, treating it as a non-food crop, though
the seed appears on the UK market as a food product. In the UK hemp seed and
fibre have always been perfectly legal products. Cultivation for non drug
purposes was however completely prohibited from 1928 until circa 1998, when
Home Office industrial-purpose licenses became available under the Misuse of
Drugs Act 1971. Industrial strains intended for legal use within the EU are
bred to comply with regulations limiting THC content to 0.2%. (THC content is a
measure of the herb's drug potential and can reach 25% or more in drug
strains).
