Cannabis (drug) Cannabis, also known as marijuana (from the Mexican Spanish
marihuana), and by other names, is a preparation of the "Cannabis" plant
intended for use as a psychoactive drug and as medicine. Pharmacologically, the
principal psychoactive constituent of cannabis is tetrahydrocannabinol (THC);
it is one of 400 compounds in the plant, including other cannabinoids, such as
cannabidiol (CBD), cannabinol (CBN), and tetrahydrocannabivarin (THCV).
Contemporary uses of cannabis are as a recreational drug, as religious or
spiritual rites, or as medicine; the earliest recorded uses date from the 3rd
millennium BC. In 2004, the United Nations estimated that global consumption of
cannabis indicated that approximately 4.0 percent of the adult world population
(162Â million people) used cannabis annually, and that approximately 0.6
percent (22.5Â million) of people used cannabis daily. Since the early 20th
century cannabis has been subject to legal restrictions with the possession,
use, and sale of cannabis preparations containing psychoactive cannabinoids
currently illegal in most countries of the world; the United Nations has said
that cannabis is the most-used illicit drug in the world. Effects. Cannabis has
psychoactive and physiological effects when consumed. The minimum amount of THC
required to have a perceptible psychoactive effect is about 10Â micrograms per
kilogram of body weight. Aside from a subjective change in perception and, most
notably, mood, the most common short-term physical and neurological effects
include increased heart rate, increased appetite and consumption of food,
lowered blood pressure, impairment of short-term and working memory,
psychomotor coordination, and concentration. Long-term effects are less clear.
Deaths attributed directly to cannabis usage are infrequent but have been
documented. Recorded fatalities resulting from cannabis overdose in animals are
generally only after intravenous injection of hashish oil. Classification.
While many psychoactive drugs clearly fall into the category of either
stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogen, cannabis exhibits a mix of all
properties, perhaps leaning the most towards hallucinogenic or psychedelic
properties, though with other effects quite pronounced as well. THC is
typically considered the primary active component of the cannabis plant,
various scientific studies have suggested that certain other cannabinoids like
CBD may also play a significant role in its psychoactive effects. Medical use.
Cannabis used medically has several well-documented beneficial effects. Among
these are: the amelioration of nausea and vomiting, stimulation of hunger in
chemotherapy and AIDS patients, lowered intraocular eye pressure (shown to be
effective for treating glaucoma), as well as general analgesic effects (pain
reliever). Less confirmed individual studies also have been conducted
indicating cannabis to be beneficial to a gamut of conditions running from
multiple sclerosis to depression. Synthesized cannabinoids are also sold as
prescription drugs, including Marinol (dronabinol in the United States and
Germany) and Cesamet (nabilone in Canada, Mexico, the United States and the
United Kingdom). Currently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not
approved smoked cannabis for any condition or disease in the United States,
largely because the FDA claims good quality scientific evidence for its use
from U.S. studies is lacking. Sixteen states have legalized cannabis for
medical use. The United States Supreme Court has ruled in "United States v.
Oakland Cannabis Buyers' Coop" and "Gonzales v. Raich" that it is the federal
government that has the right to regulate and criminalize cannabis, even for
medical purposes. Canada, Spain, The Netherlands and Austria have legalized
some form of cannabis for medicinal use. Long-term effects. Cannabis can be
habit-forming and the development of cannabis dependence in some users has been
well established; its effects on intelligence, memory, respiratory functions
and the possible relationship of cannabis use to mental disorders such as
schizophrenia, psychosis, depersonalization disorder and depression are still
under discussion. A study published in the American Journal of Epidemiology in
2011, concluded that the prevalence of obesity is lower in cannabis users than
in nonusers. A 35-year study published August 2012 in Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences and funded partly by NIDA and other NIH institutes
provides objective evidence that, at least for adolescents, marijuana is
harmful to the brain. It was found that the persistent, dependent use of
marijuana before age 18 showed lasting harm to a person's intelligence,
attention and memory. Quitting cannabis did not appear to reverse the loss.
However, individuals who started cannabis use after the age of 18 did not show
similar declines. A July 2012 report in Brain reveals neural-connectivity
impairment in some brain regions following prolonged cannabis use initiated in
adolescence or young adulthood. Forms. Unprocessed. The terms "cannabis" or
"marijuana" generally refer to the dried flowers and subtending leaves and
stems of the female cannabis plant. This is the most widely consumed form,
containing 3% to 22% THC. In contrast, cannabis varieties used to produce
industrial hemp contain less than 1% THC and are thus not valued for
recreational use. Processed. Kief. Kief is a powder, rich in trichomes, which
can be sifted from the leaves and flowers of cannabis plants and either
consumed in powder form or compressed to produce cakes of hashish. Hashish.
Hashish (also spelled hasheesh, hashisha, or simply hash) is a concentrated
resin produced from the flowers of the female cannabis plant. Hash can often be
more potent than marijuana and can be smoked or chewed. It varies in color from
black to golden brown depending upon purity. Hash oil. Hash oil, or "butane
honey oil" (BHO), is a mix of essential oils and resins extracted from mature
cannabis foliage through the use of various solvents. It has a high proportion
of cannabinoids (ranging from 40 to 90%) and is used in a variety of cannabis
foods. Residue (resin). Because of THC's adhesive properties, a sticky residue,
most commonly known as "resin", builds up inside utensils used to smoke
cannabis. It has tar-like properties but still contains THC as well as other
cannabinoids. This buildup retains some of the psychoactive properties of
cannabis but is more difficult to smoke without discomfort caused to the throat
and lungs. This tar may also contain CBN, which is a breakdown product of THC.
Cannabis users typically only smoke residue when cannabis is unavailable. Glass
pipes may be water-steamed at a low temperature prior to scraping in order to
make the residue easier to remove. Routes of administration. Cannabis is
consumed in many different ways, most of which involve inhaling vaporized
cannabinoids ("smoke") from small pipes, bongs (portable version of hookah with
water chamber), paper-wrapped joints or tobacco-leaf-wrapped blunts. A
vaporizer heats herbal cannabis to , causing the active ingredients to
evaporate into a vapor without burning the plant material (the boiling point of
THC is at 760 mmHg pressure). A lower proportion of toxic chemicals is released
than by smoking, depending on the design of the vaporizer and the temperature
setting. This method of consuming cannabis produces markedly different effects
than smoking due to the flash points of different cannabinoids; for example,
CBN (usually considered undesirable) has a flash point of and would normally be
present in smoke but not in vapor. Fresh, non-dried cannabis may be consumed
orally. However, the cannabis or its extract must be sufficiently heated or
dehydrated to cause decarboxylation of its most abundant cannabinoid,
tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA), into psychoactive THC. Cannabinoids can be
extracted from cannabis plant matter using high-proof spirits (often grain
alcohol) to create a tincture, often referred to as Green Dragon. Cannabis can
also be consumed as a tea. THC is lipophilic and only slightly water-soluble
(with a solubility of 2.8Â mg per liter), so tea is made by first adding a
saturated fat to hot water (i.e. cream or any milk except skim) with a small
amount of cannabis. Mechanism of action. The high lipid-solubility of
cannabinoids results in their persisting in the body for long periods of time.
Even after a single administration of THC, detectable levels of THC can be
found in the body for weeks or longer (depending on the amount administered and
the sensitivity of the assessment method). A number of investigators have
suggested that this is an important factor in marijuana's effects, perhaps
because cannabinoids may accumulate in the body, particularly in the lipid
membranes of neurons. Until recently, little was known about the specific
mechanisms of action of THC at the neuronal level. However, researchers have
now confirmed that THC exerts its most prominent effects via its actions on two
types of cannabinoid receptors, the CB1 receptor and the CB2 receptor, both of
which are G-Protein coupled receptors. The CB1 receptor is found primarily in
the brain as well as in some peripheral tissues, and the CB2 receptor is found
primarily in peripheral tissues, but is also expressed in neuroglial cells as
well. THC appears to alter mood and cognition through its agonist actions on
the CB1 receptors, which inhibit a secondary messenger system (adenylate
cyclase) in a dose dependent manner. These actions can be blocked by the
selective CB1 receptor antagonist SR141716A (rimonabant), which has been shown
in clinical trials to be an effective treatment for smoking cessation, weight
loss, and as a means of controlling or reducing metabolic syndrome risk
factors. However, due to the dysphoric effect of CB1 antagonists, this drug is
often discontinued due to these side effects. Via CB1 activation, THC
indirectly increases dopamine release and produces psychotropic effects. THC,
anandamide, and several other cannabinoids also act as allosteric modulators of
opioid and glycine receptors. The role of these interactions in the "marijuana
high" remains elusive. Potency. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), "the amount of THC present in a cannabis sample is generally
used as a measure of cannabis potency." The three main forms of cannabis
products are the flower, resin (hashish), and oil (hash oil). The UNODC states
that cannabis often contains 5% THC content, resin "can contain up to 20% THC
content", and that "Cannabis oil may contain more than 60% THC content." A
scientific study published in 2000 in the "Journal of Forensic Sciences" (JFS)
found that the potency (THC content) of confiscated cannabis in the United
States (US) rose from "approximately 3.3% in 1983 and 1984", to "4.47% in
1997". It also concluded that "other major cannabinoids (i.e., CBD, CBN, and
CBC)" (other chemicals in cannabis) "showed no significant change in their
concentration over the years". More recent research undertaken at the
University of Mississippi's Potency Monitoring Project has found that average
THC levels in cannabis samples between 1975 and 2007 have increased from 4% in
1983 to 9.6% in 2007. Australia's National Cannabis Prevention and Information
Centre (NCPIC) states that the buds (flowers) of the female cannabis plant
contain the highest concentration of THC, followed by the leaves. The stalks
and seeds have "much lower THC levels". The UN states that the leaves can
contain ten times less THC than the buds, and the stalks one hundred times less
THC. After revisions to cannabis rescheduling in the UK, the government moved
cannabis back from a class C to a class B drug. A purported reason was the
appearance of high potency cannabis. They believe skunk accounts for between 70
and 80% of samples seized by police (despite the fact that skunk can sometimes
be incorrectly mistaken for all types of herbal cannabis). Extracts such as
hashish and hash oil typically contain more THC than high potency cannabis
flowers. While commentators have warned that greater cannabis "strength" could
represent a health risk, others have noted that users readily learn to
compensate by reducing their dosage, thus benefiting from reductions in smoking
side-hazards such as heat shock or carbon monoxide. A number of analytical
laboratories serving the medical marijuana industry in the Western US have
evaluated THC levels of medical cannabis. Typical levels range between 16â17%
while cannabis materials with less than 10% THC are an anomaly. Currently upper
THC limits for herbal cannabis grown in California are 23â25%. Difference
between "Cannabis indica" and "Cannabis sativa". "Cannabis indica" may have a
CBD:THC ratio 4â5 times that of "Cannabis sativa". Cannabis strains with
relatively high CBD:THC ratios are less likely to induce anxiety than vice
versa. This may be due to CBD's antagonistic effects at the cannabinoid
receptors, compared to THC's partial agonist effect. CBD is also a 5-HT1A
receptor agonist, which may also contribute to an anxiolytic effect. This
likely means the high concentrations of CBD found in "Cannabis indica" mitigate
the anxiogenic effect of THC significantly. The effects of "sativa" are well
known for its cerebral high, hence used daytime as medical cannabis, while
"indica" are well known for its sedative effects and preferred night time as
medical cannabis. Adulterants. Chalk (in the Netherlands) and glass particles
(in the UK) have been used to make cannabis appear to be higher quality.
Increasing the weight of hashish products in Germany with lead caused lead
intoxication in at least 29 users. In the Netherlands two chemical analogs of
sildenafil (Viagra) were found in adulterated marijuana. According to both the
"Talk to FRANK" website and the UKCIA website, "Soap Bar", "perhaps the most
common type of hash in the UK", was found "at worst" to contain turpentine,
tranquilizers, boot polish, henna and animal fecesâamongst several other
things. One small study of five "soap-bar" samples seized by UK Customs in 2001
found huge adulteration by many toxic substances, including soil, glue, engine
oil and animal feces. Detection of use. THC and its major (inactive)
metabolite, THC-COOH, can be measured in blood, urine, hair, oral fluid or
sweat using chromatographic techniques as part of a drug use testing program or
a forensic investigation of a traffic or other criminal offense. The
concentrations obtained from such analyses can often be helpful in
distinguishing active use from passive exposure, elapsed time since use, and
extent or duration of use. These tests cannot, however, distinguish authorized
cannabis smoking for medical purposes from unauthorized recreational smoking.
Commercial cannabinoid immunoassays, often employed as the initial screening
method when testing physiological specimens for marijuana presence, have
different degrees of cross-reactivity with THC and its metabolites. Urine
contains predominantly THC-COOH, while hair, oral fluid and sweat contain
primarily THC. Blood may contain both substances, with the relative amounts
dependent on the recency and extent of usage. The Duquenois-Levine test is
commonly used as a screening test in the field, but it cannot definitively
confirm the presence of cannabis, as a large range of substances have been
shown to give false positives. Despite this, it is common in the United States
for prosecutors to seek plea bargains on the basis of positive D-L tests,
claiming them definitive, or even to seek conviction without the use of gas
chromatography confirmation, which can only be done in the lab. In 2011,
researchers at John Jay College of Criminal Justice reported that dietary zinc
supplements can mask the presence of THC and other drugs in urine. Similar
claims have been made in web forums on that topic. Gateway drug theory. Since
the 1950s, United States drug policies have been guided by the assumption that
trying cannabis increases the probability that users will eventually use
"harder" drugs. This hypothesis has been one of the central pillars of anti-
cannabis drug policy in the United States, though the validity and implications
of this hypothesis are hotly debated. Studies have shown that tobacco smoking
is a better predictor of concurrent illicit hard drug use than smoking
cannabis. No widely accepted study has ever demonstrated a cause-and-effect
relationship between the use of cannabis and the later use of harder drugs like
heroin and cocaine. However, the prevalence of tobacco cigarette advertising
and the practice of mixing tobacco and cannabis together in a single large
joint, common in Europe, are believed to be cofactors in promoting nicotine
dependency among young people trying cannabis. A 2005 comprehensive review of
the literature on the cannabis gateway hypothesis found that pre-existing
traits may predispose users to addiction in general, the availability of
multiple drugs in a given setting confounds predictive patterns in their usage,
and drug sub-cultures are more influential than cannabis itself. The study
called for further research on "social context, individual characteristics, and
drug effects" to discover the actual relationships between cannabis and the use
of other drugs. Some studies state that while there is no proof for this
gateway hypothesis, young cannabis users should still be considered as a risk
group for intervention programs. Other findings indicate that hard drug users
are likely to be "poly-drug" users, and that interventions must address the use
of multiple drugs instead of a single hard drug. Another gateway hypothesis is
that a gateway effect may be detected as a result of the "common factors"
involved with using any illegal drug. Because of its illegal status, cannabis
users are more likely to be in situations which allow them to become acquainted
with people who use and sell other illegal drugs. By this argument, some
studies have shown that alcohol and tobacco may be regarded as gateway drugs.
However, a more parsimonious explanation could be that cannabis is simply more
readily available (and at an earlier age) than illegal hard drugs, and alcohol/
tobacco are in turn easier to obtain earlier than cannabis (though the reverse
may be true in some areas), thus leading to the "gateway sequence" in those
people who are most likely to experiment with any drug offered. A 2010 study
published in the "Journal of Health and Social Behavior" found that the main
factors in users moving on to other drugs were age, wealth, unemployment
status, and psychological stress. The study found there is no "gateway theory"
and that drug use is more closely tied to a person's life situation, although
cannabis users are more likely to use other drugs. History. Cannabis is
indigenous to Central and South Asia. Evidence of the inhalation of cannabis
smoke can be found in the 3rd millennium BCE, as indicated by charred cannabis
seeds found in a ritual brazier at an ancient burial site in present day
Romania. In 2003, a leather basket filled with cannabis leaf fragments and
seeds was found next to a 2,500- to 2,800-year-old mummified shaman in the
northwestern Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region of China. Cannabis is also known
to have been used by the ancient Hindus of India and Nepal thousands of years
ago. The herb was called "ganjika" in Sanskrit (à¤à¤¾à¤à¤à¤¾/à¦à¦¾à¦à¦à¦¾
"ganja" in modern Indic languages). The ancient drug soma, mentioned in the
Vedas, was sometimes associated with cannabis. Cannabis was also known to the
ancient Assyrians, who discovered its psychoactive properties through the
Aryans. Using it in some religious ceremonies, they called it "qunubu" (meaning
"way to produce smoke"), a probable origin of the modern word "cannabis".
Cannabis was also introduced by the Aryans to the Scythians, Thracians and
Dacians, whose shamans (the "kapnobatai"â"those who walk on smoke/clouds")
burned cannabis flowers to induce a state of trance. Cannabis has an ancient
history of ritual use and is found in pharmacological cults around the world.
Hemp seeds discovered by archaeologists at Pazyryk suggest early ceremonial
practices like eating by the Scythians occurred during the 5th to 2nd century
BCE, confirming previous historical reports by Herodotus. One writer has
claimed that cannabis was used as a religious sacrament by ancient Jews and
early Christians due to the similarity between the Hebrew word ""qannabbos""
(""cannabis"") and the Hebrew phrase ""qenÃ© bÃ³sem"" ("aromatic cane"). It was
used by Muslims in various Sufi orders as early as the Mamluk period, for
example by the Qalandars. A study published in the "South African Journal of
Science" showed that "pipes dug up from the garden of Shakespeare's home in
Stratford-upon-Avon contain traces of cannabis." The chemical analysis was
carried out after researchers hypothesized that the "noted weed" mentioned in
Sonnet 76 and the "journey in my head" from Sonnet 27 could be references to
cannabis and the use thereof. John Gregory Bourke described use of "mariguan",
which he identifies as "Cannabis indica" or Indian hemp, by Mexican residents
of the Rio Grande region of Texas in 1894. He described its uses for treatment
of asthma, to expedite delivery, to keep away witches, and as a love-philtre.
He also wrote that many Mexicans added the herb to their cigarritos or mescal,
often taking a bite of sugar afterward to intensify the effect. Bourke wrote
that because it was often used in a mixture with toloachi (which he
inaccurately describes as "Datura stramonium"), mariguan was one of several
plants known as "loco weed". Bourke compared mariguan to hasheesh, which he
called "one of the greatest curses of the East", citing reports that users
"become maniacs and are apt to commit all sorts of acts of violence and
murder", causing degeneration of the body and an idiotic appearance, and
mentioned laws against sale of hasheesh "in most Eastern countries". Cannabis
was criminalized in various countries beginning in the early 20th century. In
the United States, the first restrictions for sale of cannabis came in 1906 (in
District of Columbia). It was outlawed in South Africa in 1911, in Jamaica
(then a British colony) in 1913, and in the United Kingdom and New Zealand in
the 1920s. Canada criminalized cannabis in the Opium and Drug Act of 1923,
before any reports of use of the drug in Canada. In 1925 a compromise was made
at an international conference in The Hague about the International Opium
Convention that banned exportation of "Indian hemp" to countries that had
prohibited its use, and requiring importing countries to issue certificates
approving the importation and stating that the shipment was required
"exclusively for medical or scientific purposes". It also required parties to
"exercise an effective control of such a nature as to prevent the illicit
international traffic in Indian hemp and especially in the resin". In 1937 in
the United States, the Marihuana Tax Act was passed, and prohibited the
production of hemp in addition to cannabis. The reasons that hemp was also
included in this law are disputed. Several scholars have claimed that the Act
was passed in order to destroy the hemp industry, largely as an effort of
businessmen Andrew Mellon, Randolph Hearst, and the Du Pont family. With the
invention of the decorticator, hemp became a very cheap substitute for the
paper pulp that was used in the newspaper industry. Hearst felt that this was a
threat to his extensive timber holdings. Mellon, Secretary of the Treasury and
the wealthiest man in America, had invested heavily in the DuPont's new
synthetic fiber, nylon, and considered its success to depend on its replacement
of the traditional resource, hemp. The claims that hemp could have been a
successful substitute for wood pulp have been based on an incorrect government
report of 1916 which concluded that hemp hurds, broken parts of the inner core
of the hemp stem, were a suitable source for paper production. This has not
been confirmed by later research, as hemp hurds are not reported to be a good
enough substitute. Many advocates for hemp have greatly overestimated the
proportion of useful cellulose in hemp hurds. In 2003, 95% of the hemp hurds in
EU were used for animal bedding, almost 5% were used as building material.
Legal status. Since the beginning of the 20th century, most countries have
enacted laws against the cultivation, possession or transfer of cannabis. These
laws have impacted adversely on the cannabis plant's cultivation for non-
recreational purposes, but there are many regions where, under certain
circumstances, handling of cannabis is legal or licensed. Many jurisdictions
have lessened the penalties for possession of small quantities of cannabis, so
that it is punished by confiscation and sometimes a fine, rather than
imprisonment, focusing more on those who traffic the drug on the black market.
In some areas where cannabis use has been historically tolerated, some new
restrictions have been put in place, such as the closing of cannabis coffee
shops near the borders of the Netherlands, closing of coffee shops near
secondary schools in the Netherlands and crackdowns on "Pusher Street" in
Christiania, Copenhagen in 2004. Some jurisdictions use free voluntary
treatment programs and/or mandatory treatment programs for frequent known
users. Simple possession can carry long prison terms in some countries,
particularly in East Asia, where the sale of cannabis may lead to a sentence of
life in prison or even execution. More recently however, many political
parties, non-profit organizations and causes based on the legalization of
medical cannabis and/or legalizing the plant entirely (with some restrictions)
have emerged. Price. The price or street value of cannabis varies widely
depending on geographic area and potency. In the United States, cannabis is
overall the #4 value crop, and is #1 or #2 in many states including California,
New York and Florida, averaging $3,000/lb. It is believed to generate an
estimated $36Â billion market. Most of the money is spent not on growing and
producing but on smuggling the supply to buyers. The United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime claims in its 2008 World Drug Report that typical U.S. retail
prices are $10â15 per gram (approximately $280â420 per ounce). Street
prices in North America are known to range from about $150 to $400 per ounce,
depending on quality. The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug
Addiction reports that typical retail prices in Europe for cannabis varies from
2â¬ to 14â¬ per gram, with a majority of European countries reporting prices
in the range 4â10â¬. In the United Kingdom, a cannabis plant has an
approximate street value of Â£300, but retails to the end-user at about Â£160/
oz. Truth serum. Cannabis was used as a truth serum by the Office of Strategic
Services (OSS), a US government intelligence agency formed during World War II.
In the early 1940s, it was the most effective truth drug developed at the OSS
labs at St. Elizabeths Hospital; it caused a subject "to be loquacious and free
in his impartation of information." In May 1943, Major George Hunter White,
head of OSS counter-intelligence operations in the US, arranged a meeting with
Augusto Del Gracio, an enforcer for gangster Lucky Luciano. Del Gracio was
given cigarettes spiked with THC concentrate from cannabis, and subsequently
talked openly about Luciano's heroin operation. On a second occasion the dosage
was increased such that Del Gracio passed out for two hours. Breeding and
cultivation. It is often claimed by growers and breeders of herbal cannabis
that advances in breeding and cultivation techniques have increased the potency
of cannabis since the late 1960s and early '70s, when THC was first discovered
and understood. However, potent seedless cannabis such as "Thai sticks" were
already available at that time. Sinsemilla (Spanish for "without seed") is the
dried, seedless inflorescences of female cannabis plants. Because THC
production drops off once pollination occurs, the male plants (which produce
little THC themselves) are eliminated before they shed pollen to prevent
pollination. Advanced cultivation techniques such as hydroponics, cloning,
high-intensity artificial lighting, and the sea of green method are frequently
employed as a response (in part) to prohibition enforcement efforts that make
outdoor cultivation more risky. It is often cited that the average levels of
THC in cannabis sold in United States rose dramatically between the 1970s and
2000, but such statements are likely skewed because of undue weight given to
much more expensive and potent, but less prevalent samples. The average THC
level in coffee shops in the Netherlands is currently about 18â19%, but new
regulations adopted by the Dutch government in 2011 will force the THC content
of cannabis sold in coffee shops to be limited to 15%, stating that cannabis in
excess of 15% THC will be reclassified as a hard drug. These new regulations
take effect in 2012.
