Nordic race The Nordic race was one of the three sub-races into which the
Caucasian race was divided by anthropologists using scientific racism in the
first half of the 20th century. (The three sub-types being Nordic, Alpine and
Mediterranean.) People of the Nordic type were described as having blond or
brown hair, light colored eyes, fair skin and tall stature, and were considered
to predominate in countries of Central and Northern Europe. The notion is today
considered ideological rather than scientific by most. Nordicism (also "Nordic
theory") is an ideology of racial supremacy that claims that a Nordic race,
within the greater Caucasian race, constituted a "master race". This ideology
was popular in the late-19th and early 20th centuries in some Central and
Northern European countries as well as North America, and achieved mainstream
success throughout Germany via National Socialism during the Third Reich.
Background ideas. Attitudes in ancient Europe. Most ancient writers were from
the Southern European civilisations, and generally took the view that people
living in the north of their lands were barbarians. Pale skin and light hair
were described as signs of barbarism by Polemon of Laodicea in his book
"Physiognomica". Pseudo-Aristotle noted differences between Greeks and the
people of the north, believing that Greek superiority was visible in their
medium skin tone, as opposed to pale northerners and dark southerners and
Africans. Aristotle himself claimed that blue eyes had less liquid in them than
darker eyes, and that they indicated poor eyesight, especially in daylight.
Despite this, Aphrodite was often depicted with blonde hair, as were deities
associated with the sun. Likewise, the Roman historian Tacitus idealized the
Germanic tribes (which he considered autochthonous to their land) for qualities
such as superior warlike ardor and chastity, in contrast to the Romans of his
day - though his portrait is not unmixed - as he also portrays them as
incurably lazy and addicted to gambling. Many Romans believed that fair
features were beautiful. Wealthy Romans paid for blond and red wigs made from
the hair of captured Germanics or Celts. Renaissance. During the Renaissance,
blonde hair, blue eyes, and pale skin were regularly portrayed in literature as
signs of beauty and were associated with noble moral qualities. This imagery
was largely aesthetic. It was not typically theorised in terms of racial
difference, drawing instead on traditional symbolism of light as opposed to
darkness. Enlightenment. From the 17th century onwards, as Central and Northern
European countries became more powerful, and their people began to adapt such
aesthetic traditions into arguments for their own superiority. Benjamin
Franklin proposed a clear distinction between ""white"" Europeans and
""swarthy"" Europeans, stating that immigration to the newly-born United States
should favour the ""white"" Saxons and Englishmen rather than the ""swarthy"",
Germans (except the Saxons), Italians, French, Russians, Spaniards, and Swedes.
19th century racial thought.  Aryanism. Such arguments became especially
significant when allied to the theory of Aryanism in the mid-19th century. This
theory held that native speakers of the Indo-European languages ("Aryans") are
an innately superior branch of humanity, responsible for most of its greatest
achievements. Its principal proponent was Arthur de Gobineau in his "Essay on
the Inequality of the Human Races" (1855). Though Gobineau did not equate
Nordic peoples with Aryans, he argued that Germanic people were the best modern
representatives of the Aryan race. Adapting the comments of Tacitus and other
Roman writers, he argued that "pure" Northerners regenerated Europe after the
Roman empire declined due to racial "dilution" of its leadership. By the 1880s
a number of linguists and anthropologists argued that the Aryans themselves had
originated somewhere in northern Europe. Theodor Poesche proposed that the
Aryans originated in the vast Rokitno, or Pinsk Marshes, then in the Russian
Empire, now covering much of the southern part of Belarus and the north-west of
the Ukraine, but it was Karl Penka who popularized the idea that the Aryans had
emerged in Scandinavia and could be identified by the distinctive Nordic
characteristics of blond hair and blue eyes. The distinguished biologist Thomas
Henry Huxley agreed with him, coining the term "Xanthochroi" to refer to fair-
skinned Europeans, as opposed to darker Mediterranean peoples, whom Huxley
called "Melanochroi". It was Huxley who also concluded that the Melanochroi
(Peoples of the Mediterranean race), who he described as "dark whites", are of
a mixture of the Xanthochroi and Australioids. This distinction was repeated by
Charles Morris in his book "The Aryan Race" (1888), which argued that the
original Aryans could be identified by their blond hair and other Nordic
features, such as dolichocephaly (long skull). The argument was given extra
impetus by the French anthropologist Vacher de Lapouge in his book "Lâ€™Aryen",
in which he argued that the "dolichocephalic-blond" peoples were natural
leaders, destined to rule over more brachycephalic (short-skulled) peoples. The
philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche also referred in his writings to "blond
beasts": amoral adventurers who were supposed to be the progenitors of creative
cultures. In "On the Genealogy of Morals" (1887), he wrote, "In Latin malus ...
could indicate the vulgar man as the dark one, especially as the black-haired
one, as the pre-Aryan dweller of the Italian soil which distinguished itself
most clearly through his colour from the blonds who became their masters,
namely the Aryan conquering race." Defining characteristics. It was the
Russian-born French anthropologist Joseph Deniker that initially proposed
"Nordic" as a racial group. Deniker's use of "Nordique" was meant to simply
translate as "Northern", and described what he called an "ethnic group" (a term
that he coined). He defined "nordique" by a set of physical characteristics:
The concurrence of fair, somewhat wavy hair, light eyes, reddish skin, tall
stature and a dolichocephalic skull. Of six 'Caucasian' groups Deniker
accommodated four into secondary ethnic groups, all of which he considered
intermediate to the Nordic: "Northwestern", "Sub-Nordic", "Vistula" and "Sub-
Adriatic", respectively. American economist William Z. Ripley purported to
define scientifically a "Teutonic race" in his book "The Races of Europe"
(1899). He divided Europeans into three main subcategories: Teutonic
("teutonisch"), Alpine and Mediterranean. According to Ripley the "Teutonic
race" resided in Scandinavia, north Germany, Baltic states and East Prussia,
north Poland, north Russia, Britain, Ireland, parts of Central Europe and was
typified by "very light" hair, blue eyes, tall stature and a narrow, aquiline
nose. Georges Vacher de Lapouge had called this race "Homo Europaeus". Madison
Grant, in his book "The Passing of the Great Race", took up Ripley's
classification. He described a "Nordic" or "Baltic" type: Madison Grant, ""The
Passing of the Great Race"", Scribner's Sons, 1921, p. 167 According to Grant,
the "Alpine race", shorter in stature, darker in colouring, with a rounder
head, predominated in Central and Eastern Europe through to Turkey and the
Eurasian steppes of Central Asia and Southern Russia. The "Mediterranean race",
with dark hair and eyes, aquiline nose, swarthy complexion, moderate-to-short
stature, and moderate or long skull was said to be prevalent in Southern
Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa. 20th century. By 1902 the German
archaeologist Gustaf Kossinna claimed to have identified the original Aryans
(Proto-Indo-Europeans) with the north German Corded Ware culture, an argument
that gained in currency over the following two decades. He placed the Indo-
European Urheimat in Schleswig-Holstein, arguing that they had expanded across
Europe from there. By the early 20th century this theory was well established,
though far from universally accepted. Sociologists were soon using the concept
of a "blond race" to model the migrations of the supposedly more
entrepreneurial and innovative components of European populations. As late as
1939 Carleton Coon wrote that "The Poles who came to the United States during
the 19th century, and the early decades of the 20th, did not represent a cross-
section of the Polish population, but a taller, blonder, longer-headed group
than the Poles as a whole." The ""high brow""/""low brow"" distinction, derived
from such theories, also became enshrined in language. It was the already
mentioned work of sociologist/economist William Z. Ripley which popularized the
idea of three biological European races. Ripley borrowed Deniker's terminology
of Nordic (he had previously used the term "Teuton"); his division of the
European races relied on a variety of anthropometric measurements, but focused
especially on their cephalic index and stature. Compared to Deniker, Ripley
advocated a simplified racial view and proposed a single "Teutonic" race linked
to geographic areas where Nordic-like characteristics predominate, and
contrasted these areas to the boundaries of two other types, "Alpine" and
"Mediterranean", thus reducing the 'caucasoid branch of humanity' to three
distinct groups. By the early 20th century, Ripley's tripartite Nordic/Alpine/
Mediterranean model was well established. Most nineteenth-century race-
theorists like Arthur de Gobineau, Otto Ammon, Georges Vacher de Lapouge, and
Houston Stewart Chamberlain preferred to speak of "Aryans," "Teutons," and
"Indo-Europeans" instead of "Nordic Race". The British German racialist Houston
Stewart Chamberlain considered the Nordic race to be made up of Celtic and
Germanic peoples, as well as some Slavs. Chamberlain called those people "Celt-
Germanic peoples", and his ideas would influence Adolf Hitler's Nazi ideology.
Only in the 1920s did a strong partiality for "Nordic" begin to reveal itself,
and for a while the term was used almost interchangeably with Aryan. Later,
however, "Nordic" would not be co-terminous with Aryan, Indo-European or
Germanic. For example, the later Nazi minister for Food, Richard Walther
DarrÃ©, who had developed a concept of the German peasantry as Nordic race,
used the term 'Aryan' to refer to the tribes of the Iranian plains. The notion
of a distinct northern European race was also rejected by several
anthropologists on craniometric grounds. Rudolf Virchow attacked the claim
following a study of craniometry, which gave surprising results according to
contemporary scientific racist theories on the "Aryan race." During the 1885
Anthropology Congress in Karlsruhe, Virchow denounced the "Nordic mysticism,"
while Josef Kollmann, a collaborator of Virchow, stated that the people of
Europe, be they German, Italian, English or French, belonged to a "mixture of
various races," furthermore declaring that the "results of craniology" led to
"struggle against any theory concerning the superiority of this or that
European race". Coon (1939). Carleton Coon in his book of 1939 "The Races of
Europe" subdivided the Nordic race into three main types, "Corded", "Danubian"
and "Keltic", besides a "Neo-Danubian" type and a variety of Nordic types
altered by Upper Palaeolithic or Alpine admixture. "Exotic Nordics" are
morphologically Nordic types that occur in places distant from the northwestern
European center of Nordic concentration. Coon takes the Nordics to be a
partially depigmented branch of the greater Mediterranean racial stock. He
suggests that the Nordic type emerged as a result of a mixture of "the Danubian
Mediterranean strain with the later Corded element". Hence his two main Nordic
types show Corded and Danubian predominance, respectively . The third "Keltic"
or "Hallstatt" type Coon takes to have emerged in the European Iron Age, in
Central Europe, where it was subsequently mostly replaced, but "found a refuge
in Sweden and in the eastern valleys of southern Norway." Depigmentation
theory. Coon's (1939) theory that the Nordic race was a depigmentated variation
of the greater Mediterranean racial stock was also supported by his mentor
Earnest Albert Hooton who in the same year published "Twilight of Man", which
notes: "The Nordic race is certainly a depigmented offshoot from the basic
long-headed Mediterranean stock. It deserves separate racial classification
only because its blond hair (ash or golden), its pure blue or gray eyes".
Nordicism.  Nordicists claimed that Nordics had formed upper tiers of ancient
civilizations, even in the Mediterranean civilizations of antiquity, which had
declined once this dominant race had been assimilated. Thus they argued that
ancient evidence suggested that leading Romans like Nero, Sulla, and Cato were
blond or red-haired Some Nordicists admitted the Mediterranean race was
superior to the Nordic in terms of artistic ability. However, the Nordic race
was regarded as superior on the basis that, although Mediterranean peoples were
culturally sophisticated, it was the Nordics who were alleged to be the
innovators and conquerors, having an adventurous spirit that no other race
could match. The Alpine race was usually regarded as inferior to both the
Nordic and Mediterranean races, making up the traditional peasant class of
Europe while Nordics occupied the aristocracy and led the world in technology,
and Mediterraneans were regarded as more imaginative. Opponents of Nordicism
rejected these arguments. The anti-Nordicist writer Giuseppe Sergi argued in
his influential book "The Mediterranean Race" (1901) that there was no evidence
that the upper tiers of ancient societies were Nordic, insisting that
historical and anthropological evidence contradicted such claims. Sergi argued
that Mediterraneans constituted "the greatest race in the world", with a
creative edge absent in the Nordic race. According to him, they were the
creators of all the major ancient civilizations, from Mesopotamia to Rome. This
argument was later repeated by C.G. Seligman, who wrote that "it must, I think,
be recognized that the Mediterranean race has actually more achievement to its
credit than any other". Even Carleton Coon insisted that among Greeks "the
Nordic element is weak, as it probably has been since the days of Homer...It is
my personal reaction to the living Greeks that their continuity with their
ancestors of the ancient world is remarkable, rather than the opposite." In the
USA. In the USA, the primary spokesman for Nordicism was the eugenicist Madison
Grant. His 1916 book, "The Passing of the Great Race, or the Racial Basis of
European History" about Nordicism was highly influential among racial thinking
and government policy making. Grant used the theory as justification for
immigration policies of the 1920s, arguing that the immigrants from certain
areas of Europe represented a lesser type of European and their numbers in the
United States should not be increased. Grant and others urged this as well as
the complete restriction of non-Europeans, such as the Chinese and Japanese.
Grant argued the Nordic race had been responsible for most of humanity's great
achievements, and admixture was "race suicide" and unless eugenic policies were
enacted, the Nordic race would be supplanted by inferior races. Future
president Calvin Coolidge agreed, stating "Biological laws tell us that certain
divergent people will not mix or blend. The Nordics propagate themselves
successfully. With other races, the outcome shows deterioration on both sides."
The Immigration Act of 1924 was signed into law by President Coolidge. This was
designed to reduce the number of immigrants from Southern Europe and Russia,
exclude Asian immigrants altogether, and favor immigration from the British
Isles, Germany, Poland, Sweden and Norway. THE IMMIGRATION ACT OF 1924 The
spread of these ideas also affected popular culture. F. Scott Fitzgerald
invokes Grant's ideas through a character in part of "The Great Gatsby", and
Hilaire Belloc jokingly rhapsodied the "Nordic man" in a poem and essay in
which he satirised the stereotypes of Nordics, Alpines and Mediterraneans.
Writers such as Jack London, Robert E. Howard, and H. P. Lovecraft reflected
Nordicist ideas in their fictions. Nordic thought in Germany. In Germany,
however, the influence of Nordicism remained powerful. There it was known under
the term "Nordischer Gedanke" ("Nordic thought"). This phrase was coined by the
German eugenicists Erwin Baur, Eugen Fischer and Fritz Lenz. It appeared in
their 1921 work "Human Heredity", which insisted on the innate superiority of
the Nordic race. Adapting the arguments of Schopenhauer and others to Darwinian
theory, they argued that the qualities of initiative and will-power identified
by earlier writers had arisen from natural selection, because of the tough
landscape in which Nordic peoples evolved. This had ensured that weaker
individuals had not survived. This argument was derived from earlier eugenicist
and Social Darwinist ideas. According to the authors, the Nordic race arose in
the ice age, from, They went on to argue that "the original Indo-Germanic
civilization" was carried by Nordic migrants as far as India, and that the
physiognomy of upper-caste Indians "disclose a Nordic origin". By this time,
Germany was well-accustomed to theories of race and racial superiority due to
the long presence of the VÃ¶lkish movement, the philosophy that Germans
constituted a unique people, or volk, linked by common blood. While Volkism was
popular mainly among Germany's lower classes and was more a romanticized
version of ethnic nationalism, Nordicism attracted German anthropologists and
eugenicists. Hans F. K. GÃ¼nther, one of Fischer's students, first defined
"Nordic thought" in his programmatic book "Der Nordische Gedanke unter den
Deutschen". He became the most influential German in this field. His "Short
Ethnology of the German People" (1929) was very widely circulated. In his
"Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes" ("Race-Lore of the German Volk"), published
1922, GÃ¼nther identified five principal European races instead of three,
adding the East Baltic race and Dinaric race to Ripley's categories. He used
the term Ostic instead of Alpine. He focused on their supposedly distinct
mental attributes. GÃ¼nther criticised the VÃ¶lkish idea, stating that the
Germans were not racially unified, but were actually one of the most racially
diverse peoples in Europe. Despite this, many VÃ¶lkists who merged VÃ¶lkism and
Nordicism embraced GÃ¼nther's ideas, most notably the Nazis. Nazi Nordicism.
Adolf Hitler read "Human Heredity" shortly before he wrote "Mein Kampf", and
called it scientific proof of the racial basis of civilization. Its arguments
were also repeated by the Nazi ideologist Alfred Rosenberg, in his book "The
Myth of the Twentieth Century" (1930). Nazi racial theories, such as those of
Julius Evola, held the Atlanteans to be a race of Nordic supermen, and Alfred
Rosenberg wrote of a "Nordic-Atlantean" master race whose civilization was lost
through inward corruption and betrayal. The Occult and Nazism Re-Examined.
According to Rosenberg, the Nordic race had evolved in a now-lost landmass off
the coast of Europe, perhaps mythical Atlantis, migrated through northern
Europe and expanded further south, and as far as Iran and India where it
founded the Aryan cultures of Zoroastrianism and Hinduism. Like Grant and
others, he argued that the entrepreneurial energy of the Nordics had
"degenerated" when they mixed with "inferior" peoples. With the rise of Hitler,
Nordic theory became the norm within German culture. In some cases the "Nordic"
concept became an almost abstract ideal rather than a mere racial category. For
example Hermann Gauch wrote in 1933 (in a book which was banned in the Third
Reich) that the fact that "birds can be taught to talk better than other
animals is explained by the fact that their mouths are Nordic in structure." He
further claimed that in humans, "the shape of the Nordic gum allows a superior
movement of the tongue, which is the reason why Nordic talking and singing are
richer." Such views were extreme, but more mainstream Nordic theory was
institutionalized. Hans F. K. GÃ¼nther, who joined the Nazi Party in 1932, was
praised as a pioneer in racial thinking, a shining light of Nordic theory. Most
official Nazi comments on the Nordic Race were based on GÃ¼nther's works, and
Alfred Rosenberg presented GÃ¼nther with a medal for his work in anthropology.
Eugen Fischer and Fritz Lenz were also appointed to senior positions overseeing
the policy of Racial Hygiene. Madison Grant's book was the first non-German
book to be translated and published by the Nazi Reich press, and Grant proudly
displayed to his friends a letter from Hitler claiming that the book was "his
Bible." The Nazi state used such ideas about the differences between European
races as part of their various discriminatory and coercive policies which
culminated in the Holocaust. Ironically, in Grant's first edition of his
popular book, he classified the Germans as being primarily Nordic, but in his
second edition, published after the USA had entered World War I, he had re-
classified the now enemy power as being dominated by "inferior" Alpines.
GÃ¼nther's work agreed with Grant's, and the German anthropologist frequently
stated that the Germans are definitely not a fully Nordic people. Hitler
himself was later to downplay the importance of Nordicism in public for this
very reason. The standard tripartite model placed most of the population of
Hitler's Germany in the Alpine category, especially after the Anschluss. J.
Kaup led a movement opposed to GÃ¼nther. Kaup took the view that a German
nation, all of whose citizens belonged to a "German race" in a populationist
sense, offered a more convenient sociotechnical tool than GÃ¼nther's concept of
an ideal Nordic type to which only a very few Germans could belong. Nazi
legislation identifying the ethnic and "racial" affinities of the Jews reflects
the populationist concept of race. Discrimination was not restricted to Jews
who belonged to the "Oriental-Armenoid" race, but was directed against all
members of the Jewish ethnic population. The German Jewish journalist Kurt Caro
(1905â€“1979) who emigrated to Paris in 1933 and served in the British army
from 1943, published a book under the pseudonym Manuel Humbert claiming to
unmask Hitler's "Mein Kampf" in which he stated the following racial
composition of the Jewish population of Central Europe: 23,8% Lapponid race,
21,5% Nordic race, 20,3% Armenoid race, 18,4% Mediterranean race, 16,0%
Oriental race. By 1939 Hitler had abandoned Nordicist rhetoric in favour of the
idea that the German people as a whole were united by distinct "spiritual"
qualities. Nevertheless, Nazi eugenics policies continued to favor Nordics over
Alpines and other racial groups, particularly during the war when decisions
were being made about the incorporation of conquered peoples into the Reich. In
1942 Hitler stated in private, Trevor-Roper, Hugh, "Hitler's Table Talk, 1941-
44", 1973 edition, p. 475 (12 May 1942) Hitler and Himmler planned to use the
SS as the basis for the racial "regeneration" of Europe following the final
victory of Nazism. The SS was to be a racial elite chosen on the basis of
"pure" Nordic qualities.  Post-Nazi re-evaluation and decline of Nordicism.
Even before the rise of Nazism, Grant's concept of "race" lost favor in the USA
in the polarizing political climate after World War I, including the Great
Migration and the Great Depression. By the 1930s, criticism of the Nordicist
model was growing in Britain and America. The British historian Arnold J.
Toynbee in "A Study of History" (1934) argued that the most dynamic
civilisations have arisen from racially mixed cultures. In southern Europe the
theory understandably had less influence. This required the abandonment of
Grant's gradations of "white" in favour of the "One-drop theory"â€”which was
embraced by white supremacists and black supremacists alike. Among the latter
were Marcus Garvey, and, in part, W. E. B. Du Bois, at least in his later
thought. With the rise of Nazism many critics pointed to the flaws in the
theory, repeating the arguments made by Sergi and others that the evidence of
ancient Nordic achievement is thin when set against the civilizations of the
Mediterranean and elsewhere. The equation of Nordic and Aryan identity was also
widely criticised.  Some Lombard nationalists took it up in Italy, but even
after the establishment of Benito Mussolini's fascist government racial
theories were not prominent. Mussolini stated, "Nothing will ever make me
believe that biologically pure races can be shown to exist." After World War
II, the categorization of peoples into "superior" and "inferior" groups fell
even further out of political and scientific favor, eventually leading to the
characterization of such theories as scientific racism. The tripartite
subdivision of "Caucasians" into Nordic, Alpine and Mediterranean groups
persisted among some scientists into the 1960s, notably in Carleton Coon's book
"The Origin of Races" (1962). Already race academics such as A. James Gregor
were heavily criticizing Nordicism. In 1961 Gregor called it a "philosophy of
despair", on the grounds that its obsession with purity doomed it to ultimate
pessimism and isolationism. As late as 1977 the Swedish author Bertil Lundman
wrote a book "The Races And Peoples Of Europe" mentioning a "Nordid Race". The
development of the Kurgan theory of Indo-European origins challenged the
Nordicist equation of Aryan and Nordic identity, since it placed the earliest
Indo-European speakers around central Asia and/or far-eastern Europe (although
according the Kurgan hypothesis some Proto-Indo-Europeans "did" eventually
migrate into Central and Northern Europe and become the ancestors of the Nordic
peoples.) The original German term used by Ripley, ""Theodiscus"", which is
translated into English as "Teutonic", has fallen out of favour amongst German-
speaking scholars, and is restricted to a somewhat ironical usage similar to
the archaic "teutsch", if used at all. While the term is still present in
English, which has retained it in some contexts as a translation of the
traditional Latin "Teutonicus" (most notably the aforementioned Teutonic
Order), it should not be translated into German as ""Teutonisch"" except when
referring to the historical Teutones. Depigmentation theory. The depigmentation
theory received notable support from later anthropologists, thus in 1947
Melville Jacobs noted: "To many physical anthropologists Nordic means a group
with an especially high percentage of blondness, which represent a
depigmentated Mediterranean". In her work "Races of Man" (1963, 2nd Ed. 1965)
Sonia Mary Cole went further to argue that the Nordic race belongs to the
"brunette Mediterrenean" Caucasoid division but that it differs only in its
higher percentage of blonde hair and light eyes. The Harvard anthropologist
Claude Alvin Villee, Jr. also was a notable proponent of this theory, writing:
"The Nordic division, a partially depigmized branch of the Meditterranean
group." "Collier's Encyclopedia" as late as 1984 contains an entry for this
theory, citing anthropological support. Early 21st century genetic studies have
provided new insights into the origins of Irish people as well as their
neighbours from other parts of the British Isles. Correspondingly, researchers
in the field have suggested that migrations from Prehistoric Iberia can be
viewed as the primary source for their genetic material, having demonstrated
marked similarities with modern representatives of the aforementioned time
period in that of the Basque people. However, the majority of Irish males fall
under the R1b sub-clade L-21, which is quite rare for Basques. Forensic
anthropology. Some forensic scientists, pathologists and anthropologists up to
the 1990s continued to use the tripartite division of Caucasoids: Nordic,
Alpine, and Mediterranean, based on their cranial anthropometry. The
anthropologist Wilton M. Krogman for example identified Nordic racial crania in
her work "The Human Skeleton in Forensic Medicine" (1986) as being
"dolichochranic". In his work "Forensic Pathology", published in 1991, Bernard
Knight, a Professor of Forensic Pathology, also uses the tripartite model and
identifies the Nordic race based on its dolichocephalic skull shape. Forensic
anthropologists of the 21st century however no longer continue to use the
tripartite division of Caucasoids, but instead only recognise Caucasoid,
Negroid and Mongoloid through analysis of skeletal remains and not subraces of
these racial groups. 21st century. In the 21st century there is unanimous
agreement among anthopologists and biologists that completely "pure" races do
not and have not existed. Current views of European anthropologists on race:
influence of educational and ideological background. In other words, there are
not identifiable clades of humans that "exactly" correspond with any ethnic
groups, although population genetics have identified some dominant clades
"among" the ethno-linguistic groups. This opportunity for population genetics
has reduced the degree of speculation about human prehistory and about the
validity of early recorded history. Genetic reality. The emergence of
population genetics further undermined the categorisation of Europeans into
clearly defined racial groups. A 2007 study on the genetic history of Europe
found that the most important genetic differentiation in Europe occurs on a
line from the north to the south-east (northern Europe to the Balkans), with
another east-west axis of differentiation across Europe, separating the
"indigenous" Basques and Sami from other European populations. Despite these
stratifications it noted the unusually high degree of European homogeneity:
"there is low apparent diversity in Europe with the entire continent-wide
samples only marginally more dispersed than single population samples elsewhere
in the world."
