Puerto Rico Puerto Rico ( or ), officially the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (,
‚Äîliterally, "Associated Free State of Puerto Rico"), is an unincorporated
territory of the United States, located in the northeastern Caribbean, east of
the Dominican Republic and west of both the United States Virgin Islands and
the British Virgin Islands. Puerto Rico (Spanish for "rich port") comprises an
archipelago that includes the main island of Puerto Rico and a number of
smaller islands, the largest of which are Vieques, Culebra, and Mona. The main
island of Puerto Rico is the smallest by land area of the Greater Antilles.
However, it ranks third in population among that group of four islands, which
also include Cuba, Hispaniola (Dominican Republic and Haiti), and Jamaica. Due
to its location, Puerto Rico enjoys a tropical climate and also experiences the
Atlantic hurricane season. Originally populated for centuries by indigenous
aboriginal peoples known as Ta√≠nos, the island was claimed by Christopher
Columbus for Spain during his second voyage to the Americas on November 19,
1493. Under Spanish rule, the island was colonized and the indigenous
population was forced into slavery and nearly wiped out due to, among other
things, European infectious diseases. The remaining population was emancipated
by King Charles I in 1520. Spain possessed Puerto Rico for over 400 years,
despite attempts at capture of the island by the French, Dutch, and British.
The Spanish Crown, in an attempt to keep Puerto Rico from gaining its
independence, revived the Royal Decree of Graces of 1815. The decree was
printed in three languages‚ÄîSpanish, English and French‚Äîand it fostered the
immigration of hundreds of non-Spanish European families. The relationship
between Puerto Rico and the United States dates back to the Spanish-American
War, in which Spain, under the terms of the Treaty of Paris of 1898, ceded the
island to the United States. In 1917, Puerto Ricans became U.S. citizens and,
today, "the United States Congress legislates many fundamental aspects of
Puerto Rican life". However, the islanders may not vote in U.S. presidential
elections. Since 1947, Puerto Ricans have been able to elect their own
governor. Its official languages are Spanish and English, with Spanish being
the primary language. The island's current political status, including the
possibility of statehood or independence, is widely debated in Puerto Rico. In
a non-binding referendum held on November 6, 2012, 53% of respondents voted
against the current status, while in a second question 65% favored statehood as
the preferred alternative. Name. Puerto Ricans often call the island
"Borinquen", from "Borik√©n", its indigenous Ta√≠no name, which means "Land of
the Valiant Lord". The terms "boricua" and "borincano" derive from "Borik√©n"
and "Borinquen" respectively, and are commonly used to identify someone of
Puerto Rican heritage. The island is also popularly known in Spanish as "la
isla del encanto", meaning "the island of enchantment". Columbus named the
island San Juan Bautista, in honor of Saint John the Baptist. Eventually,
traders and other maritime visitors came to refer to the entire island as
"Puerto Rico", and "San Juan" became the name of the main trading/shipping
port. History. Pre-Columbian era. The ancient history of the archipelago known
today as Puerto Rico before the arrival of Columbus is not well known. Unlike
other larger more advanced indigenous communities in the New World (Aztec,
Inca) that left behind abundant archeological and physical evidence of their
societies, the indigenous population of Puerto Rico left scant records. What is
known today about them comes from scarce archaeological findings and early
Spanish scholarly accounts. Today, there are few and rare cave drawings, rock
carvings and ancient recreational activity sites that have been identified with
some degree of speculation as to who left them behind. The first comprehensive
book on the history of Puerto Rico was written by Fray √ç√±igo Abbad y Lasierra
in 1786, almost three centuries after the first Spaniards arrived on the
island. The first settlers were the Ortoiroid people, an Archaic Period culture
of Amerindian hunters and fishermen. An archaeological dig in the island of
Vieques in 1990 found the remains of what is believed to be an "Arcaico"
(Archaic) man (named "Puerto Ferro Man") dated to around 2000¬ BCE. The Igneri,
a tribe from the region of the Orinoco river, in northern South America,
arrived between 120 and 400¬ CE. The Arcaicos and Igneri co-existed on the
island between the 4th and 10th centuries, and perhaps clashed. Between the 7th
and 11th centuries the Ta√≠no culture developed on the island, and by
approximately 1000¬ CE had become dominant. At the time of Columbus' arrival,
an estimated 30 to 60 thousand Ta√≠no Amerindians, led by "cacique" (chief)
Ag√ºeyban√°, inhabited the island. They called it Boriken, "the great land of
the valiant and noble Lord". The natives lived in small villages led by a
cacique and subsisted on hunting, fishing and gathering of indigenous cassava
root and fruit. This lasted until Columbus arrived in 1493. However, Puerto
Rican culture today exhibits many Ta√≠no influences within its music and
vocabulary. Spanish colony. When Columbus arrived in Puerto Rico during his
second voyage on , 1493, the island was inhabited by the Ta√≠nos. They called
it "Borik√©n", or "Borinquen". Columbus named the island San Juan Bautista, in
honor of Saint John the Baptist. The first Spanish settlement, Caparra, was
founded on August 8, 1508 by Juan Ponce de Le√≥n, a lieutenant under Columbus,
who later became the first governor of the island. Eventually, traders and
other maritime visitors came to refer to the entire island as Puerto Rico, and
San Juan became the name of the main trading/shipping port. According to the
"500TH Florida Discovery Council Round Table", on March 3, 1513, Juan Ponce de
Leon, organized and commenced an expedition (with a Crew of 200-including Women
and Free Blacks) departing from "Punta Aguada" Puerto Rico. Puerto Rico was the
historic 1st gateway to the discovery of Florida which opened the doors to the
advanced settlement of the USA. They introduced Christianity, Cattle, Horses,
Sheep, the Spanish language and more to the land (Florida) that later became
the United States of America, 107 years before the Pilgrims landed. The
Spaniards began to colonize the island. The indigenous population (Ta√≠nos)
came to be exploited and forced into slavery. Within 50 years they were reduced
to near extinction by the harsh conditions of work and by European infectious
diseases to which they had no natural immunity. For example, the smallpox
outbreak in 1518‚Äì1519 wiped out much of the Island's indigenous population.
In 1520, King Charles I of Spain issued a royal decree collectively
emancipating the remaining Ta√≠no population. Essentially, the Ta√≠no presence
while not completely extinct had almost vanished. The importation of Sub-
Saharan African slaves was introduced to provide the new manual work force for
the Spanish colonists and merchants. Following the decline of the Ta√≠no
population, more slaves were brought to Puerto Rico; however, the number of
slaves on the island paled in comparison to those in neighboring islands.
African slavery was primarily restricted to coastal ports and cities, while the
interior of the island continued to be essentially unexplored and undeveloped.
Spanish and other European colonists were concentrated in island's seaports.
Puerto Rico soon became an important stronghold and a significant port for
Spanish Main colonial expansion. Various forts and walls, such as La Fortaleza,
El Castillo San Felipe del Morro and El Castillo de San Crist√≥bal, were built
to protect the strategic port of San Juan from numerous European invasion
attempts. San Juan served as an important port-of-call for ships of all
European nations for purposes of taking on water, food and other commercial
provisions and mercantile exchange. In 1607, Puerto Rico served as a port
provisioning the English ships "Godspeed", "Susan Constant" and "Discovery",
which were on their way to establish Jamestown, Virginia, the first successful
English settlement in the New World. The Netherlands and England made several
attempts to capture Puerto Rico but failed to wrest it from the long-term
possession by Spain, which held tenaciously onto its increasingly prized island
colony. During the late 17th and early 18th centuries, Spanish colonial
emphasis continued to be focussed on the more prosperous mainland North,
Central, and South American colonies. This continued distraction on the part of
the Spanish Crown left the island of Puerto Rico virtually unexplored,
undeveloped, and (excepting coastal outposts) largely unsettled before the
nineteenth century. But as independence movements in the larger Spanish
colonies grew successful, Spain began to pay attention to Puerto Rico as one of
its last remaining maritime colonies. Amidst the attacks, Puerto Rican culture
began to flourish. In 1786, the first comprehensive history of Puerto
Rico‚Äî"Historia Geogr√°fica, Civil y Pol√≠tica de Puerto Rico" by Fray I√±igo
Abbad y Lasierra‚Äîwas published in Madrid, documenting the history of Puerto
Rico from the time of Columbus' landing in 1493 until 1783. The book also
presents a first-hand account of Puerto Rican identity, including music,
clothing, personality and nationality. In 1779, citizens of the still-Spanish
colony of Puerto Rico fought in the American Revolutionary War under the
command of Bernardo de G√°lvez, named Field Marshal of the Spanish colonial
army in North America. Puerto Ricans participated in the capture of Pensacola,
the capital of the British colony of West Florida, and the cities of Baton
Rouge, St. Louis and Mobile. The Puerto Rican troops, under the leadership of
Brigadier General Ram√≥n de Castro, helped defeat the British and Indian army
of 2,500 soldiers and British warships in Pensacola. In 1809, in a further move
to secure its political bond with the island and in the midst of the European
Peninsular War, the Supreme Central Junta based in C√°diz recognized Puerto
Rico as an overseas province of Spain with the right to send representatives to
the recently convened Spanish parliament with equal representation to Mainland
Iberian, Mediterranean (Balearic Islands) and Atlantic maritime Spanish
provinces (Canary Islands). The first Spanish parliamentary representative from
the island of Puerto Rico, Ramon Power y Giralt, died after serving a three-
year term in the Cortes. These parliamentary and constitutional reforms, which
were in force from 1810 to 1814 and again from 1820 to 1823, were reversed
twice afterwards when the traditional monarchy was restored by Ferdinand¬ VII.
Nineteenth-century immigration and commercial trade reforms further augmented
the island's European population and economy, and expanded Spanish cultural and
social imprint on the local character of the island. Minor slave revolts had
occurred in the island during this period; however, the revolt planned and
organized by Marcos Xiorro in 1821, was the most important. Even though the
conspiracy was unsuccessful, Xiorro achieved legendary status and is part of
Puerto Rico's folklore. In the early 19th century, Puerto Rico had an
Independence movement which, due to the harsh persecution by the Spanish
authorities, met in the island of St. Thomas. The movement was largely inspired
by the ideals of Sim√≥n Bol√≠var of establishing a United Provinces of New
Granada which included Puerto Rico and Cuba. Among the influential members of
this movement was Brigadier General Antonio Valero de Bernabe, a Puerto Rican
military leader known in Latin America as the "Liberator from Puerto Rico" who
fought alongside Bolivar and Mar√≠a de las Mercedes Barbudo, a businesswoman
also known as the "first Puerto Rican female freedom fighter". The movement was
discovered and Governor Miguel de la Torre had its members imprisoned or
exiled. With the increasingly rapid growth of independent former Spanish
colonies in the South and Central American states in the first part of the
century, Puerto Rico and Cuba continued to grow in strategic importance to the
Spanish Crown. In a very deliberate move to increase its hold on its last two
new world colonies, the Spanish Crown revived the Royal Decree of Graces of
1815. This time the decree was printed in three languages: Spanish, English and
French. Its primary intent was to attract Europeans of who were not of Spanish
origin, with the hope that the independence movements would lose their
popularity and strength with increase of new loyalist settlers with strong
sympathies to Spain. As a consequence, hundreds of families, mainly from
Corsica, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy and Scotland, immigrated to the
island. In 1858, Samuel Morse introduced wired communication to Latin America
when he established a telegraph system in Puerto Rico. Morse's oldest daughter,
Susan Walker Morse (1821‚Äì1885), would often visit her uncle Charles Pickering
Walker, who owned the Hacienda Concordia in the town of Guayama. Morse often
spent winters at the Hacienda with his daughter and son-in-law, who lived and
owned the Habienda Henriqueta, and he set a two-mile telegraph line connecting
his son-in-law's hacienda to their house in Arroyo. The line was inaugurated on
March 1, 1859 in a ceremony flanked by the Spanish and American flags. The
first lines transmitted by Morse that day in Puerto Rico were: "Puerto Rico,
beautiful jewel! When you are linked with the other jewels of the Antilles in
the necklace of the world's telegraph, yours will not shine less brilliantly in
the crown of your Queen!" As an incentive to immigrate and colonize, free land
was offered to those who wanted to populate the two islands on the condition
that they swear their loyalty to the Spanish Crown and allegiance to the Roman
Catholic Church. It was very successful and European immigration continued even
after 1898. Puerto Rico today still receives Spanish and European immigration.
Poverty and political estrangement with Spain led to a small but significant
uprising in 1868 known as "Grito de Lares." It began in the rural town of
Lares, but was subdued when rebels moved to the neighboring town of San
Sebasti√°n. Leaders of this independence movement included Ram√≥n Emeterio
Betances, considered the "father" of the Puerto Rican independence movement,
and other political figures such as Segundo Ruiz Belvis. Leaders of "El Grito
de Lares", who were in exile in New York City, joined the Puerto Rican
Revolutionary Committee, founded on December 8, 1895, and continued their quest
for Puerto Rican independence. In 1897, Antonio Mattei Lluberas and the local
leaders of the independence movement of the town of Yauco organized another
uprising, which became known as the "Intentona de Yauco". This was the first
time that the current Puerto Rican flag was unfurled on Puerto Rican soil. The
local conservative political factions, which believed that such an attempt
would be a threat to their struggle for (colonial) autonomy, opposed such an
action. Rumors of the planned event spread to the local Spanish authorities who
acted swiftly and put an end to what would be the last major uprising in the
island to Spanish colonial rule. In 1897, Luis Mu√±oz Rivera and others
persuaded the liberal Spanish government to agree to Charters of Autonomy for
Cuba and Puerto Rico. In 1898, Puerto Rico's first, but short-lived, autonomous
government was organized as an "overseas province" of Spain. This bilaterally
agreed-upon charter maintained a governor appointed by Spain, which held the
power to annul any legislative decision, and a partially elected parliamentary
structure. In February, Governor-General Manuel Mac√≠as inaugurated the new
government under the Autonomous Charter. General elections were held in March
and the autonomous government began to function on , 1898. United States
colony. In 1890, Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan, a member of the Navy War Board
and leading U.S. strategic thinker, wrote a book titled "The Influence of Sea
Power upon History" in which he argued for the creation of a large and powerful
navy modeled after the British Royal Navy. Part of his strategy called for the
acquisition of colonies in the Caribbean Sea which would serve as coaling and
naval stations and which would serve as strategic points of defense upon the
construction of a canal in the Isthmus. This idea was not new, since William H.
Seward, the former Secretary of State under the administrations of various
presidents, among them Abraham Lincoln and Ulysses Grant, had stressed that a
canal be built either in Honduras, Nicaragua or Panama and that the United
States annex the Dominican Republic and purchase Puerto Rico and Cuba. The idea
of annexing the Dominican Republic failed to receive the approval of the U.S.
Senate and Spain did not accept the dollars that the U.S. offered for Puerto
Rico and Cuba. Captain Mahan made the following statement to the War
Department: A. T. Mahan, "The Influence of Sea Power upon History
(1660‚Äì1783)", London: Sampson Low, Marston, Seale; p. 83. Since 1894, the
Naval War College had been formulating contingency plans for a war with Spain.
By 1896, the Office of Naval Intelligence had prepared a plan which included
military operations in Puerto Rican waters. This prewar planning did not
contemplate major territorial acquisitions. Except for one 1895 plan which
recommended annexation of the island then named "Isle of Pines" (later renamed
as Isla de la Juventud), a recommendation dropped in later planning, plans
developed for attacks on Spanish territories were intended as support
operations against Spain's forces in and around Cuba. However, Jorge Rodriguez
Beruf, recognized as a foremost researcher on United States militarism in
Puerto Rico, writes that not only was Puerto Rico considered valuable as a
naval station, Puerto Rico and Cuba were also abundant in sugar ‚Äì a valuable
commercial commodity which the United States lacked. On July 25, 1898, during
the Spanish-American War, Puerto Rico was invaded by the United States with a
landing at Gu√°nica. As an outcome of the war, Spain ceded Puerto Rico, along
with the Philippines and Guam, which were under Spanish sovereignty, to the
U.S. under the Treaty of Paris. Spain relinquished sovereignty over Cuba, but
did not cede it to the U.S. The United States and Puerto Rico thus began a
long-standing relationship. Puerto Rico began the 20th century under the
military rule of the U.S. with officials, including the governor, appointed by
the President of the United States. The Foraker Act of 1900 gave Puerto Rico a
certain amount of civilian popular government, including a popularly elected
House of Representatives, also a judicial system following the American legal
system that includes both state courts and federal courts establishing a Puerto
Rico Supreme Court and a United State District Court; and a non-voting member
of Congress, by the title of "Resident Commissioner". In addition, this Act
extended all U.S. laws "not locally inapplicable" to Puerto Rico, specifying
specific exemption from U.S. Internal Revenue laws. The Act empowered the civil
government to legislate on "all matters of legislative character not locally
inapplicable", including the power to modify and repeal any laws then in
existence in Puerto Rico, though the U.S. Congress retained the power to annul
acts of the Puerto Rico legislature. During an address to the Puerto Rican
legislature in 1906, President Theodore Roosevelt recommended that Puerto
Ricans become U.S. citizens. In 1917, Puerto Ricans were made U.S. citizens via
the Jones Act. The same Act also provided for a popularly elected Senate to
complete a bicameral Legislative Assembly, a bill of rights and authorized the
election of a Resident Commissioner to a four-year term. As a result of their
new U.S. citizenship, many Puerto Ricans were drafted into World War¬ I and all
subsequent wars with U.S. participation in which a national military draft was
in effect. Natural disasters, including a major earthquake, a tsunami and
several hurricanes, and the Great Depression impoverished the island during the
first few decades under U.S. rule. Some political leaders, like Pedro Albizu
Campos who led the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party, demanded change. On , 1937,
a march was organized in the southern city of Ponce by the Puerto Rican
Nationalist Party. This march turned bloody when the Insular Police, "a force
somewhat resembling the National Guard which answered to the U.S.-appointed
governor", opened fire upon unarmed and defenseless cadets and bystanders
alike, as reported by a U.S. Congressman Vito Marcantonio and the "Hays
Commission" led by Arthur Garfield Hays. Nineteen were killed and over 200 were
badly wounded, many in their backs while running away. An American Civil
Liberties Union report declared it a massacre and it has since been known as
the Ponce Massacre. On April 2, 1943, U.S. Senator Millard Tydings introduced a
bill in Congress calling for independence for Puerto Rico. This bill ultimately
was defeated. The internal governance changed during the latter years of the
Roosevelt‚ÄìTruman administrations, as a form of compromise led by Luis Mu√±oz
Mar√≠n and others. It culminated with the appointment by President Truman in
1946 of the first Puerto Rican-born governor, Jes√∫s T. Pi√±ero. Commonwealth.
In 1947, the U.S. granted Puerto Ricans the right to elect democratically their
own governor. Luis Mu√±oz Mar√≠n was elected during the 1948 general elections,
becoming the first popularly elected governor of Puerto Rico. A bill was
introduced before the Puerto Rican Senate which would restrain the rights of
the independence and nationalist movements in the island. The Senate at the
time was controlled by the PPD, and was presided over by Luis Mu√±oz Mar√≠n.
The bill, also known as the Gag Law ("Ley de la Mordaza" in Spanish) was
approved by the legislature on May 21, 1948. It made it illegal to display a
Puerto Rican flag, to sing a patriotic tune, to talk of independence, or to
fight for the liberation of the island. The bill, which resembled the anti-
communist Smith Law passed in the United States, was signed and made into law
on June 10, 1948, by the U.S. appointed governor of Puerto Rico, Jes√∫s T.
Pi√±ero, and became known as "Law 53" ("Ley 53" in Spanish). In accordance to
the new law, it would be a crime to print, publish, sell, exhibit, organize or
help anyone organize any society, group or assembly of people whose intentions
are to paralyze or destroy the insular government. Anyone accused and found
guilty of disobeying the law could be sentenced to ten years of prison, be
fined $10,000 dollars (US), or both. According to Dr. Leopoldo Figueroa, a
member of the Puerto Rico House of Representatives, the law was repressive, and
was in violation of the First Amendment of the US Constitution, which
guarantees Freedom of Speech. He pointed out that the law as such was a
violation of the civil rights of the people of Puerto Rico. The infamous law
was repealed in 1957. In 1950, the U.S. Congress approved Public Law 600 (P.L.
81-600), which allowed for a democratic referendum in Puerto Rico to determine
whether Puerto Ricans desired to draft their own local constitution. This Act
was meant to be adopted in the "nature of a compact". It required congressional
approval of the Puerto Rico Constitution before it could go into effect, and
repealed certain sections of the Organic Act of 1917. The sections of this
statute left in force were then entitled the "Puerto Rican Federal Relations
Act". Then U.S. Secretary of the Interior Oscar L. Chapman, under whose
Department resided responsibility of Puerto Rican affairs, clarified the new
commonwealth status in this manner, "The bill (to permit Puerto Rico to write
its own constitution) merely authorizes the people of Puerto Rico to adopt
their own constitution and to organize a local government...The bill under
consideration would not change Puerto Rico's political, social, and economic
relationship to the United States." On October 30, 1950, Pedro Albizu Campos
and other nationalists led a 3-day revolt against the United States in various
cities and towns of Puerto Rico in what is known as the Puerto Rican
Nationalist Party Revolts of the 1950s. The most notable occurred in Jayuya and
Utuado. In the Jayuya revolt, known as the Jayuya Uprising, the United States
declared martial law, and attacked Jayuya with infantry, artillery and bombers.
The Utuado Uprising culminated in what is known as the Utuado massacre. On ,
1950, Puerto Rican nationalists Griselio Torresola and Oscar Collazo attempted
to assassinate President Harry S Truman. Torresola was killed during the
attack, but Collazo was captured. Collazo served 29 years in a federal prison,
being released in 1979. Don Pedro Albizu Campos also served many years in a
federal prison in Atlanta, Georgia, for seditious conspiracy to overthrow the
U.S. government in Puerto Rico. The Constitution of Puerto Rico was approved by
a Constitutional Convention on , 1952, ratified by the U.S. Congress, approved
by President Truman on of that year, and proclaimed by Gov. Mu√±oz Mar√≠n on ,
1952, on the anniversary of the , 1898, landing of U.S. troops in the Puerto
Rican Campaign of the Spanish-American War, until then an annual Puerto Rico
holiday. Puerto Rico adopted the name of "Estado Libre Asociado" (literally
"Free Associated State", officially translated into English as Commonwealth),
for its body politic. "The United States Congress legislates over many
fundamental aspects of Puerto Rican life, including citizenship, the currency,
the postal service, foreign affairs, military defense, communications, labor
relations, the environment, commerce, finance, health and welfare, and many
others." During the 1950s, Puerto Rico experienced rapid industrialization, due
in large part to "Operaci√≥n Manos a la Obra" ("Operation Bootstrap"), an
offshoot of FDR's New Deal, which aimed to transform Puerto Rico's economy from
agriculture-based to manufacturing-based. Presently, Puerto Rico has become a
major tourist destination, as well as a global center for pharmaceutical
manufacturing. Yet it still struggles to define its political status. Three
plebiscites have been held in recent decades to resolve the political status,
but no changes have been attained. Support for the pro-statehood party, Partido
Nuevo Progresista (PNP), and the pro-commonwealth party, Partido Popular
Democr√°tico (PPD), remains about equal. The only registered pro-independence
party, the Partido Independentista Puertorrique√±o (PIP), usually receives
3‚Äì5% of the electoral votes. Government and politics. Puerto Rico has a
republican form of government, subject to U.S. jurisdiction and sovereignty.
Its current powers are all delegated by the United States Congress and lack
full protection under the United States Constitution. Puerto Rico's head of
state is the President of the United States. The government of Puerto Rico,
based on the formal republican system, is composed of three branches:
executive, legislative, and judicial. The executive branch is headed by the
Governor, currently Luis Fortu√±o. The legislative branch consists of a
bicameral Legislative Assembly made up of a Senate upper chamber and a House of
Representatives lower chamber. The Senate is headed by the President of the
Senate, while the House of Representatives is headed by the Speaker of the
House. The judicial branch is headed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
of Puerto Rico. The legal system is a mix of the civil law and the common law
systems. The governor and legislators are elected by popular vote every four
years. Members of the Judicial branch are appointed by the governor with the
"advice and consent" of the Senate. Puerto Rico is represented in the United
States Congress by a nonvoting delegate, formally called a Resident
Commissioner (currently Pedro Pierluisi). Current legislation has returned the
Commissioner's power to vote in the Committee of the Whole, but not on matters
where the vote would represent a decisive participation. Puerto Rican elections
are governed by the Federal Election Commission and the State Elections
Commission of Puerto Rico. While residing in Puerto Rico, Puerto Ricans cannot
vote in U.S. presidential elections, but they can vote in primaries. Puerto
Ricans who become residents of a U.S. state can vote in presidential elections.
Puerto Rico is not an independent country and, as such, it hosts no embassies.
It is host, however, to consulates from 41 countries, mainly from the Americas
and Europe. Most consulates are located in San Juan. As an unincorporated
territory of the United States, Puerto Rico does not have any first-order
administrative divisions as defined by the U.S. government, but has 78
municipalities at the second level. Mona Island is not a municipality, but part
of the municipality of Mayag√ºez. Municipalities are subdivided into wards or
barrios, and those into sectors. Each municipality has a mayor and a municipal
legislature elected for a four year term. The municipality of San Juan
(previously called "town"), was founded first, in 1521, San Germ√°n in 1570,
Coamo in 1579, Arecibo in 1614, Aguada in 1692 and Ponce in 1692. An increase
of settlement saw the founding of 30 municipalities in the 18th century and 34
in the 19th. Six were founded in the 20th century; the last was Florida in
1971. Since 1952, Puerto Rico has had three main political parties: the Popular
Democratic Party (PPD), the New Progressive Party (PNP) and the Puerto Rican
Independence Party (PIP). These three parties stood for three distinct future
political status scenarios: the PPD seeks to maintain the island's
"association" status with the U.S. as a commonwealth, and has won a plurality
vote in referendums on the island's status held over the last six decades, the
PNP seeks to have Puerto Rico become a U.S. state, and the PIP seeks the
establishment of a sovereign and independent republic. In 2007, a fourth party,
the Puerto Ricans for Puerto Rico Party (PPR), was registered. The PPR claims
that it seeks to address the islands' problems from a status-neutral platform.
However, it ceased to remain a registered political party when it failed to
obtain the requisite number of votes in the 2008 general election. Non-
registered parties include the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party, the Socialist
Workers Movement, the Hostosian National Independence Movement. Political
status. The nature of Puerto Rico's political relationship with the U.S. is the
subject of ongoing debate in Puerto Rico, the United States Congress, and the
United Nations. Specifically, the basic question is whether Puerto Rico should
remain a U.S. territory, become a U.S. state, or become an independent country.
After several failed tries dating back to 1967, Puerto Ricans voted for the
first time to become a state in 2012. The plebiscite was nonbinding. "Estado
Libre Asociado". In 1950, the U.S. Congress granted Puerto Ricans the right to
organize a constitutional convention via a referendum that gave them the option
of voting their preference, "yes" or "no", on a proposed U.S. law that would
organize Puerto Rico as a "commonwealth" that would continue United States
sovereignty over Puerto Rico and its people. Puerto Rico's electorate expressed
its support for this measure in 1951 with a second referendum to ratify the
constitution. The Constitution of Puerto Rico was formally adopted on , 1952.
The Constitutional Convention specified the name by which the body politic
would be known. "We, the people of Puerto Rico, in order to organise ourselves
politically on a fully democratic basis, ...do ordain and establish this
Constitution for the commonwealth which, in the exercise of our natural rights,
we now create within our union with the United States of America. ... We
consider as determining factors in our life our citizenship of the United
States of America and our aspiration continually to enrich our democratic
heritage in the individual and collective enjoyment of its rights and
privileges; our loyalty to the principles of the Federal Constitution;..."
While the approval of the Commonwealth constitution by the people of Puerto
Rico, the U.S. Congress and the U.S. President, marked a historic change in the
civil government of Puerto Rico, neither it nor the public laws approved by
Congress in 1950 and 1952 revoked statutory provisions concerning the legal
relationship of Puerto Rico to the United States. This relationship is based on
the Territorial Clause of the U.S. Constitution. The statutory provisions that
set forth the conditions of the relationship are commonly referred to as the
Federal Relations Act (FRA). Inclusive by Resolution number 34, approved by the
Constitutional Convention and ratified in the Referendum held on November 4,
1952, the following new sentence was added to section 3 of article VII of the
commonwealth constitution: "Any amendment or revision of this constitution
shall be consistent with the resolution enacted by the applicable provisions of
the Constitution of the United States, with the Puerto Rican Federal Relations
Act and with Public Law 600, Eighty-first Congress, adopted in the nature of a
compact". The provisions of the Federal Relations Act as codified on the U.S.
Code Title 48, Chapter 4 shall apply to the island of Puerto Rico and to the
adjacent islands belonging to the United States and waters of those islands;
and the name Puerto Rico, as used in the chapter, shall be held to include not
only the island of that name, but all the adjacent islands as aforesaid. While
specified subsections of the FRA were "adopted in the nature of a compact",
other provisions, by comparison, are excluded from the compact reference.
Matters still subject to congressional authority and established pursuant to
legislation include the citizenship status of residents, tax provisions, civil
rights, trade and commerce, public finance, the administration of public lands
controlled by the federal government, the application of federal law over
navigable waters, congressional representation, and the judicial process, among
others. In 1967, Puerto Rico's Legislative Assembly polled the political
preferences of the Puerto Rican electorate by passing a plebiscite act that
provided for a vote on the status of Puerto Rico. This constituted the first
plebiscite by the Legislature for a choice among three status options
(commonwealth, statehood, and independence). Claiming "foul play" and dubbing
the process as illegitimate and contrary to norms of international law
regarding decolonization procedures, the plebiscite was boycotted by the major
pro-statehood and pro-independence parties of the time, the Republican Party of
Puerto Rico and the Puerto Rican Independence Party, respectively. The
Commonwealth option, represented by the PDP, won with a majority of 60.4% of
the votes. After the plebiscite, efforts in the 1970s, 1980s, 1990s and 2000s
to enact legislation to address the status issue died in U.S. Congressional
committees. In subsequent plebiscites organized by Puerto Rico held in 1993 and
1998 (without any formal commitment on the part of the U.S. Government to honor
the results), the current political status failed to receive majority support.
In 1993, Commonwealth status won by only a plurality of votes (48.6% versus
46.3% for statehood), while the "none of the above" option, which was the
Popular Democratic Party-sponsored choice, won in 1998 with 50.3% of the votes
(versus 46.5% for statehood). Disputes arose as to the definition of each of
the ballot alternatives, and Commonwealth advocates, among others, reportedly
urged a vote for "none of the above". Within the United States.
Constitutionally, Puerto Rico is subject to the Congress's plenary powers under
the territorial clause of Article¬ IV, sec. 3, of the U.S. Constitution. U.S.
federal law applies to Puerto Rico, even though Puerto Rico is not a state of
the American Union and their residents have no voting representation in the
U.S. Congress. Like the States of the American Union, Puerto Rico lacks "the
full sovereignty of an independent nation," for example, the power to manage
its "external relations with other nations," which is held by the Federal
Government. The U.S. Supreme Court has indicated that once the Constitution has
been extended to an area (by Congress or the Courts), its coverage is
irrevocable. To hold that the political branches may switch the Constitution on
or off at will would lead to a regime in which they, not this Court, say "what
the law is.". Puerto Ricans "were collectively made U.S. citizens" in 1917 as a
result of the Jones-Shafroth Act. However, U.S. citizens residing in Puerto
Rico cannot vote for the U.S. president, though both major parties, Republican
and Democrat, run primary elections in Puerto Rico to send delegates to vote on
a presidential candidate. Since Puerto Rico is an unincorporated territory (see
above) and not a U.S. state, the United States Constitution does not fully
enfranchise US citizens residing in Puerto Rico.("See also:" "Voting rights in
Puerto Rico"). Despite their American citizenship, however, only the
"fundamental rights" under the federal constitution apply to Puerto Ricans.
Various other U.S Supreme Court decisions have held which rights apply in
Puerto Rico and which ones do not. Puerto Ricans have a long history of service
in the U.S. armed forces and, since 1917, they have been included in the U.S.
compulsory draft whenever it has been in effect. Though the Commonwealth
government has its own tax laws, Puerto Ricans are also required to pay many
kinds of U.S. federal taxes, not including the federal personal income tax, but
only under certain circumstances. In 2009, Puerto Rico paid into the US
Treasury. Residents of Puerto Rico pay into Social Security, and are thus
eligible for Social Security benefits upon retirement. However, they are
excluded from the Supplemental Security Income (SSI), and the island actually
receives a small fraction of the Medicaid funding it would receive if it were a
U.S. state. Also, Medicare providers receive less-than-full state-like
reimbursements for services rendered to beneficiaries in Puerto Rico, even
though the latter paid fully into the system. In 1992, President George H. W.
Bush issued a memorandum to heads of executive departments and agencies
establishing the current administrative relationship between the federal
government and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. This memorandum directs all
federal departments, agencies, and officials to treat Puerto Rico
administratively as if it were a state, insofar as doing so would not disrupt
federal programs or operations. Many federal executive branch agencies have
significant presence in Puerto Rico, just as in any state, including the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Federal Emergency Management Agency,
Transportation Security Administration, Social Security Administration, and
others. While Puerto Rico has its own Commonwealth judicial system similar to
that of a U.S. state, there is also a U.S federal district court in Puerto
Rico, and Puerto Rican judges have served in that Court and in other federal
courts on the U.S. mainland regardless of their residency status at the time of
their appointment. Puerto Ricans have also been regularly appointed to high-
level federal positions, including serving as United States Ambassadors to
other nations. International status. On November 27, 1953, shortly after the
establishment of the Commonwealth, the General Assembly of the United Nations
approved Resolution 748, removing Puerto Rico's classification as a non-self-
governing territory under article 73(e) of the Charter from UN. But the General
Assembly did not apply the full list of criteria which was enunciated in 1960
when it took favorable note of the cessation of transmission of information
regarding the non-self-governing status of Puerto Rico. According to the White
House Task Force on Puerto Rico's Political Status in its , 2007 report, the
U.S., in its written submission to the UN in 1953, never represented that
Congress could not change its relationship with Puerto Rico without the
territory's consent. It stated that the U.S. Justice Department in 1959
reiterated that Congress held power over Puerto Rico pursuant to the
Territorial Clause of the U.S. Constitution. In 1993, the United States Court
of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit stated that Congress may unilaterally
repeal the Puerto Rican Constitution or the Puerto Rican Federal Relations Act
and replace them with any rules or regulations of its choice. In a 1996 report
on a Puerto Rico status political bill, the U.S. House Committee on Resources
stated, "Puerto Rico's current status does not meet the criteria for any of the
options for full self-government under Resolution 1541" (the three established
forms of full self-government being stated in the report as (1) national
independence, (2) free association based on separate sovereignty, or (3) full
integration with another nation on the basis of equality). The report concluded
that Puerto Rico "... remains an unincorporated territory and does not have the
status of 'free association' with the United States as that status is defined
under United States law or international practice", that the establishment of
local self-government with the consent of the people can be unilaterally
revoked by the U.S. Congress, and that U.S. Congress can also withdraw the U.S.
citizenship of Puerto Rican residents of Puerto Rico at any time, for a
legitimate Federal purpose. The application of the U.S. Constitution to Puerto
Rico is limited by the Insular Cases. In 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, and 2011 the
United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization passed resolutions calling
on the United States to expedite a process "that would allow Puerto Ricans to
fully exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and independence",
and to release all Puerto Rican political prisoners in U.S. prisons, to clean
up, decontaminate and return the lands in the islands of Vieques and Culebra to
the people of Puerto Rico, to perform a probe into U.S. human rights violations
on the island and a probe into the killing by the FBI of pro-independence
leader Filiberto Ojeda Rios. Recent developments. In 2005 and 2007, two reports
were issued by the U.S. President's Task Force on Puerto Rico's Status. Both
reports conclude that Puerto Rico continues to be a territory of U.S. under the
plenary powers of the U.S. Congress. Reactions from Puerto Rico's two major
political parties were mixed. The Popular Democratic Party (PPD) challenged the
task force's report and committed to validating the current status in all
international forums, including the United Nations. It also rejected any
"colonial or territorial status" as a status option, and vowed to keep working
for the enhanced Commonwealth status that was approved by the PPD in 1998,
which included sovereignty, an association based on "respect and dignity
between both nations", and common citizenship. The New Progressive Party or New
Party for Progress (PNP) supported the White House Report's conclusions and
supported bills to provide for a democratic referendum process among Puerto
Rico voters. A 2009 CRS report suggested that action might be taken in the
111th Congress. The reports issued in 2007 and 2005 by the President's Task
Force on Puerto Rico's Status may be the basis for reconsideration of the
existing commonwealth status, as legislative developments during the 109th and
110th Congresses suggested. Agreement on the process to be used in considering
the status proposals has been as elusive as agreement on the end result.
Congress would have a determinative role in any resolution of the issue. The
four options that appear to be most frequently discussed include continuation
of the commonwealth, modification of the current commonwealth agreement,
statehood, or independence. If independence, or separate national sovereignty,
were selected, Puerto Rican officials might seek to negotiate a compact of free
association with the United States. On June 15, 2009, the United Nations
Special Committee on Decolonization approved a draft resolution calling on the
Government of the United States to expedite a process that would allow the
Puerto Rican people to exercise fully their inalienable right to self-
determination and independence. On April 29, 2010, the U.S. House voted
223‚Äì169 to approve a measure for a federally sanctioned process for Puerto
Rico's self-determination, allowing Puerto Rico to set a new referendum on
whether to continue its present form of commonwealth political status or to
have a different political status. If Puerto Ricans vote to continue to have
their present form of political status, the Government of Puerto Rico is
authorized to conduct additional plebiscites at intervals of every eight years
from the date on which the results of the prior plebiscite are certified; if
Puerto Ricans vote to have a different political status, a second referendum
would determine whether Puerto Rico would become a U.S. state, an independent
country, or a sovereign nation associated with the U.S. that would not be
subject to the Territorial Clause of the United States Constitution. During the
House debate, a fourth option, to retain its present form of commonwealth
(sometimes referred to as "the status quo") political status, was added as an
option in the second plebiscite. Immediately following U.S. House passage, H.R.
2499 was sent to the U.S. Senate, where it was given two formal readings and
referred to the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. A Senate
hearing was held on May 19, 2010, for the purpose of gathering testimony on the
bill. Among those offering testimony were Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico,
Pedro Pierluisi; Governor of Puerto Rico, Luis Fortu√±o; President of the
Popular Democratic Party of Puerto Rico, H√©ctor Ferrer; and President of the
Puerto Rican Independence Party, Rub√©n Berr√≠os. According to the Senate
Energy & Natural Resources Committee leadership, the four options are the
continuation of the current commonwealth status, subject to the territorial
clause (under Article IV of the Constitution), statehood, independence, and
free association. On December 22, 2010, the 111th United States Congress
adjourned without any Senate vote on H.R.2499, killing the bill. The latest
Task Force report was released on March 11, 2011. The report suggested a two-
plebiscite process, including a "first plebiscite that requires the people of
Puerto Rico to choose whether they wish to be part of the United States (either
via Statehood or Commonwealth) or wish to be independent (via Independence or
Free Association). If continuing to be part of the United States were chosen in
the first plebiscite, a second vote would be taken between Statehood and
Commonwealth." On June 14, 2011, President Barack Obama "promised to support
‚Äúa clear decision‚Äù by the people of Puerto Rico on statehood". That same
month, the United Nations Special Committee on Decolonization passed a
resolution and adopted a consensus text introduced by Cuba's delegate on June
20, 2011, calling on the United States to expedite a process "that would allow
Puerto Ricans to fully exercise their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence." In December 2011, the Government of Puerto Rico passed a law
mandating a referendum on the political status of Puerto Rico to be held on
November 6, 2012, simultaneous with the general elections. The referendum
consisted of two questions. The first question asked voters whether they wanted
to maintain the current status under the territorial clause of the U.S.
Constitution. The second question posed three alternate status options if the
first question was approved: statehood, independence or free association. For
the first question, 54 percent voted against the current Commonwealth status,
and in the second question, over 61 percent favored statehood. Geography.
Puerto Rico consists of the main island of Puerto Rico and various smaller
islands, including Vieques, Culebra, Mona, Desecheo, and Caja de Muertos. Of
these last five, only Culebra and Vieques are inhabited year-round. Mona is
uninhabited most of the year except for employees of the Puerto Rico Department
of Natural Resources. There are also many other even smaller islands including
Monito and "La Isleta de San Juan" which includes Old San Juan and Puerta de
Tierra and is connected to the main island by bridges. The Commonwealth of
Puerto Rico has an area of , of which is land and is water. The maximum length
of the main island from east to west is , and the maximum width from north to
south is . Puerto Rico is the smallest of the Greater Antilles. It is 80% of
the size of Jamaica, just over 18% of the size of Hispaniola and 8% of the size
of Cuba, the largest of the Greater Antilles. Puerto Rico is mostly mountainous
with large coastal areas in the north and south. The main mountain range is
called "La Cordillera Central" (The Central Range). The highest elevation in
Puerto Rico, Cerro de Punta , is located in this range. Another important peak
is El Yunque, one of the highest in the "Sierra de Luquillo" at the El Yunque
National Forest, with an elevation of . Puerto Rico has 17 lakes, all man-made,
and more than 50 rivers, most originating in the Cordillera Central. Rivers in
the northern region of the island are typically longer and of higher water flow
rates than those of the south, since the south receives less rain than the
central and northern regions. Puerto Rico is composed of Cretaceous to Eocene
volcanic and plutonic rocks, overlain by younger Oligocene and more recent
carbonates and other sedimentary rocks. Most of the caverns and karst
topography on the island occurs in the northern region in the carbonates. The
oldest rocks are approximately years old (Jurassic) and are located at Sierra
Bermeja in the southwest part of the island. They may represent part of the
oceanic crust and are believed to come from the Pacific Ocean realm. Puerto
Rico lies at the boundary between the Caribbean and North American plates and
is being deformed by the tectonic stresses caused by their interaction. These
stresses may cause earthquakes and tsunamis. These seismic events, along with
landslides, represent some of the most dangerous geologic hazards in the island
and in the northeastern Caribbean. The most recent major earthquake occurred on
, 1918, and had an estimated magnitude of 7.5 on the Richter scale. It
originated off the coast of Aguadilla and was accompanied by a tsunami. The
Puerto Rico Trench, the largest and deepest trench in the Atlantic, is located
about north of Puerto Rico at the boundary between the Caribbean and North
American plates. It is long. At its deepest point, named the Milwaukee Deep, it
is almost deep, or about 5.2 miles. Located in the tropics, Puerto Rico has an
average temperature of throughout the year, with an average minimum temperature
of and maximum of . Temperatures do not change drastically throughout the
seasons. The temperature in the south is usually a few degrees higher than the
north and temperatures in the central interior mountains are always cooler than
the rest of the island. The hurricane season spans from June to November. The
all-time low in Puerto Rico has been , registered in Aibonito. The average
yearly precipitation is 1687mm. Species endemic to the archipelago are 239
plants, 16 birds and 39 amphibians/reptiles, recognized as of 1998. Most of
these (234, 12 and 33 respectively) are found on the main island. The most
recognizable endemic species and a symbol of Puerto Rican pride is the
"Coqu√≠", a small frog easily identified by the sound of its call, and from
which it gets its name. Most "Coqu√≠" species (13 of 17) live in the El Yunque
National Forest, a tropical rainforest in the northeast of the island
previously known as the Caribbean National Forest. El Yunque is home to more
than 240 plants, 26 of which are endemic to the island. It is also home to 50
bird species, including the critically endangered Puerto Rican Amazon. Across
the island in the southwest, the of dry land at the Gu√°nica Commonwealth
Forest Reserve contain over 600 uncommon species of plants and animals,
including 48 endangered species and 16 endemic to Puerto Rico. Administrative
divisions. As an unincorporated territory of the United States, Puerto Rico
does not have any first order administrative divisions as defined by the U.S.
Government, but there are 78 municipalities at the secondary level which
function as counties. Municipalities are further subdivided into "barrios", and
those into sectors. Each municipality has a mayor and a municipal legislature
elected for four year terms. The first municipality (previously called "town")
of Puerto Rico, San Juan, was founded in 1521. In the 16th century two more
municipalities were established, San Germ√°n (1570) and Coamo (1579). Three
more municipalities were established in the 17th century. These were Arecibo
(1614), Aguada (1692) and Ponce (1692). The 18th and 19th century saw an
increase in settlement in Puerto Rico with 30 municipalities being established
in the 18th century and 34 more in the 19th century. Only six municipalities
were founded in the 20th century with the last, Florida, being founded in 1971.
Economy. In the early 20th century the greatest contributor to Puerto Rico's
economy was agriculture and its main crop was sugar. In the late 1940s a series
of projects codenamed Operation Bootstrap encouraged a significant shift to
manufacture via tax exemptions. Manufacturing quickly replaced agriculture as
the main industry of the island. Puerto Rico is classified as a "high income
country" by the World Bank. Economic conditions have improved dramatically
since the Great Depression because of external investment in capital-intensive
industries such as petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals and technology. Once the
beneficiary of special tax treatment from the U.S. government, today local
industries must compete with those in more economically depressed parts of the
world where wages are not subject to U.S. minimum wage legislation. In recent
years, some U.S. and foreign owned factories have moved to lower wage countries
in Latin America and Asia. Puerto Rico is subject to U.S. trade laws and
restrictions. Also, starting around 1950, there was heavy migration from Puerto
Rico to the Continental United States, particularly New York City, in search of
better economic conditions. Puerto Rican migration to New York displayed an
average yearly migration of 1,800 for the years 1930‚Äì1940, 31,000 for
1946‚Äì1950, 45,000 for 1951‚Äì1960, and a peak of 75,000 in 1953. As of 2003,
the U.S. Census Bureau estimates that more people of Puerto Rican birth or
ancestry live in the U.S. than in Puerto Rico. On May 1, 2006, the Puerto Rican
government faced significant shortages in cash flows, which forced the closure
of the local Department of Education and 42 other government agencies. All
1,536 public schools closed, and 95,762 people were furloughed in the first-
ever partial shutdown of the government in the island's history. On , 2006, the
budget crisis was resolved with a new tax reform agreement so that all
government employees could return to work. On , 2006, a 5.5% sales tax was
implemented. Municipalities are required by law to apply a municipal sales tax
of 1.5% bringing the total sales tax to 7%. Tourism is an important component
of Puerto Rican economy supplying an approximate . In 1999, an estimated
tourists visited the island, most from the U.S. Nearly a third of these are
cruise ship passengers. A steady increase in hotel registrations since 1998 and
the construction of new hotels and new tourism projects, such as the Puerto
Rico Convention Center, indicate the current strength of the tourism industry.
In 2009, tourism accounted for nearly 7% of the islands' gross national
product. Puerto Ricans had median household income of $18,314 for 2009, which
makes Puerto Rico's economy comparable to the independent nations of Latvia or
Poland. By comparison, the poorest state of the Union, Mississippi, had median
household income of $36,646 in 2009. Nevertheless, Puerto Rico's GDP per capita
compares favorably to other independent Caribbean nations, and is one of the
highest in North America. See List of North American countries by GDP per
capita. Puerto Rico's public debt has grown at a faster pace than the growth of
its economy, reaching in 2008. In , Luis Fortu√±o enacted several measures
aimed at eliminating the government's deficit, including laying off 12,505
government employees. Puerto Rico's unemployment rate was 15.9 percent in .
Some analysts said they expect the government's layoffs to propel that rate to
17 percent. In November 2010, Gov. Fortu√±o proposed a tax reform plan that
would be implemented in a six-year period, retroactive to , 2010. The first
phase, applicable to year 2010, reduces taxes to all individual taxpayers by
7‚Äì15%. By year 2016, average relief for individual taxpayers will represent a
50% tax cut and a 30% cut for corporate taxpayers, whose tax rate will be
lowered from 41 to 30%. Businesses and consumers in Puerto Rico are subjected
to economic discrimination by many U.S. and multinational companies that limit
access to products or offer them at higher prices to businesses and consumers
located in Puerto Rico. For example, Apple does not include K-12 or post-
secondary educational institutions in their national pricing program offering
discounts to teachers and students and special pricing for institutional
purchases. Likewise, Minneapolis-based Best Buy does not allow residents of
Puerto Rico to purchase goods on their website, which may be purchased from the
50 states, Guam and the United States Virgin Islands, but invites potential
customers to skirt their own rules: "Now you can order items online and ship
them to a U.S. address* ‚Äì or pick them up at a U.S. store. International
orders may be shipped to street addresses in the U.S., U.S. Virgin Islands and
Guam, along with AFO/FPO mailing address." At the same time, the latest report
by the President Task Force on Puerto Rico Status recognizes that the status
question and the economy are intimately linked. Many participants in the forums
conducted by the Task Force argued that uncertainty about status is holding
Puerto Rico back in economic areas. And although there are a number of economic
actions that should be taken immediately or in the short term, regardless of
the ultimate outcome of the status question, identifying the most effective
means of assisting the Puerto Rican economy depends on resolving the ultimate
question of status. In short, the long-term economic well-being of Puerto Rico
would be dramatically improved by an early decision on the status question.
Demographics. The population of Puerto Rico has been shaped by Amerindian
settlement, European colonization, slavery, economic migration, and Puerto
Rico's status as unincorporated territory of the United States. Population and
racial makeup. The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of
Puerto Rico was 3,706,690 on July 1, 2011, a 0.51% decrease since the 2010
United States Census. Racial distribution During the 19th century hundreds of
Corsican, French, Lebanese, Chinese, and Portuguese families arrived in Puerto
Rico, along with large numbers of immigrants from Spain (mainly from Catalonia,
Asturias, Galicia, the Balearic Islands, Andalusia, and the Canary Islands) and
numerous Spanish loyalists from Spain's former colonies in South America. Other
settlers included Irish, Scots, Germans, Italians and thousands others who were
granted land by Spain during the "Real Cedula de Gracias de 1815" ("Royal
Decree of Graces of 1815"), which allowed European Catholics to settle in the
island with land allotments in the interior of the island, provided they agreed
to pay taxes and continue to support the Catholic Church. Between 1960 and 1990
the census questionnaire in Puerto Rico did not ask about race or color.
However, the 2000 United States Census included a racial self-identification
question in Puerto Rico. According to the census, most Puerto Ricans self-
identified as White and few declared themselves to be Black or some other race.
A recent study conducted in Puerto Rico suggests that around 52.6% of the
population possess Amerindian mtDNA. Immigration and emigration. Puerto Rico
has recently become the permanent home of over 100,000 legal residents who
immigrated from not only the Dominican Republic, but from other Latin American
countries. These include Cuba, Colombia, and Venezuela, as well as surrounding
Caribbean islands, Haiti, Barbados, and the U.S. Virgin Islands among them.
Emigration is a major part of contemporary Puerto Rican history. Starting soon
after World War¬ II, poverty, cheap airfare, and promotion by the island
government caused waves of Puerto Ricans to move to the United States,
particularly to New York, New Jersey, Massachusetts, and Florida. This trend
continued even as Puerto Rico's economy improved and its birth rate declined,
and Puerto Ricans continue to follow a pattern of "circular migration".
Distribution. The most populous city is the capital, San Juan, with
approximately 395,326 people. Other major cities include Bayam√≥n, Carolina,
Ponce, and Caguas. Of the ten most populous cities on the island, eight are
located within what is considered San Juan's metropolitan area, while the other
two are located in the south (Ponce) and west (Mayag√ºez) of the island.
Languages. The official languages are Spanish and English with Spanish being
the primary language. English is taught as a second language in public and
private schools from elementary levels to high school and at the university
level. Spanish. The Spanish of Puerto Rico has evolved into having many
idiosyncrasies in vocabulary and syntax that differentiate it from the Spanish
spoken elsewhere. While the Spanish spoken in all Iberian, Mediterranean and
Atlantic Spanish Maritime Provinces was brought to the island over the
centuries, the most profound regional impact on the Spanish spoken in Puerto
Rico has been from that spoken in present-day Canary Islands. As a result of
the natural inclusion of indigenous vocabulary in all New World former European
colonies (English, French, Spanish, Dutch, etc.), the Spanish of Puerto Rico
also includes occasional Ta√≠no words, typically in the context of vegetation,
natural phenomenon or primitive musical instruments. Similarly, African-
attributed words exist in the contexts of foods, music or dances, developed in
coastal towns with concentrations of descendants of former Sub-Saharan slaves.
English. According to a study by the University of Puerto Rico, nine of every
ten Puerto Ricans residing in Puerto Rico do not speak English at an advanced
level. More recently, according to the "2005‚Äì2009 Population and Housing
Narrative Profile for Puerto Rico", among people at least five years old living
in Puerto Rico in 2005‚Äì2009, 95 percent spoke a language other than English
at home. Of those speaking a language other than English at home, 100 percent
spoke Spanish and less than 0.5 percent spoke some other language; 85 percent
reported that they did not speak English "very well." Religion. The Roman
Catholic Church has historically been the dominant religion in Puerto Rico. The
first dioceses in the Americas, including the first diocese of Puerto Rico,
were authorized by Pope Julius¬ II in 1511. One Pope, John Paul¬ II, visited
Puerto Rico in October¬ 1984. All municipalities in Puerto Rico have at least
one Catholic church, most of which are located at the town center or ""plaza"".
Protestantism, which was suppressed under the Spanish regime, has spread under
American rule, making modern Puerto Rico interconfessional. The first
Protestant church, Holy Trinity Church in Ponce, was established by the
Anglican diocese of Antigua in 1872. In 1872, German settlers in Ponce founded
the Iglesia Sant√≠sima Trinidad, an Anglican Church, the first non-Roman
Catholic Church in the entire Spanish Empire in the Americas. There is also an
Eastern Orthodox community in Puerto Rico, The Dormition of the Most Holy
Theotokos/ St. Spyridon's Church is located in Trujillo Alto, and serves the
small Orthodox community. The congregation represents Greeks, Russians,
Serbians, Bulgarians, Americans, Moldavians, and Puerto Ricans. In 1940,
Juanita Garcia Peraza founded the Mita Congregation, the first religion of
Puerto Rican origin. Ta√≠no religious practices have been rediscovered/
reinvented to a degree by a handful of advocates. Various African religious
practices have been present since the arrival of African slaves. In particular,
the Yoruba beliefs of Santer√≠a and/or If√°, and the Kongo-derived Palo Mayombe
find adherence among a few individuals who practice some form of African
traditional religion. In 1952, a handful of American Jews established the
island's first synagogue in the former residence of William Korber, a wealthy
Puerto Rican of German descent, which was designed and built by Czech architect
Antonin Nechodoma. The synagogue, called Sha'are Zedeck, hired its first rabbi
in 1954. Puerto Rico now is home to the largest Jewish community in the
Caribbean, numbering 3,000, and is the only Caribbean island in which the
Conservative, Reform and Orthodox Jewish movements all are represented. In
2007, there were about 5,000 Muslims in Puerto Rico, representing about 0.13%
of the population There were eight mosques spread throughout the island, with
most Muslims living in Rio Piedras. In 2011, there were 26,546 Jehovah's
Witnesses, representing about 0.72% of the population, with 329 congregations.
The Padmasambhava Buddhist Center, whose followers practice Tibetan Buddhism,
has a branch in Puerto Rico. Iglesia Sant√≠sima Trinidad of Ponce File:IMG 3392
- Centro Islamico de Ponce, PR.jpg|Islamic Center at Ponce File:Shaare
Zedeck.jpg|Inside Sha'are Zedeck in San Juan  Culture. Modern Puerto Rican
culture is a unique mix of cultural antecedents, including African, Ta√≠no
(Amerindians), Spanish, and more recently, North American. From the Spanish
Puerto Rico received the Spanish language, the Catholic religion and the vast
majority of their cultural and moral values and traditions. The United States
added English language influence, the university system and the adoption of
some holidays and practices. On 1903, the University of Puerto Rico was
officially founded, branching out from the "Escuela Normal Industrial", a
smaller organism that was founded in Fajardo three years before. Much of Puerto
Rican culture centers on the influence of music. Like the country as a whole,
Puerto Rican music has been developed by mixing other cultures with local and
traditional rhythms. Early in the history of Puerto Rican music, the influences
of African and Spanish traditions were most noticeable. However, the cultural
movements across the Caribbean and North America have played a vital role in
the more recent musical influences that have reached Puerto Rico. The official
symbols of Puerto Rico are the "Reinita mora" or Puerto Rican Spindalis (a type
of bird), the "Flor de Maga" (a type of flower), and the "Ceiba" or Kapok (a
type of tree). The unofficial animal and a symbol of Puerto Rican pride is the
Coqu√≠, a small frog. Other popular symbols of Puerto Rico are the "j√≠baro",
the "countryman", and the carite. Sports. Baseball was one of the first sports
to gain widespread popularity in Puerto Rico. The Puerto Rico Baseball League
serves as the only active professional league, operating as a winter league. No
Major League Baseball franchise or affiliate plays in Puerto Rico, however, San
Juan hosted the Montreal Expos for several series in 2003 and 2004 before they
moved to Washington, D.C. and became the Washington Nationals. The Puerto Rico
national baseball team has participated in the World Cup of Baseball winning
one gold (1951), four silver and four bronze medals and the Caribbean Series,
winning fourteen times. Famous Puerto Rican baseball players include Roberto
Clemente and Orlando Cepeda and Roberto Alomar, enshrined in the Baseball Hall
of Fame in 1973, 1999, and 2011 respectively. Boxing, basketball, and
volleyball are considered popular sports as well. Wilfredo G√≥mez and
McWilliams Arroyo have won their respective divisions at the World Amateur
Boxing Championships. Other medalists include Jos√© Pedraza, who holds a silver
medal, as well as three boxers that finished in third place, Jos√© Luis
Vell√≥n, Nelson Dieppa and McJoe Arroyo. In the professional circuit, Puerto
Rico has the third-most boxing world champions and its the global leader in
champions per capita. These include Miguel Cotto, F√©lix Trinidad, Wilfred
Ben√≠tez and G√≥mez among others. The Puerto Rico national basketball team
joined the International Basketball Federation in 1957. Since then, it has won
more than 30 medals in international competitions, including gold in three FIBA
Americas Championships and the 1994 Goodwill Games. , 2004, became a landmark
date for the team when it became the first team to defeat the United States in
an Olympic tournament since the integration of National Basketball Association
players. Winning the inaugural game with scores of 92‚Äì73 as part of the 2004
Summer Olympics organized in Athens, Greece. Baloncesto Superior Nacional acts
as the top-level professional basketball league in Puerto Rico, and has
experienced success since its beginning in 1930. Miscellaneous practices of
this sport have experienced some success, including the "Puerto Rico All Stars"
team, which has won twelve world championships in unicycle basketball.
Organized Streetball has gathered some exposition, with teams like "Puerto Rico
Street Ball" competing against established organizations including the
Capitanes de Arecibo and AND1's Mixtape Tour Team. Six years after the first
visit, AND1 returned as part of their renamed Live Tour, losing to the Puerto
Rico Streetballers. Consequently, practitioners of this style have earned
participation in international teams, including Orlando "El Gato" Mel√©ndez,
who became the first Puerto Rican born athlete to play for the Harlem
Globetrotters. Orlando Antigua, whose mother is Puerto Rican, made history in
1995, when he became the first Hispanic and the first non-black in 52 years to
play for the Harlem Globetrotters. The Puerto Rico Islanders Football Club,
founded in 2003, plays in the United Soccer Leagues First Division, which
constitutes the second tier of football in North America. Puerto Rico is also a
member of FIFA and CONCACAF. In 2008, the archipelago's first unified league,
the Puerto Rico Soccer League, was established. Secondary sports include
Professional wrestling and road running. The World Wrestling Council and
International Wrestling Association are the largest wrestling promotions in the
main island. The World's Best 10K, held annually in San Juan, has been ranked
among the 20 most competitive races globally. Puerto Rico has representation in
all international competitions including the Summer and Winter Olympics, the
Pan American Games, the Caribbean World Series, and the Central American and
Caribbean Games. Puerto Rican athletes have won seven medals (two silver, five
bronze) in Olympic competition, the first one in 1948 by boxer Juan Evangelista
Venegas. On , San Juan's Hiram Bithorn Stadium hosted the opening round as well
as the second round of the newly formed World Baseball Classic. The Central
American and Caribbean Games were held in 1993 in Ponce and in 2010 in
Mayag√ºez. Education. The first school in Puerto Rico and the first school in
the United States after Puerto Rico became a US territory, was the Escuela de
Gramatica (Grammar School). The school was established by Bishop Alonso Manso
in 1513, in the area where the Cathedral of San Juan was to be constructed. The
school was free of charge and the courses taught were Latin language,
literature, history, science, art, philosophy and theology. Education in Puerto
Rico is divided in three levels‚ÄîPrimary (elementary school grades 1‚Äì6),
Secondary (intermediate and high school grades 7‚Äì12), and Higher Level
(undergraduate and graduate studies). As of 2002, the literacy rate of the
Puerto Rican population was 94.1%; by gender, it was 93.9% for males and 94.4%
for females. According to the 2000 Census, 60.0% of the population attained a
high school degree or higher level of education, and 18.3% has a bachelor's
degree or higher. Instruction at the primary school level is compulsory between
the ages of 5 and 18 and is enforced by the state. The Constitution of Puerto
Rico grants the right to an education to every citizen on the island. To this
end, public schools in Puerto Rico provide free and non-sectarian education at
the elementary and secondary levels. At any of the three levels, students may
attend either public or private schools. As of 1999, there were 1532 public
schools and 569 private schools in the island. The largest and oldest
university system in Puerto Rico is the public University of Puerto Rico (UPR)
with 11 campuses. The largest private university systems on the island are the
Sistema Universitario Ana G. Mendez which operates the Universidad del Turabo,
Metropolitan University and Universidad del Este, the multi-campus Inter
American University, the Pontifical Catholic University, and the Universidad
del Sagrado Coraz√≥n. Puerto Rico has four schools of Medicine and four Law
Schools. Transportation. Cities and towns in Puerto Rico are interconnected by
a system of roads, freeways, expressways, and highways maintained by the
Highways and Transportation Authority under the jurisdiction of the U.S.
Department of Transportation, and patrolled by the Puerto Rico Police
Department. The island's metropolitan area is served by a public bus transit
system and a metro system called "Tren Urbano" (in English: Urban Train). Other
forms of public transportation include seaborne ferries (that serve Puerto
Rico's archipelago) as well as "Carros P√∫blicos" (private mini buses). The
island has three international airports, the Luis Mu√±oz Mar√≠n International
Airport in Carolina, Mercedita Airport in Ponce, and the Rafael Hern√°ndez
Airport in Aguadilla, and 27 local airports. The Luis Mu√±oz Mar√≠n
International Airport is the largest aerial transportation hub in the
Caribbean, and one of the largest in the world in terms of passenger and cargo
movement. Puerto Rico has 9 ports in different cities across the main island.
The San Juan Port is the largest in Puerto Rico, and the busiest port in the
Caribbean and the 10th busiest in the United States in terms of commercial
activity and cargo movement, respectively. The second largest port is the Port
of the Americas in Ponce, currently under expansion to increase cargo capacity
to twenty-foot containers (TEUs) per year.
