Unidentified flying object An unidentified flying object, often abbreviated UFO
or U.F.O., is an unusual apparent anomaly in the sky that is not readily
identifiable to the observer as any known object, often associated with
extraterrestrial life. Terminology. The Oxford English Dictionary defines a UFO
as "An unidentified flying object; a â€˜flying saucerâ€™." The word was first
used in print by Donald Keyhoe in 1953. The acronym "UFO" was coined by Capt.
Edward J. Ruppelt, who headed Project Blue Book, then the USAF's official
investigation of UFOs. He wrote, "Obviously the term 'flying saucer' is
misleading when applied to objects of every conceivable shape and performance.
For this reason the military prefers the more general, if less colorful, name:
unidentified flying objects. UFO (pronounced Yoo-foe) for short." Other phrases
that were used officially and that predate the UFO acronym include "flying
flapjack", "flying disc", "unexplained flying discs", "unidentifiable flying
object", and "flying saucer". The phrase "flying saucer" had gained widespread
attention after the summer of 1947. On June 24, a civilian pilot named Kenneth
Arnold reported seeing nine objects flying in formation near Mount Rainer.
Arnold timed the sighting and estimated the speed of discs to be over
1,000Â mph. He described their movement like "a saucer skipped across water".
The newspaper reporters then invented the "flying saucer". (see Kenneth Arnold
UFO sighting for details). In popular usage the term UFO came to sometimes be
used to refer to alien spacecraft. and because of the public and media ridicule
sometimes associated with the topic, some investigators prefer to use such
terms as "unidentified aerial phenomenon" (or "UAP")or "anomalous phenomena,"
as in the title of the National Aviation Reporting Center on Anomalous
Phenomena or NARCAP. The equivalent acronym for UFO in Spanish, Portuguese,
French, and Italian is OVNI ("Objeto Volador No Identificado", "Objeto Voador
NÃ£o Identificado", "Objet volant non identifiÃ©" or "Oggetto Volante Non
Identificato"), pronounced as one word ("ov-nee"). Studies. Studies have
established that the majority of UFO observations are misidentified
conventional objects or natural phenomenaâ€”most commonly aircraft, balloons,
noctilucent clouds, nacreous clouds, or astronomical objects such as meteors or
bright planets with a small percentage even being hoaxes. After excluding
incorrect reports, however, most investigators have acknowledged that between
5% and 20% of reported sightings remain unexplained, and therefore can be
classified as unidentified in the strictest sense. Many reports have been made
by such trained observers as pilots, police, and the military; some have
involved simultaneous radar tracking and visual accounts. Proponents of the
extraterrestrial hypothesis suggest that these unexplained reports are of alien
spacecraft, though various other hypotheses have been proposed. While UFOs have
been the subject of extensive investigation by various governments and although
some scientists support the extraterrestrial hypothesis, few scientific papers
about UFOs have been published in peer-reviewed journals. There has been some
debate in the scientific community about whether any scientific investigation
into UFO sightings is warranted. The void left by the lack of institutional
scientific study has given rise to independent researchers and groups,
including NICAP (the National Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena) in
the mid-20th century and, more recently, MUFON (Mutual UFO Network) and CUFOS
(Center for UFO Studies). The term "Ufology" is used to describe the collective
efforts of those who study reports and associated evidence of unidentified
flying objects. According to MUFON, as of 2011 the number of UFO reports to
their worldwide offices has increased by 67% from the previous three years and
now averages around 500 reported sightings per month. UFOs have become a
relevant theme in modern culture, and the social phenomena have been the
subject of academic research in sociology and psychology. Early history.
Unexplained aerial observations have been reported throughout history. Some
were undoubtedly astronomical in nature: comets, bright meteors, one or more of
the five planets that can be seen with the naked eye, planetary conjunctions,
or atmospheric optical phenomena such as parhelia and lenticular clouds. An
example is Halley's Comet, which was recorded first by Chinese astronomers in
240 BC and possibly as early as 467 BC. Such sightings throughout history often
were treated as supernatural portents, angels, or other religious omens. Some
current-day UFO researchers have noticed similarities between some religious
symbols in medieval paintings and UFO reports though the canonical and symbolic
character of such images is documented by art historians placing more
conventional religious interpretations on such images. Investigations. UFOs
have been subject to investigations over the years that varied widely in scope
and scientific rigor. Governments or independent academics in the United
States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Japan, Peru, France, Belgium, Sweden,
Brazil, Chile, Uruguay, Mexico, Spain, and the Soviet Union are known to have
investigated UFO reports at various times. Among the best known government
studies are the ghost rockets investigation by the Swedish military
(1946â€“1947), Project Blue Book, previously Project Sign and Project Grudge,
conducted by the United States Air Force from 1947 until 1969, the secret U.S.
Army/Air Force Project Twinkle investigation into green fireballs
(1948â€“1951), the secret USAF Project Blue Book Special Report #14 by the
Battelle Memorial Institute, and Brazilian Air Force Operation Saucer (1977).
France has had an ongoing investigation (GEPAN/SEPRA/GEIPAN) within its space
agency CNES since 1977; the government of Uruguay has had a similar
investigation since 1989. Project Sign. Project Sign in 1948 produced a highly
classified finding (see Estimate of the Situation) that the best UFO reports
probably had an extraterrestrial explanation; the private but high-level French
COMETA study of 1999 reached a similar conclusion. A top secret Swedish
military opinion given to the USAF in 1948 stated that some of their analysts
believed that the 1946 ghost rockets and later flying saucers had
extraterrestrial origins. (see Ghost rockets for document). In 1954 German
rocket scientist Hermann Oberth revealed that an internal West German
government investigation, which he headed, had arrived at an extraterrestrial
conclusion, but this study was never made public. Project Magnet. Classified,
internal reports by the Canadian Project Magnet in 1952 and 1953 also assigned
high probability to extraterrestrial origins. Publicly, however, neither
Project Magnet nor later Canadian defense studies ever stated such a
conclusion. Project Grudge. Project Sign was dismantled and became Project
Grudge at the end of 1948. Angered by the low quality of investigations by
Grudge, the Air Force Director of Intelligence reorganized it as Project Blue
Book in late 1951, placing Ruppelt in charge. Blue Book closed down in 1970,
using the Condon Commission's negative conclusion as a rationale, thus ending
official Air Force UFO investigations. However, a 1969 USAF document, known as
the Bolender memo, along with later government documents, revealed that non-
public U.S. government UFO investigations continued after 1970. The Bollender
memo first stated that "reports of unidentified flying objects that could
affect national security . . . are not part of the Blue Book system,"
indicating that more serious UFO incidents already were handled outside the
public Blue Book investigation. The memo then added, "reports of UFOs which
could affect national security would continue to be handled through the
standard Air Force procedures designed for this purpose." In addition, in the
late 1960s a chapter on UFOs in the Space Sciences course at the U.S. Air Force
Academy gave serious consideration to possible extraterrestrial origins. When
word of the curriculum became public, the Air Force in 1970 issued a statement
to the effect that the book was outdated and that cadets instead were being
informed of the Condon report's negative conclusion. USAF Regulation 200-2. ,
issued in 1953 and 1954, defined an Unidentified Flying Object ("UFOB") as "any
airborne object which by performance, aerodynamic characteristics, or unusual
features, does not conform to any presently known aircraft or missile type, or
which cannot be positively identified as a familiar object." The regulation
also said UFOBs were to be investigated as a "possible threat to the security
of the United States" and "to determine technical aspects involved." The
regulation went on to say that "it is permissible to inform news media
representatives on UFOB's when the object is positively identified as a
familiar object," but added: "For those objects which are not explainable, only
the fact that ATIC Technical Intelligence Center will analyze the data is
worthy of release, due to many unknowns involved." Project Bluebook. J. Allen
Hynek, a trained astronomer who served as a scientific advisor for Project
Bluebook, was initially skeptical of UFO reports, but eventually came to the
conclusion that many of them could not be satisfactorily explained and was
highly critical of what he described as "the cavalier disregard by Project Blue
Book of the principles of scientific investigation." Leaving government work,
he founded the privately funded Center for UFO Studies, to whose work he
devoted the rest of his life. Other private groups studying the phenomenon
include the Mutual UFO Network, a grass roots organization whose investigator's
handbooks go into great detail on the documentation of alleged UFO sightings.
Like Hynek, Jacques VallÃ©e, a scientist and prominent UFO researcher, has
pointed to what he believes is the scientific deficiency of most UFO research,
including government studies. He complains of the mythology and cultism often
associated with the phenomenon, but alleges that several hundred professional
scientistsâ€”a group both he and Hyneck have termed "the invisible
college"â€”continue to study UFOs in private. Scientific studies. The study of
UFOs has received little support in mainstream scientific literature. Official
studies ended in the U.S. in December 1969, following the statement by the
government scientist Edward Condon that further study of UFOs could not be
justified on grounds of scientific advancement. The Condon report and its
conclusions were endorsed by the National Academy of Scientists, of which
Condon was a member. On the other hand, a scientific review by the UFO
subcommittee of the AIAA disagreed with Condon's conclusion, noting that at
least 30 percent of the cases studied remained unexplained and that scientific
benefit might be gained by continued study. Critics argue that all UFO evidence
is anecdotal and can be explained as prosaic natural phenomena. Defenders of
UFO research counter that knowledge of observational data, other than what is
reported in the popular media, is limited in the scientific community and that
further study is needed. No official government investigation has ever publicly
concluded that UFOs are indisputably real, physical objects, extraterrestrial
in origin, or of concern to national defense. These same negative conclusions
also have been found in studies that were highly classified for many years,
such as the UK's Flying Saucer Working Party, Project Condign, the US CIA-
sponsored Robertson Panel, the US military investigation into the green
fireballs from 1948 to 1951, and the Battelle Memorial Institute study for the
USAF from 1952 to 1955 (Project Blue Book Special Report #14). Some public
government reports have acknowledged the possibility of physical reality of
UFOs, but have stopped short of proposing extraterrestrial origins, though not
dismissing the possibility entirely. Examples are the Belgian military
investigation into large triangles over their airspace in 1989â€“1991 and the
recent 2009 Uruguay Air Force study conclusion (see below). Some private
studies have been neutral in their conclusions, but argued that the
inexplicable core cases call for continued scientific study. Examples are the
Sturrock Panel study of 1998 and the 1970 AIAA review of the Condon Report.
United States. Thousands of documents released under FOIA also indicate that
many U.S. intelligence agencies collected (and still collect) information on
UFOs. These agencies include the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), FBI, CIA,
National Security Agency (NSA), as well as military intelligence agencies of
the Army and Navy, in addition to the Air Force. The investigation of UFOs has
also attracted many civilians, who in the U.S formed research groups such as
National Investigations Committee On Aerial Phenomena (NICAP, active
1956â€“1980), Aerial Phenomena Research Organization (APRO, 1952â€“1988),
Mutual UFO Network (MUFON, 1969â€“), and Center for UFO Studies (CUFOS,
1973â€“). In November 2011, the White House released an official response to
two petitions asking the U.S. government to acknowledge formally that aliens
have visited this planet and to disclose any intentional withholding of
government interactions with extraterrestrial beings. According to the
response, "The U.S. government has no evidence that any life exists outside our
planet, or that an extraterrestrial presence has contacted or engaged any
member of the human race." Also, according to the response, there is "no
credible information to suggest that any evidence is being hidden from the
public's eye." The response further noted that efforts, like SETI, the Kepler
space telescope and the NASA Mars rover, continue looking for signs of life.
The response noted "odds are pretty high" that there may be life on other
planets but "the odds of us making contact with any of themâ€”especially any
intelligent onesâ€”are extremely small, given the distances involved." Post-
1947 sightings. Following the large U.S. surge in sightings in June and early
July 1947, on July 9, 1947, Army Air Force (AAF) intelligence, in cooperation
with the FBI, began a formal investigation into selected sightings with
characteristics that could not be immediately rationalized, which included
Kenneth Arnoldâ€™s and that of the United Airlines crew. The AAF used "all of
its top scientists" to determine whether "such a phenomenon could, in fact,
occur." The research was "being conducted with the thought that the flying
objects might be a celestial phenomenon," or that "they might be a foreign body
mechanically devised and controlled." Three weeks later in a preliminary
defense estimate, the air force investigation decided that, "This â€˜flying
saucerâ€™ situation is not all imaginary or seeing too much in some natural
phenomenon. Something is really flying around." A further review by the
intelligence and technical divisions of the Air Materiel Command at Wright
Field reached the same conclusion. It reported that "the phenomenon is
something real and not visionary or fictitious," that there were objects in the
shape of a disc, metallic in appearance, and as big as man-made aircraft. They
were characterized by "extreme rates of climb maneuverability," general lack of
noise, absence of trail, occasional formation flying, and "evasive" behavior
"when sighted or contacted by friendly aircraft and radar," suggesting a
controlled craft. It was therefore recommended in late September 1947 that an
official Air Force investigation be set up to investigate the phenomenon. It
was also recommended that other government agencies should assist in the
investigation. Project Sign. This led to the creation of the Air Forceâ€™s
Project Sign at the end of 1947, one of the earliest government studies to come
to a secret extraterrestrial conclusion. In August 1948 Sign investigators
wrote a top-secret intelligence estimate to that effect, but the Air Force
Chief of Staff Hoyt Vandenberg ordered it destroyed. The existence of this
suppressed report was revealed by several insiders who had read it, such as
astronomer and USAF consultant J. Allen Hynek and Capt. Edward J. Ruppelt, the
first head of the USAF's Project Blue Book. Another highly classified U.S.
study was conducted by the CIA's Office of Scientific Investigation (OS/I) in
the latter half of 1952 in response to orders from the National Security
Council (NSC). This study concluded UFOs were real physical objects of
potential threat to national security. One OS/I memo to the CIA Director (DCI)
in December read, "...the reports of incidents convince us that there is
something going on that must have immediate attention... Sightings of
unexplained objects at great altitudes and traveling at high speeds in the
vicinity of major U.S. defense installations are of such a nature that they are
not attributable to natural phenomena or any known types of aerial vehicles."
The matter was considered so urgent that OS/I drafted a memorandum from the DCI
to the NSC proposing that the NSC establish an investigation of UFOs as a
priority project throughout the intelligence and the defense research and
development community. It also urged the DCI to establish an external research
project of top-level scientists, now known as the Robertson Panel to analyze
the problem of UFOs. The OS/I investigation was called off after the Robertson
Panel's negative conclusions in January 1953. The Condon Committee. A public
research effort conducted by the Condon Committee for the USAF, which arrived
at a negative conclusion in 1968, marked the end of the US government's
official investigation of UFOs, though various government intelligence agencies
continue unofficially to investigate or monitor the situation. Controversy has
surrounded the Condon report, both before and after it was released. It has
been observed that the report was "harshly criticized by numerous scientists,
particularly at the powerful AIAA ... recommended moderate, but continuous
scientific work on UFOs". In an address to the AAAS, James E. McDonald stated
that he believed science had failed to mount adequate studies of the problem
and criticized the Condon report and earlier studies by the US Air Force as
scientifically deficient. He also questioned the basis for Condon's conclusions
and argued that the reports of UFOs have been "laughed out of scientific
court." J. Allen Hynek, an astronomer who worked as a USAF consultant from
1948, sharply criticized Condon Committee Report and later wrote two
nontechnical books that set forth the case for continuing to investigate UFO
reports. Ruppelt recounted his experiences with Project Blue Book, a USAF
investigation that preceded Condon's. Canada. In Canada, the Department of
National Defence has dealt with reports, sightings and investigations of UFOs
across Canada. In addition to conducting investigations into crop circles in
Duhamel, Alberta, it still considers "unsolved" the Falcon Lake incident in
Manitoba and the Shag Harbour incident in Nova Scotia. Early Canadian studies
included Project Magnet (1950â€“1954) and Project Second Storey (1952â€“1954),
supported by the Defence Research Board. These studies were headed by Canadian
Department of Transport radio engineer Wilbert B. Smith, who later publicly
supported extraterrestrial origins. In the Shag Harbour incident, a large
object sequentially flashing lights was seen and heard to dive into the water
by multiple witnesses. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police and many local
residents also witnessed a light floating on the water immediately afterward,
and a large patch of unusual yellow foam when a water search was initiated.
Multiple government agencies were eventually involved in trying to identify the
crashed object and searching for it. Canadian naval divers later purportedly
found no wreckage. In official documents, the object was called a "UFO" because
no conventional explanation for the crashed object was discovered. Around the
same time, both the Canadian and US military were involved in another UFO-
related search at Shelburne, Nova Scotia, approximately 30 miles from Shag
Harbour. France. On March 2007, the French Centre National d'Ã‰tudes Spatiales
(CNES) "published" an archive of UFO sightings and other phenomena online.
French studies include GEPAN/SEPRA/GEIPAN (1977â€“), within the French space
agency CNES, the longest ongoing government-sponsored investigation. About 14%
of some 6000 cases studied remained unexplained. The official opinion of GEPAN/
SEPRA/GEIPAN has been neutral or negative, but the three heads of the studies
have gone on record in stating that UFOs were real physical flying machines
beyond our knowledge or that the best explanation for the most inexplicable
cases was an extraterrestrial one. The French COMETA panel (1996â€“1999) was a
private study undertaken mostly by aerospace scientists and engineers
affiliated with CNES and high-level French Air Force military intelligence
analysts, with ultimate distribution of their study intended for high
government officials. The COMETA panel likewise concluded the best explanation
for the inexplicable cases was the extraterrestrial hypothesis and went further
in accusing the United States government of a massive cover-up. United Kingdom.
The UK's Flying Saucer Working Party published its final report in 1951, which
remained secret for over 50 years. The Working Party concluded that all UFO
sightings could be explained as misidentifications of ordinary objects or
phenomena, optical illusions, psychological misperceptions/aberrations, or
hoaxes. The report stated: "We accordingly recommend very strongly that no
further investigation of reported mysterious aerial phenomena be undertaken,
unless and until some material evidence becomes available." Eight file
collections on UFO sightings, dating from 1978 to 1987, were first released on
May 14, 2008, to the UK National Archives by the Ministry of Defence. Although
kept secret from the public for many years, most of the files have low levels
of classification and none are classified Top Secret. 200 files are set to be
made public by 2012. The files are correspondence from the public sent to
government officials, such as the MoD and Margaret Thatcher. The MoD released
the files under the Freedom of Information Act due to requests from
researchers. These files include, but are not limited to, UFOs over Liverpool
and the Waterloo Bridge in London. On October 20, 2008 more UFO files were
released. One case released detailed that in 1991 an Alitalia passenger
aircraft was approaching Heathrow Airport when the pilots saw what they
described as a "cruise missile" fly extremely close to the cockpit. The pilots
believed that a collision was imminent. UFO expert David Clarke says that this
is one of the most convincing cases for a UFO he has come across. A secret
study of UFOs was undertaken for the UKâ€™s Ministry of Defence (MoD) between
1996 and 2000 and was code-named Project Condign. The resulting report, titled
"Unidentified Aerial Phenomena in the UK Defence Region", was publicly released
in 2006, but the identity and credentials of whomever constituted Project
Condign remains classified. The report confirmed earlier findings that the main
causes of UFO sightings are misidentification of man-made and natural objects.
The report noted: "No artefacts of unknown or unexplained origin have been
reported or handed to the UK authorities, despite thousands of UAP reports.
There are no SIGINT, ELINT or radiation measurements and little useful video or
still IMINT." It concluded: "There is no evidence that any UAP, seen in the
UKADR Air Defence Region, are incursions by air-objects of any intelligent
(extraterrestrial or foreign) origin, or that they represent any hostile
intent." A little-discussed conclusion of the report was that novel
meteorological plasma phenomenon akin to Ball Lightning are responsible for
"the majority, if not all" of otherwise inexplicable sightings, especially
reports of Black Triangle UFOs. In August 2009 The Black Vault internet archive
announced the release by the British government of more than 4,000 pages of
declassified records. The records include information on the Rendlesham Forest
incident, crop circles, a UFO attack on a cemetery and even reports of alien
abduction claims. On December 1, 2009, the British Ministry of Defense (MoD)
quietly closed down its UFO investigations unit. The unit's hotline and email
address were suspended by the Ministry of Defense on that date. The MoD said
there was no value in continuing to receive and investigate sightings in a
release, stating The Guardian reported that the MoD claimed the closure would
save the Ministry around Â£50,000 a year. The MoD said that it would continue
to release UFO files to the public through the National Archives. Uruguay. The
Uruguayan Air Force has been conducting an ongoing UFO investigation since 1989
and analyzed 2100 cases, of which they regard only 40 (about 2%) as definitely
lacking any conventional explanation. All files have recently been
declassified. The unexplained cases include military jet interceptions,
abductions, cattle mutilations, and physical landing trace evidence. Colonel
Ariel Sanchez, who currently heads the investigation, summarized its findings
as follows: "The commission managed to determine modifications to the chemical
composition of the soil where landings are reported. The phenomenon exists. It
could be a phenomenon that occurs in the lower sectors of the atmosphere, the
landing of aircraft from a foreign air force, up to the extraterrestrial
hypothesis. It could be a monitoring probe from outer space, much in the same
way that we send probes to explore distant worlds. The UFO phenomenon exists in
the country. I must stress that the Air Force does not dismiss an
extraterrestrial hypothesis based on our scientific analysis." Astronomer
reports. The United States Air Force's Project Blue Book files indicate that
approximately 1â€‰% of all unknown reports came from amateur and professional
astronomers or other users of telescopes (such as missile trackers or
surveyors). In 1952, astronomer J. Allen Hynek, then a consultant to Blue Book,
conducted a small survey of 45 fellow professional astronomers. Five reported
UFO sightings (about 11%). In the 1970s, astrophysicist Peter A. Sturrock
conducted two large surveys of the American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics and American Astronomical Society. About 5â€‰% of the members
polled indicated that they had had UFO sightings. Astronomer Clyde Tombaugh,
who admitted to six UFO sightings, including three green fireballs, supported
the Extraterrestrial hypothesis (ETH) for UFOs and stated he thought scientists
who dismissed it without study were being "unscientific". Another astronomer
was Lincoln LaPaz, who had headed the Air Force's investigation into the green
fireballs and other UFO phenomena in New Mexico. LaPaz reported two personal
sightings, one of a green fireball, the other of an anomalous disc-like object.
(Both Tombaugh and LaPaz were part of Hynek's 1952 survey.) Hynek himself took
two photos through the window of a commercial airliner of a disc-like object
that seemed to pace his aircraft. Even later UFO debunker Donald Menzel filed a
UFO report in 1949. In 1980, a survey of 1800 members of various amateur
astronomer associations by Gert Helb and Hynek for the Center for UFO Studies
(CUFOS) found that 24â€‰% responded "yes" to the question "Have you ever
observed an object which resisted your most exhaustive efforts at
identification?" Identification of UFOs. A 1952â€“1955 study by the Battelle
Memorial Institute for the US Air Force included these categories as well as a
"psychological" one. However, the scientific analysts were unable to come up
with prosaic explanations for 21.5â€‰% of the 3200 cases they examined and
33â€‰% of what were considered the best cases remained unexplained, double the
number of the worst cases. (See full statistical breakdown in Identification
studies of UFOs). Of the 69â€‰% identifieds, 38â€‰% were deemed definitely
explained while 31â€‰% were thought to be "questionable." About 9â€‰% of the
cases were considered to have insufficient information to make a determination.
The official French government UFO investigation (GEPAN/SEPRA/GEIPAN), run
within the French space agency CNES between 1977 and 2004, scientifically
investigated about 6000 cases and found that 13.5â€‰% defied any rational
explanation, 46â€‰% were deemed definitely or likely identifiable, while 41â€‰%
lacked sufficient information for classification. An individual 1979 study by
CUFOS researcher Allan Hendry found, as did other investigations, that only a
small percentage of cases he investigated were hoaxes (<1â€‰%) and that most
sightings were actually honest misidentifications of prosaic phenomena. Hendry
attributed most of these to inexperience or misperception. However, Hendry's
figure for unidentified cases was considerably lower than many other UFO
studies such as Project Blue Book or the Condon Report that have found rates of
unidentified cases ranging from 6â€‰% to 30â€‰%. Hendry found that 88.6â€‰% of
the cases he studied had a clear prosaic explanation, and he discarded a
further 2.8â€‰% due to unreliable or contradictory witnesses or insufficient
information. The remaining 8.6â€‰% of reports could not definitively be
explained by prosaic phenomena, although he felt that a further 7.1â€‰% could
possibly be explained, leaving only the very best 1.5â€‰% without plausible
explanation. Extraterrestrial hypothesis. While technically a UFO refers to any
unidentified flying object, in modern popular culture the term UFO has
generally become synonymous with alien spacecraft; however, the term ETV
(ExtraTerrestrial Vehicle) is sometimes used to separate this explanation of
UFOs from totally earthbound explanations. Proponents argue that because these
objects appear to be technological and not natural phenomena and are alleged to
display flight characteristics or have shapes seemingly unknown to conventional
technology, the conclusion is that they must not be from Earth. Though UFO
sightings have occurred throughout recorded history, modern interest in them
dates from World War II (see foo fighter), further fueled in the late 1940s by
Kenneth Arnold's report of a close encounter, which led to coining of the term
flying saucer, and the Roswell UFO Incident. Since then governments have
investigated UFO reports, often from a military perspective, and UFO
researchers have investigated, written about, and created organizations devoted
to the subject. One such investigation, the UK's Project Condign, made public
in 2006, attributed unaccountable UFO sightings to a hitherto unknown and
scientifically unexplained "plasma field." It also concluded that Russian,
former Soviet Republics, and Chinese authorities had made a co-ordinated effort
to understand the UFO phenomenon and that military organizations, particularly
in Russia, had done "considerably more work (than is evident from open
sources)" on military applications stemming from their UFO research. The report
also noted that "several aircraft have been destroyed and at least four pilots
have been killed 'chasing UFOs'." Associated claims. Besides anecdotal visual
sightings, reports sometimes include claims of other kinds of evidence,
including cases studied by the military and various government agencies of
different countries (such as Project Blue Book, the Condon Committee, the
French GEPAN/SEPRA, and Uruguay's current Air Force study). A comprehensive
scientific review of cases where physical evidence was available was carried
out by the 1998 Sturrock UFO panel, with specific examples of many of the
categories listed below. Reverse engineering. Attempts have been made to
reverse engineer the possible physics behind UFOs through analysis of both
eyewitness reports and the physical evidence, on the assumption that they are
powered vehicles. Examples are former NASA and nuclear engineer James
McCampbell in his book "Ufology", NACA/NASA engineer Paul R. Hill in his book
"Unconventional Flying Objects", and German rocketry pioneer Hermann Oberth.
Among subjects tackled by McCampbell, Hill, and Oberth was the question of how
UFOs can fly at supersonic speeds without creating a sonic boom. McCampbell's
proposed solution is microwave plasma parting the air in front of the craft. In
contrast, Hill and Oberth believed UFOs utilize an as-yet-unknown anti-gravity
field to accomplish the same thing as well as provide propulsion and protection
of occupants from the effects of high acceleration. Ufology. "Ufology" is a
neologism describing the collective efforts of those who study UFO reports and
associated evidence. Categorization. Popular UFO classification systems include
the Hynek system, created by J. Allen Hynek, and the VallÃ©e system, created by
Jacques VallÃ©e. Hynek's system involves dividing the sighted object by
appearance, subdivided further into the type of "close encounter" (a term from
which the film director Steven Spielberg derived the title of his 1977 UFO
movie, "Close Encounters of the Third Kind"). Jacques VallÃ©e's system
classifies UFOs into five broad types, each with from three to five subtypes
that vary according to type. Scientific skepticism. A scientifically skeptical
group that has for many years offered critical analysis of UFO claims is the
Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (CSI). Responding to local beliefs that
"extraterrestrial beings" in UFOs were responsible for crop circles appearing
in Indonesia, the government and the National Aeronautics and Space Agency
(Lapan) described them as "man-made". Thomas Djamaluddin, research professor of
astronomy and astrophysics at Lapan stated: "We have come to agree that this
'thing' cannot be scientifically proven. A professor at the Indonesian National
Aeronautics and Space Agency put UFOs in the category of pseudoscience."
Conspiracy theories. UFOs are sometimes an element of conspiracy theories in
which governments are allegedly intentionally "covering up" the existence of
aliens or sometimes collaborating with them. There are many versions of this
story; some are exclusive, while others overlap with various other conspiracy
theories. In the U.S., an opinion poll conducted in 1997 suggested that 80â€‰%
of Americans believed the U.S. government was withholding such information.
Various notables have also expressed such views. Some examples are astronauts
Gordon Cooper and Edgar Mitchell, Senator Barry Goldwater, Vice Admiral Roscoe
H. Hillenkoetter (the first CIA director), Lord Hill-Norton (former British
Chief of Defense Staff and NATO head), the 1999 high-level French COMETA report
by various French generals and aerospace experts, and Yves Sillard (former
director of the French space agency CNES, new director of French UFO research
organization GEIPAN). It has also been suggested by a few paranormal authors
that all or most human technology and culture is based on extraterrestrial
contact. See also ancient astronauts. Allegations of evidence suppression.
There have been allegations of suppression of UFO related evidence for many
decades. There are claims that physical evidence might have been removed and/or
destroyed/suppressed by some governments. In popular culture. UFOs constitute a
widespread international cultural phenomenon of the last 60 years. Gallup polls
rank UFOs near the top of lists for subjects of widespread recognition. In
1973, a survey found that 95 percent of the public reported having heard of
UFOs, whereas only 92 percent had heard of U.S. President Gerald Ford in a 1977
poll taken just nine months after he left the White House. A 1996 Gallup poll
reported that 71 percent of the United States population believed that the
government was covering up information regarding UFOs. A 2002 Roper poll for
the Sci Fi Channel found similar results, but with more people believing that
UFOs are extraterrestrial craft. In that latest poll, 56 percent thought UFOs
were real craft and 48 percent that aliens had visited the Earth. Again, about
70 percent felt the government was not sharing everything it knew about UFOs or
extraterrestrial life. In the film Yellow Submarine, Ringo states that the
yellow submarine that is following him "must be one of them unidentified flying
cupcakes." Another effect of the flying saucer type of UFO sightings has been
Earth-made flying saucer craft in space fiction, for example the Earth
spacecraft Starship C-57D in "Forbidden Planet", the Jupiter Two in "Lost in
Space", and the saucer section of the USS "Enterprise" in "Star Trek", and many
others.
