Usta≈°e The Usta≈°a ‚Äì Croatian Revolutionary Movement (, before 1933 it was
called Usta≈°a ‚Äì Croatian Revolutionary Organization; ; members known
collectively as Usta≈°e, but sometimes anglicised as Ustashe, Ustashas or
Ustashi) was a Croatian fascist and terrorist organization which was
responsible for the deaths of hundreds of thousands of citizens of Yugoslavia,
particularly Serbs, during World War II. The ideology of the movement was a
blend of Nazism and Croatian nationalism. The Usta≈°e supported the creation of
a Greater Croatia that would span to the River Drina and to the border of
Belgrade. The movement emphasized the need for a racially "pure" Croatia and
promoted persecution and genocide against Serbs, Jews and Romani people.
Fiercely nationalistic, the Usta≈°e were also fanatically Catholic. In the
Yugoslav political context, they identified Catholicism with Croatian
nationalism.""Fiercely nationalistic, the Usta≈°e were also fanatically
Catholic. In the Yugoslav political context, they identified Catholicism with
Croatian nationalism..."" Following Croatian nationalism, they declared the
Catholic and Muslim faiths as religions of the Croatian people. The Usta≈°e
also saw the Islam of Bosniaks as a religion which "keeps true the blood of
Croats." The movement functioned as a terrorist organization before World War
II, but in April 1941, they were appointed to rule a part of Axis-occupied
Yugoslavia as the Independent State of Croatia (NDH), which has been described
as both an Italian-German quasi-protectorate, and as a puppet state of Nazi
Germany. The Usta≈°e were chiefly responsible for the World War II Holocaust in
the NDH. Around three hundred thousand were killed by the NDH government's
racial policies, which condemned all Serbs, Jews and Roma to death in the
concentration camps, alongside Croat resistance members and political
opponents. When it was founded in 1930, the Usta≈°e was a nationalist
organization that sought to create an independent Croatian state. When the
Usta≈°e came to power in the NDH, a quasi-protectorate established by Fascist
Italy and Nazi Germany during World War II, its military wings became the Army
of the Independent State of Croatia and the Usta≈°e militia (). The NDH
collaborated with the Italian and German occupation forces in Yugoslavia in
fighting an increasingly unsuccessful campaign against the resistance forces,
the Yugoslav Partisans, who were recognized in late November 1943 as the
military of the Allied Yugoslav state. As German forces withdrew from
Yugoslavia in 1944/1945, the Usta≈°e mostly left the country, some of them
remained in SFR Yugoslavia as a resistance group known as Crusaders and large
numbers of them were killed without trial by Yugoslav forces (the Partisans)
after the end of the war. Name. The word "usta≈°a" (plural: "usta≈°e") is
derived from the intransitive verb "ustati" (Croatian for "rise up"). "" () was
a military rank in the Imperial Croatian Home Guard (1868‚Äì1918). The same
term was the name of Croatian third-class infantry regiments () during World
War One 1914‚Äì1918. Another variation of the word "ustati" is "ustanik"
(plural: "ustanici") which means an insurgent, or a rebel. The name "usta≈°a"
did not have fascist connotations during their early years in the Kingdom of
Yugoslavia as the term "ustat" was itself used in Herzegovina to denote the
insurgents from the Herzegovinian rebellion of 1875. The full original name of
the organization appeared in April 1931 as the "Usta≈°a ‚Äì Hrvatska
revolucionarna organizacija" or UHRO (Usta≈°a ‚Äì Croatian revolutionary
organization), though in 1933 it was renamed the "Usta≈°a ‚Äì Hrvatski
revolucionarni pokret" (Usta≈°a ‚Äì Croatian revolutionary movement) which it
kept until World War II. Ideology. Ideological roots. One of the major
ideological influences of the Croatian nationalism of the Usta≈°e was 19th
century Croatian activist Ante Starƒçeviƒá. Starƒçeviƒá was an advocate of
Croatian unity and independence and was both anti-Habsburg and anti-Serbian. He
envisioned the creation of a Greater Croatia that would include territories
inhabited by Bosniaks, Serbs, and Slovenes, considering Bosniaks and Serbs as
Croats who had been converted to Islam and Orthodox Christianity while
considering the Slovenes "mountain Croats". He argued that the large Serb
presence in territories claimed by a Greater Croatia was the result of recent
settlement, encouraged settlement by Habsburg rulers, and influx of groups like
Vlachs who took up Orthodox Christianity and identified as Serbs. Starƒçeviƒá
declared his admiration for Bosniaks because in his view they were Croats who
tactically had adopted Islam to preserve the economic and political autonomy of
Bosnia and medieval Croatia under the Ottoman Empire. The Usta≈°e used
Starƒçeviƒá's theories to promote the annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
Croatia and recognized Croatia as having two major ethnocultural components:
Catholic Croats and Muslim Croats. The Usta≈°e deliberately sought to represent
Starƒçeviƒá as being connected to their views, and falsely asserted that
Starƒçeviƒá, as a liberal, never supported human equality or women's equality
while portraying him as a racist. The Usta≈°e promoted the theories of Dr.
Milan ≈ ufflay who is believed to have claimed that Croatia had been "one of
the strongest ramparts of Western civilization for many centuries" that he
claimed had been lost with its union with Serbia in Yugoslavia in 1918.
≈ ufflay himself had been murdered in Yugoslavia in 1931, allegedly by
proponents of the regime, causing an internationally publicized affair. The
Usta≈°e utilized the 1935 thesis by Reverend Krunoslav Draganoviƒá, which
claimed that many Roman Catholics in southern Herzegovina had been converted to
Orthodox Christianity in the 16th and 17th centuries, to justify a policy of
forced conversion of Orthodox Christians in the area to Roman Catholicism. The
Usta≈°e were heavily influenced by Italian Fascism and Nazism. Ante Paveliƒá's
position of "Poglavnik" was based on the similar positions of "Duce" held by
Benito Mussolini and "F√ºhrer" by Adolf Hitler. The Usta≈°e, like fascists,
promoted a corporatist economy. Paveliƒá and the Usta≈°e were allowed sanctuary
in Italy by Mussolini after being exiled from Yugoslavia. Paveliƒá had been in
negotiations with Fascist Italy since 1927 that included advocating a
territory-for-sovereignty swap in which he would tolerate Italy annexing its
claimed territory in Dalmatia in exchange for Italy supporting the sovereignty
of an independent Croatia. However Mussolini's support of the Usta≈°e was based
on pragmatic maximization of Italian influence in the Balkans. After 1937 with
the weakening of French influence in Europe following Germany's
remilitarization of the Rhineland, and with the rise of a quasi-fascist
government in Yugoslavia under Milan Stojadinoviƒá, Mussolini from 1937 to 1939
abandoned support for the Ustase and sought to improve relations Yugoslavia, as
he feared that continued hostility towards Yugoslavia would result in
Yugoslavia joining the German sphere of influence. However the collapse of the
quasi-fascist Stojadinoviƒá regime resulted in Italy restoring its support for
the Usta≈°e and its agenda to promote an independent Croatia broken away from
Yugoslavia that was in personal union with Italy. Distrust towards the Ustase
grew, Mussolini's son-in-law Count and Italian foreign minister Count Galeazzo
Ciano noting in his diary that "The Duce is indignant with Paveliƒá, because he
claims that the Croats are descendants of the Goths. This will have the effect
of bringing them into the German orbit." Nazi Germany initially held no support
for an independent Croatia nor the Usta≈°e and Hitler stressed the importance
for a "strong and united Yugoslavia". Nazi officials including Hermann G√∂ring
wanted Yugoslavia to be stable and officially neutral during the war to insure
that Germany could continue to securely gain Yugoslavia's raw material exports.
The Nazis also grew aggravated with the Ustase, such as Reichsfuhrer SS
Heinrich Himmler who was dissatisfied with the lack of full compliance by the
NDH to the Nazis' agenda of extermination of the Jews, as the Usta≈°e permitted
Jews who converted to Catholicism to be recognized "honourary Croats" and were
exempted from persecution. Political programme and main agendas. In 1933, the
Usta≈°e presented "The Seventeen Principles" that formed the official ideology
of the movement. The Principles stated the uniqueness of the Croatian nation,
promoted collective rights over individual rights, and declared that people who
were not Croat by "blood" would be excluded from political life. Those peoples
considered "undesirables" were subjected to mass murder. The Principles called
for the creation of a new economic system that would be neither capitalist nor
communist. The Principles emphasized the importance of the Roman Catholic
Church and the patriarchial family as means to maintain social order and
morality. (The name given by modern historian to this particular aspect of
Usta≈°e ideology varies; "national Catholicism", "political Catholicism" and
"Catholic Croatism" have been proposed among others.) In power, the Usta≈°e
banned contraception and tightened laws against blasphemy. The Ustase accepted
that Croats were part of the Dinaric race, but rejected the concept that Croats
were primarily a Slavic people and claimed that Croats were primarily the
descendents of the stronger Germanic roots with the Goths than Slavic roots.
The Usta≈°e believed that a government must naturally be strong and
authoritarian. The movement opposed parliamentary democracy for being "corrupt"
and Marxism and Bolshevism for interfering in family life and the economy and
for their materialism. The movement considered political institutions such as
political parties and parliaments to be harmful and unnatural. The Usta≈°e
recognized both Roman Catholicism and Islam as the national religions of the
Croatian people but initially rejected Orthodox Christianity as being
incompatible with their objectives. Though the Ustase emphasized religious
themes, it stressed that duty to the nation took precedence over religious
custom. The Usta≈°e in power banned the use of the expression of "Serbian
Orthodox faith" and mandated the use of the expression "Greek-Eastern faith" in
its place. The Usta≈°e persecuted "Old Catholics" who did not recognize papal
infallibility. Orthodox Christian churches were closed, destroyed, or plundered
during Usta≈°e rule. The Usta≈°e altered their stance towards the Orthodox
faith in August 1941 when the NDH allowed those Orthodox Serbs who held no
political association with Serbia to be permitted to attain Croatian
citizenship and be declared an Aryan person. On 2 July 1942 the Croatian
Orthodox Church was founded, and Orthodoxy thus became one of Croatia's state
religions. The Usta≈°e attached conditions to citizenship of people of Islamic
faith, such as asserting that a Muslim who supported Yugoslavia would not be
considered a Croat, nor a citizen but a "Muslim Serb" who could be denied
property and imprisoned. The Ustase claimed that such "Muslim Serbs" had to
earn Croat status. The Usta≈°e persecuted Jews who practiced Judaism but it
authorized Jewish converts to Catholicism to be recognized as Croatian citizens
and be given honourary Aryan citizenship that allowed them to be reinstated in
their jobs that they had lost due to their previous practice of Judaism. In
economics, the Usta≈°e supported the creation of a corporatist economy. The
movement believed that natural rights existed to private property and ownership
over small-scale means of production free from state control. Armed struggle,
revenge, and terrorism were glorified by the Usta≈°e. History. Before World War
II. In October 1928, after the assassination of leading Croatian politician
Stjepan Radiƒá, Croatian Peasant Party President in the Yugoslav Assembly by
radical Montenegrin politician Puni≈°a Raƒçiƒá, a youth group named the Croat
Youth Movement was founded by Branimir Jeliƒá at the University of Zagreb. A
year later, Ante Paveliƒá was invited by the 21-year-old Jeliƒá into the
organization as a junior member. A related movement, the Domobranski Pokret,
which had been the name of the legal Croatian army in Austria-Hungary, began
publication of "Hrvatski Domobran", a newspaper dedicated to Croatian national
matters. The Ustase sent "Hrvatski Domobran" to the United States to garner
support for the Ustase from Croatian Americans. The organization around the
Domobran tried to engage with and radicalize moderate Croats, using Radiƒá‚Äôs
murder to stir up emotions in the country. By 1929, however, two divergent
political streams had formed within Croatia: some supported the Paveliƒá view
that only violence could secure Croatia's national interests; however, the
Croatian Peasant Party, led then by Vladko Maƒçek, successor to Stjepan Radiƒá,
had much greater support among Croats. Various members of the Croatian Party of
Rights contributed to the writing of the "Domobran", until around Christmas
1928 when the newspaper was banned by the authorities of the Kingdom of Serbs,
Croats and Slovenes. In January 1929, the King banned all national parties, and
the radical wing of the Party of Rights was exiled, among them Ante Paveliƒá,
Gustav Perƒçec and Branimir Jeliƒá. This group was later joined by several
other Croatian exiles. On 20 April 1929, Paveliƒá and others co-signed a
declaration in Sofia, Bulgaria together with members of the Macedonian National
Committee, asserting that they would pursue "their legal activities for the
establishment of human and national rights, political freedom and complete
independence for both Croatia and Macedonia". Due to this, the Court for the
Preservation of the State in Belgrade sentenced Paveliƒá and Perƒçec to death
on 17 July 1929. The exiles started organizing support for their cause among
the Croatian diaspora in Europe, North and South America. In January 1932, they
named their revolutionary organization "Usta≈°a". In November 1932, ten Usta≈°e
led by Andrija Artukoviƒá, supported by four local sympathisers, attacked a
gendarme outpost at Bru≈°ani in the Lika/Velebit area. The goal of attack was
to scare Yugoslav authorities. The incident has sometimes been termed the
Velebit Uprising. One of the most important actions of Usta≈°e was
assassination of Yugoslav king Alexander I. Organizer of assassination was
Eugen Dido Kvaternik while assassin was Vlado Chernozemski, member of the
Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO). Soon after the
assassination, all organizations related to the Usta≈°e as well as the Hrvatski
Domobran, which continued as a civil organization, were banned throughout
Europe. Paveliƒá and Kvaternik were detained in Italy from October 1934 until
the end of March 1936. After March 1937, when Italy and Yugoslavia signed a
pact of friendship, Usta≈°e and their activities were banned. However, not only
did these events fail to destroy the Usta≈°a organization, but it even
attracted sympathizers among the Croatian youth, especially among university
students. In February 1939, two of these returnees, Mile Budak and Ivan
Or≈°aniƒá, became editors of the newly published magazine "Hrvatski narod"
("The Croatian nation"), which supported the Usta≈°e ideas of Croatian
independence. World War II. The Axis Powers invaded Yugoslavia on 6 April 1941.
Vladko Maƒçek, the leader of the Croatian Peasant Party (HSS) which was the
most influential party in Croatia at the time, rejected German offers to lead
the new government. On 10 April the most senior home-based Usta≈°a, Slavko
Kvaternik, took control of the police in Zagreb and in a radio broadcast that
day proclaimed the formation of the Independent State of Croatia ("Nezavisna
Dr≈æava Hrvatska", NDH). The name of the state was an attempt to capitalise on
the Croat struggle for independence. Maƒçek issued a statement that day,
calling on all Croatians to co-operate with the new authorities. Meanwhile
Paveliƒá and several hundred Usta≈°e left their camps in Italy for Zagreb,
where Paveliƒá declared new government on 16 April 1941. He accorded himself
the title of "Poglavnik" ‚Äî a Croatian approximation to "F√ºhrer" and
translating to something like "Headman" in English. Independent State of
Croatia was declared on Croatian "ethnic and historical territory" what is
today Republic of Croatia (without Istria), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Syrmia and
Bay of Kotor. However, a few days after the declaration of independence, the
Usta≈°e were forced to sign the Treaty of Rome where they surrendered part of
Dalmatia and Krk, Rab, Korƒçula, Biograd, ≈ ibenik, Split, ƒåiovo, ≈ olta,
Mljet and part of Konavle and Bay of Kotor in favor of Italy. "De facto"
control over this territory varied for the majority of the war, as the
Partisans grew more successful, while the Germans and Italians increasingly
exercised direct control over areas of interest. The Germans and the Italians
split the NDH into two zones of influence, one in the southwest controlled by
the Italians and the other in the northeast controlled by the Germans. As a
result, the NDH has been described as 'an Italian-German Quasi-Protectorate'.
In September 1943, after Italian capitulation, the NDH annexed the whole
territory which was annexed by Italy according to Treaty of Rome. Usta≈°e
Militia. The Army of the Independent State of Croatia was composed of enlisted
men who did not participate in Usta≈°e activities. The fanatical Usta≈°e
Militia, however, organised in 1941 into five (later 15) 700-man battalions,
two railway security battalions, and the elite Black Legion and Poglavnik
Bodyguard Battalion (later Brigade), fought with a merciless tenacity which
impressed and appalled friend and foe alike. On 27 April 1941, a newly formed
unit of the Usta≈°e army killed members of the largely Serbian community of
Gudovac, near Bjelovar. Eventually all who opposed and/or threatened the
Usta≈°e were outlawed. The HSS was banned on 11 June 1941, in an attempt by the
Usta≈°e to take their place as the primary representative of the Croatian
peasantry. Vladko Maƒçek was sent to the Jasenovac concentration camp, but
later released to serve a house arrest sentence due to his popularity among the
people. Maƒçek was later again called upon by foreigners to take a stand and
oppose the Paveliƒá government, but refused. In early 1941, Jews and Serbs were
ordered to leave certain areas of Zagreb Historian Jonathan Steiberg describes
Usta≈°a crimes against Serbian and Jewish civilians "Serbian and Jewish man
woman and children were literary hacked to death." Reflecting on the pictures
regarding Usta≈°a crimes taken by Italians, Steinberg writes "There are
photographs of Serbian woman with breasts hacked off by kitchen knifes, man
with eyes gouged out, emasculated and mutilated"
