2012 phenomenon The 2012 phenomenon comprises a range of eschatological beliefs
according to which cataclysmic or transformative events will occur on 21
December 2012. This date is regarded as the end-date of a 5,125-year-long cycle
in the Mesoamerican Long Count calendar. Various astronomical alignments and
numerological formulae have been proposed as pertaining to this date, though
none have been accepted by mainstream scholarship. A New Age interpretation of
this transition is that this date marks the start of time in which Earth and
its inhabitants may undergo a positive physical or spiritual transformation,
and that 2012 may mark the beginning of a new era. Others suggest that the 2012
date marks the end of the world or a similar catastrophe. Scenarios suggested
for the end of the world include the arrival of the next solar maximum, an
interaction between Earth and the black hole at the center of the galaxy, or
Earth's collision with a planet called "Nibiru". Scholars from various
disciplines have dismissed the idea of such cataclysmic events occurring in
2012. Professional Mayanist scholars state that predictions of impending doom
are not found in any of the extant classic Maya accounts, and that the idea
that the Long Count calendar "ends" in 2012 misrepresents Maya history and
culture. Astronomers and other scientists have rejected the proposals as
pseudoscience, stating that they conflict with simple astronomical observations
and amount to "a distraction from more important science concerns, such as
global warming and loss of biological diversity". Mesoamerican Long Count
calendar. December 2012 marks the conclusion of a "b'ak'tun"â€”a time period in
the Mesoamerican Long Count calendar which was used in Central America prior to
the arrival of Europeans. Although the Long Count was most likely invented by
the Olmec, it has become closely associated with the Maya civilization, whose
classic period lasted from 250 to 900Â AD. The writing system of the classic
Maya has been substantially deciphered, meaning that a corpus of their written
and inscribed material has survived from before the European conquest. Unlike
the 52-year Calendar Round still used today among the Maya, the Long Count was
linear rather than cyclical, and kept time roughly in units of 20: 20 days made
a "uinal", 18 uinals (360 days) made a "tun", 20 tuns made a "k'atun", and 20
k'atuns (144,000 days or roughly 394 years) made up a "b'ak'tun". Thus, the
Mayan date of 8.3.2.10.15 represents 8 b'ak'tuns, 3 k'atuns, 2 tuns, 10 uinals
and 15 days. Apocalypse. There is a strong tradition of "world ages" in Mayan
literature, but the record has been distorted, leaving several possibilities
open to interpretation. According to the "Popol Vuh", a compilation of the
creation accounts of the K'iche' Maya of the Colonial-era highlands, we are
living in the fourth world. The "Popol Vuh" describes the gods first creating
three failed worlds, followed by a successful fourth world in which humanity
was placed. In the Maya Long Count, the previous world ended after 13
b'ak'tuns, or roughly 5,125 years. The Long Count's "zero date" was set at a
point in the past marking the end of the third world and the beginning of the
current one, which corresponds to 11 August 3114Â BC in the proleptic Gregorian
calendar. This means that the fourth world will also have reached the end of
its 13th b'ak'tun, or Mayan date 13.0.0.0.0, on 21 December 2012. In 1957,
Mayanist and astronomer Maud Worcester Makemson wrote that "the completion of a
Great Period of 13 b'ak'tuns would have been of the utmost significance to the
Maya". In 1966, Michael D. Coe wrote in "The Maya" that "there is a
suggestionÂ ... that Armageddon would overtake the degenerate peoples of the
world and all creation on the final day of the 13th ThusÂ ... our present
universe [would be annihilated December 2012 when the Great Cycle of the Long
Count reaches completion." Objections. Coe's interpretation was repeated by
other scholars through the early 1990s. In contrast, later researchers said
that, while the end of the 13th b'ak'tun would perhaps be a cause for
celebration, it did not mark the end of the calendar. "There is nothing in the
Maya or Aztec or ancient Mesoamerican prophecy to suggest that they prophesied
a sudden or major change of any sort in 2012", said Mayanist scholar Mark Van
Stone. "The notion of a 'Great Cycle' coming to an end is completely a modern
invention." In 1990, Mayanist scholars Linda Schele and David Freidel argued
that the Maya "did not conceive this to be the end of creation, as many have
suggested". Susan Milbrath, curator of Latin American Art and Archaeology at
the Florida Museum of Natural History, stated that, "We have no record or
knowledge that Maya would think the world would come to an end" in 2012. Sandra
Noble, executive director of the Foundation for the Advancement of Mesoamerican
Studies, said, "For the ancient Maya, it was a huge celebration to make it to
the end of a whole cycle", and, "The 2012 phenomenon is a complete fabrication
and a chance for a lot of people to cash in". "There will be another cycle",
said E. Wyllys Andrews V, director of the Tulane University Middle American
Research Institute. "We know the Maya thought there was one before this, and
that implies they were comfortable with the idea of another one after this."
Commenting on the new calendar found at Xultun, one archaeologist said "The
ancient Maya predicted the world would continueÂ â€“ that 7,000 years from now,
things would be exactly like this. We keep looking for endings. The Maya were
looking for a guarantee that nothing would change. It's an entirely different
mindset." Several prominent individuals representing Maya of Guatemala decried
the suggestion that the world ends on b'ak'tun 13. Ricardo Cajas, president of
the Colectivo de Organizaciones IndÃ­genas de Guatemala, said the date did not
represent an end of humanity but that the new cycle, "supposes changes in human
consciousness". MartÃ­n Sacalxot of Procurador de los Derechos Humanos
(Guatemala's Human Rights Ombudsman, PDH) said that end of the calendar has
nothing to do with the end of the world or the year 2012. Prior associations.
The European association of the Maya with eschatology dates back to the time of
Christopher Columbus, who was compiling a work called "Libro de las profecias"
during the voyage in 1502 when he first heard about the "Maia" on Guanaja, an
island off the north coast of Honduras. Influenced by the writings of Bishop
Pierre d'Ailly, Columbus believed that his discovery of "most distant" lands
(and, by extension, the Maya themselves) was prophesied and would bring about
the Apocalypse. End-times fears were widespread during the early years of the
Spanish Conquest as the result of popular astrological predictions in Europe of
a second Great Flood for the year 1524. In the early 1900s, German scholar
Ernst FÃ¶rstemann interpreted the last page of the Dresden Codex as a
representation of the end of the world in a cataclysmic flood. He made
reference to the destruction of the world and an apocalypse, though he made no
reference to the 13th baktun or 2012 and it was not clear that he was referring
to a future event. His ideas were repeated by archaeologist Sylvanus Morley,
who directly paraphrased FÃ¶rstemann and added his own embellishments, writing,
"Finally, on the last page of the manuscript, is depicted the Destruction of
the WorldÂ ... Here, indeed, is portrayed with a graphic touch the final all-
engulfing cataclysm" in the form of a Great Flood. These comments were later
repeated in Morley's book, "The Ancient Maya", the first edition of which was
published in 1946. Mayan references to b'ak'tun 13. It is not certain what
significance the classic Maya give to the 13th b'ak'tun. Most classic Maya
inscriptions are strictly historical and do not make any prophetic
declarations. Two items in the Mayan classical corpus, however, do mention the
end of the 13th b'ak'tun: Tortuguero Monument 6 and La Corona Hieroglyphic
Stairway 12. Tortuguero. Very little is known about the god Bolon Yokte'.
According to an article by Mayanists Markus Eberl and Christian Prager in
"British Anthropological Reports", his name is composed of the elements "nine",
'OK-te' (the meaning of which is unknown), and "god". Confusion in classical
period inscriptions suggests that the name was already ancient and unfamiliar
to contemporary scribes. He also appears in inscriptions from Palenque,
Usumacinta, and La Mar as a god of war, conflict, and the underworld. In one
stele he is portrayed with a rope tied around his neck, and in another with an
incense bag, together signifying a sacrifice to end a cycle of years. Based on
observations of modern Mayan rituals, Gronemeyer and MacLeod claim that the
stele refers to a celebration in which a person portraying Bolon Yokte' K'uh
was wrapped in ceremonial garments and paraded around the site. They note that
the association of Bolon Yokte' K'uh with b'ak'tun 13 appears to be so
important on this inscription that it supersedes more typical celebrations such
as "erection of stelae, scattering of incense" and so forth. Furthermore, they
assert that this event was indeed planned for 2012 and not the 7th century.
Mayanist scholar Stephen Houston contests this view by arguing that future
dates on Mayan inscriptions were simply meant to draw parallels with
contemporary events, and that the words on the stela describe a contemporary
rather than a future scene. La Corona. In Aprilâ€“May 2012, a team of
archaeologists unearthed a previously unknown inscription on a stairway at the
La Corona site in Guatemala. The inscription, on what is known as Hieroglyphic
Stairway 12, describes the establishment of a royal court in Calakmul in 635
AD, and compares the then-recent completion of 13 k'atuns with the future
completion of the 13th b'ak'tun. However, it contains no speculation or
prophecy as to what the scribes believed would happen at that time. Dates
beyond b'ak'tun 13. Mayan inscriptions occasionally mention predicted future
events or commemorations that would occur on dates far beyond the completion of
the 13th b'ak'tun. Most of these are in the form of "distance dates"; Long
Count dates together with an additional number, known as a Distance Number,
which when added to them makes a future date. On the west panel at the Temple
of Inscriptions in Palenque, a section of text projects forward to the 80th 52-
year Calendar Round from the coronation of the ruler K'inich Janaab' Pakal.
Pakal's accession occurred on 9.9.2.4.8, equivalent to 27 July 615Â AD in the
proleptic Gregorian calendar. The inscription begins with Pakal's birthdate of
9.8.9.13.0 (24 March, ) and then adds the Distance Number 10.11.10.5.8 to it,
arriving at a date of 21 October 4772Â AD, more than 4,000 years after Pakal's
time. Another example is Stele 1 at Coba which gives a date of , or twenty
units above the b'ak'tun, placing it either 4.134105 Ã— 1028 (41 octillion)
years in the future, or an equal distance in the past. This date is 3
quintillion times the age of the universe as determined by cosmologists. In
2012, researchers announced the discovery of a series of Mayan astronomical
tables in Xultun, Guatemala which plot the movements of the Moon and other
astronomical bodies over the course of 17 b'ak'tuns. New Age beliefs. Many
assertions about the year 2012 form part of a non-codified collection of New
Age beliefs about ancient Maya wisdom and spirituality. Archaeoastronomer
Anthony Aveni says that while the idea of "balancing the cosmos" was prominent
in ancient Maya literature, the 2012 phenomenon does not draw from those
traditions. Instead, it is bound up with American concepts such as the New Age
movement, millenarianism, and the belief in secret knowledge from distant times
and places. Established themes found in 2012 literature include "suspicion
towards mainstream Western culture", the idea of spiritual evolution, and the
possibility of leading the world into the New Age by individual example or by a
group's joined consciousness. The general intent of this literature is not to
warn of impending doom but "to foster counter-cultural sympathies and
eventually socio-political and 'spiritual' activism". Aveni, who has studied
New Age and SETI communities, describes 2012 narratives as the product of a
"disconnected" society: "Unable to find spiritual answers to life's big
questions within ourselves, we turn outward to imagined entities that lie far
off in space or timeâ€”entities that just might be in possession of superior
knowledge". Origins. In 1975, the ending of b'ak'tun 13 became the subject of
speculation by several New Age authors, who asserted it would correspond with a
global "transformation of consciousness". In "Mexico Mystique: The Coming Sixth
Age of Consciousness", Frank Waters tied Coe's original date of 24 December
2011, to astrology and the prophecies of the Hopi, while both JosÃ© ArgÃ¼elles
(in "The Transformative Vision") and Terence McKenna (in "The Invisible
Landscape") discussed the significance of the year 2012 and made reference to
21 Dec. 2012. In 1983, with the publication of Robert J. Sharer's revised table
of date correlations in the 4th edition of Morley's "The Ancient Maya," each
became convinced that 21 December 2012, had significant meaning. By 1987, the
year in which he organized the Harmonic Convergence event, Arguelles was using
the date 21 December 2012 in "The Mayan Factor: Path Beyond Technology". He
claimed that on 13 August 3113 BC the Earth began a passage through a "galactic
synchronization beam" that emanated from the center of our galaxy, that it
would pass through this beam during a period of 5200 "tuns" (Maya cycles of 360
days each), and that this beam would result in "total synchronization" and
"galactic entrainment" of individuals "plugged into the Earth's electromagnetic
battery" by 13.0.0.0.0 (21 Dec. 2012). He believed that the Maya aligned their
calendar to correspond to this phenomenon. Anthony Aveni has dismissed all of
these ideas. Galactic alignment. There is no significant astronomical event
tied to the Long Count's start date. However, its supposed end date has been
tied to astronomical phenomena by esoteric, fringe, and New Age literature that
places great significance on astrology. Chief among these is the concept of the
"galactic alignment". Precession. In the Solar System, the planets and the Sun
lie roughly within the same flat plane, known as the plane of the ecliptic.
From our perspective on Earth, the ecliptic is the path taken by the Sun across
the sky over the course of the year. The twelve constellations that line the
ecliptic are known as the zodiac and, annually, the Sun passes through all of
them in turn. Additionally, over time, the Sun's annual cycle appears to recede
very slowly backward by one degree every 72 years, or by one constellation
every 2,160 years. This backward movement, called "precession", is due to a
slight wobble in the Earth's axis as it spins, and can be compared to the way a
spinning top wobbles as it slows down. Over the course of 25,800 years, a
period often called a Great Year, the Sun's path completes a full, 360-degree
backward rotation through the zodiac. In Western astrological traditions,
precession is measured from the March equinox, one of the two annual points at
which the Sun is exactly halfway between its lowest and highest points in the
sky. Presently, the Sun's March equinox position is in the constellation Pisces
and is moving back into Aquarius. This signals the end of one astrological age
(the Age of Pisces) and the beginning of another (the Age of Aquarius).
Similarly, the Sun's December solstice position (in the northern hemisphere,
the lowest point on its annual path; in the southern hemisphere, the highest)
is currently in the constellation of Sagittarius, one of two constellations in
which the zodiac intersects with the Milky Way. Every year, on the December
solstice, the Sun and the Milky Way, from the surface of the Earth, appear to
come into alignment, and every year, precession causes a slight shift in the
Sun's position in the Milky Way. Given that the Milky Way is between 10Â° and
20Â° wide, it takes between 700 and 1400 years for the Sun's December solstice
position to precess through it. It is currently about halfway through the Milky
Way, crossing the galactic equator. In 2012, the Sun's December solstice will
fall on 21 December. Mysticism. Mystical speculations about the precession of
the equinoxes and the Sun's proximity to the center of the Milky Way appeared
in "Hamlet's Mill" (1969) by Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von Deschend.
These were quoted and expanded upon by Terence and Dennis McKenna in "The
Invisible Landscape" (1975). The significance of a future "galactic alignment"
was noted in 1991 by astrologer Raymond Mardyks, who asserted that the winter
solstice would align with the galactic plane in 1998/1999, writing that an
event that "only occurs once each 26,000-year cycle and would be most
definitely of utmost significance to the top flight ancient astrologers".
Astrologer Bruce Scofield notes, "The Milky Way crossing of the winter solstice
is something that has been neglected by Western astrologers, with a few
exceptions. Charles Jayne made a very early reference to it, and in the 1970s
Rob Hand mentioned it in his talks on precession but didn't elaborate on it.
Ray Mardyks later made a point of it, and after that , myself, and Daniel
Giamario began to talk about it." Adherents to the idea, following a theory
first proposed by Munro Edmonson, allege that the Maya based their calendar on
observations of the Great Rift or Dark Rift, a band of dark dust clouds in the
Milky Way, which, according to some scholars, the Maya called the "Xibalba be"
or "Black Road". John Major Jenkins claims that the Maya were aware of where
the ecliptic intersected the Black Road and gave this position in the sky a
special significance in their cosmology. According to Jenkins, precession will
align the Sun precisely with the galactic equator at the 2012 winter solstice.
Jenkins claimed that the classical Maya anticipated this conjunction and
celebrated it as the harbinger of a profound spiritual transition for mankind.
New Age proponents of the galactic alignment hypothesis argue that, just as
astrology uses the positions of stars and planets to make claims of future
events, the Maya plotted their calendars with the objective of preparing for
significant world events. Jenkins attributes the insights of ancient Maya
shamans about the galactic center to their use of psilocybin mushrooms,
psychoactive toads, and other psychedelics. Jenkins also associates the
"Xibalba be" with a "world tree", drawing on studies of contemporary (not
ancient) Maya cosmology. Criticism. Astronomers such as David Morrison argue
that the galactic equator is an entirely arbitrary line and can never be
precisely drawn, because it is impossible to determine the Milky Way's exact
boundaries, which vary depending on clarity of view. Jenkins claims he drew his
conclusions about the location of the galactic equator from observations taken
at above , an altitude that gives a clearer image of the Milky Way than Maya
had access to. Furthermore, since the Sun is half a degree wide, its solstice
position takes 36 years to precess its full width. Jenkins himself notes that
even given this determined location for the line of the galactic equator, its
most precise convergence with the center of the Sun already occurred in 1998,
and so asserts that, rather than 2012, the galactic alignment instead focuses
on a multi-year period centred on 1998. There is no clear evidence that the
classic Maya were aware of precession. Some Maya scholars, such as Barbara
MacLeod, Michael Grofe, Eva Hunt, Gordon Brotherston, and Anthony Aveni, have
suggested that some Mayan holy dates were timed to precessional cycles, but
scholarly opinion on the subject remains divided. There is also little
evidence, archaeological or historical, that the Maya placed any importance on
solstices or equinoxes. It is possible that only the early Mesoamericans
observed solstices, but this is also a disputed issue among Mayanists. There is
also no evidence that the classic Maya attached any importance to the Milky
Way; there is no glyph in their writing system to represent it, and no
astronomical or chronological table tied to it. Timewave zero and the "I
Ching". "Timewave zero" is a numerological formula that purports to calculate
the ebb and flow of "novelty", defined as increase over time in the universe's
interconnectedness, or organized complexity. According to Terence McKenna, the
universe has a teleological attractor at the end of time that increases
interconnectedness, eventually reaching a singularity of infinite complexity in
2012, at which point anything and everything imaginable will occur
simultaneously. He conceived this idea over several years in the early to mid-
1970s while using psilocybin mushrooms and DMT. McKenna expressed "novelty" in
a computer program which purportedly produces a waveform known as "timewave
zero" or the "timewave". Based on McKenna's interpretation of the King Wen
sequence of the "I Ching", the graph appears to show great periods of novelty
corresponding with major shifts in humanity's biological and sociocultural
evolution. He believed that the events of any given time are resonantly related
to the events of other times, and chose the atomic bombing of Hiroshima as the
basis for calculating his end date of November 2012. When he later discovered
this date's proximity to the end of the 13th b'ak'tun of the Maya calendar, he
revised his hypothesis so that the two dates matched. The 1975 first edition of
"The Invisible Landscape" refers to 2012 (but no specific day during the year)
only twice. In the 1993 second edition, McKenna employed Sharer's date of 21
December 2012 throughout. Other concepts. In India, the guru Kalki Bhagavan has
promoted 2012 as a "deadline" for human enlightenment since at least 1998. Over
15 million people consider Bhagavan to be the incarnation of the god Vishnu and
believe that 2012 marks the end of the Kali Yuga, or degenerate age. In 2006,
author Daniel Pinchbeck popularized New Age concepts about this date in his
book "2012: The Return of Quetzalcoatl", linking b'ak'tun 13 to beliefs in crop
circles, alien abduction, and personal revelations based on the use of
hallucinogenic drugs and mediumship. Pinchbeck claims to discern a "growing
realization that materialism and the rational, empirical worldview that comes
with it has reached its expiration dateÂ ... e're on the verge of transitioning
to a dispensation of consciousness that's more intuitive, mystical and
shamanic". Beginning in 2000, the small French village of Bugarach, population
189, began receiving visits from "esoterics"â€”mystic believers who have
concluded that the local mountain, Pic de Bugarach, is the ideal location to
weather the transformative events of 2012. In 2011, the local mayor, Jean-
Pierre Delord, began voicing fears to the international press that the small
town would be overwhelmed by an influx of thousands of visitors in 2012, even
suggesting he may call in the army. "We've seen a huge rise in visitors",
Delord told "The Independent" in March 2012. "Already this year more than
20,000 people have climbed right to the top, and last year we had 10,000
hikers, which was a significant rise on the previous 12 months. They think Pic
de Bugarach is 'un garage Ã  ovnis' alien garage. The villagers are
exasperated: the exaggerated importance of something which they see as
completely removed from reality is bewildering. After 21 December, this will
surely return to normal." Doomsday theories. A far more apocalyptic view of the
year 2012 that has spread in various media describes the end of the world or of
human civilization on that date. This view has been promulgated by many hoax
pages on the Internet, particularly on YouTube, as well as on several cable TV
channels. Other alignments. Some people have interpreted the galactic alignment
apocalyptically, claiming that when it occurs, it will somehow create a
combined gravitational effect between the Sun and the supermassive black hole
at the center of our galaxy (known as Sagittarius A*), thus creating havoc on
Earth. Apart from the fact noted above that the "galactic alignment" already
happened in 1998, the Sun's apparent path through the zodiac as seen from Earth
does not take it near the true galactic center, but rather several degrees
above it. Even if this were not the case, Sagittarius A* is 30,000 light years
from Earth, and would have to be more than 6 million times closer to cause any
gravitational disruption to Earth's Solar System. This reading of the alignment
was included on the History Channel documentary, "Decoding the Past". However,
John Major Jenkins has complained that a science fiction writer co-authored the
documentary, and he went on to characterize it as "45Â minutes of unabashed
doomsday hype and the worst kind of inane sensationalism". Some believers in a
2012 doomsday have used the term "galactic alignment" to describe a very
different phenomenon proposed by some scientists to explain a pattern in mass
extinctions supposedly observed in the fossil record. According to this
hypothesis, mass extinctions are not random, but recur every 26 million years.
To account for this, it suggests that vertical oscillations made by the Sun on
its 250-million-year orbit of the galactic center cause it to regularly pass
through the galactic plane. When the Sun's orbit takes it outside the galactic
plane which bisects the galactic disc, the influence of the galactic tide is
weaker. However, when re-entering the galactic discâ€”as it does every
20â€“25Â million yearsâ€”it comes under the influence of the far stronger "disc
tides", which, according to mathematical models, increase the flux of Oort
cloud comets into the inner Solar System by a factor of 4, thus leading to a
massive increase in the likelihood of a devastating comet impact. However, this
"alignment" takes place over tens of millions of years, and could never be
timed to an exact date. Evidence shows that the Sun passed through the plane
bisecting the galactic disc only three million years ago and is now moving
farther above it. A third suggested alignment is some sort of planetary
conjunction occurring on 21 December 2012; however, there will be no
conjunction on that date. Multi-planet alignments did occur in both 2000 and
2010, each with no ill result for the Earth. Jupiter is the largest planet in
the Solar System; larger than all other planets combined. When Jupiter is near
opposition, the Earth experiences a less than 1% difference in the
gravitational force it feels daily from the Moon. Geomagnetic reversal. Another
idea tied to 2012 involves a geomagnetic reversal (often incorrectly referred
to as a pole shift by proponents), possibly triggered by a massive solar flare,
that would release an energy equal to 100Â billion atomic bombs. This belief is
supposedly supported by observations that the Earth's magnetic field is
weakening, which could precede a reversal of the north and south magnetic
poles. Most scientific estimates, however, say that geomagnetic reversals take
between 1,000 and 10,000 years to complete, and do not start on any particular
date. Furthermore, the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration now
predicts that the solar maximum will peak in May 2013, not 2012, and that it
will be fairly weak, with a below-average number of sunspots. In any case,
there is no scientific evidence linking a solar maximum to a geomagnetic
reversal, which is driven by forces entirely within the Earth. Instead, a solar
maximum would be mostly notable for its effects on satellite and cellular phone
communications. David Morrison attributes the rise of the solar storm idea to
physicist and science popularizer Michio Kaku, who claimed in an interview with
Fox News that a solar peak in 2012 could be disastrous for orbiting satellites.
Planet X/Nibiru. Some believers in doomsday in 2012 claim that a planet called
PlanetÂ X, or Nibiru, will collide with or pass by Earth in that year. This
idea, which has appeared in various forms since 1995, initially predicted
Doomsday in May 2003, but proponents later abandoned that date after it passed
without incident. The idea originated from claims of channeling of alien beings
and has been widely ridiculed. Astronomers have calculated that such an object
so close to Earth would be visible to anyone looking up at the night sky. Other
catastrophes. Author Graham Hancock, in his book "Fingerprints of the Gods",
interpreted Coe's remarks in "Breaking the Maya Code" as evidence for the
prophecy of a global cataclysm. Filmmaker Roland Emmerich would later credit
the book with inspiring his 2009 disaster film "2012". Other speculations
regarding doomsday in 2012 have included predictions by the Web Bot project, a
computer program that purports to predict the future using Internet chatter.
However, commentators have rejected the programmers' claims to have
successfully predicted natural disasters, which web chatter could never
predict, as opposed to human-caused disasters like stock market crashes. Also,
the 2012 date has been loosely tied to the long-running concept of the Photon
Belt, which predicts a form of interaction between Earth and Alcyone, the
largest star of the Pleiades cluster. Critics have argued that photons cannot
form belts, that the Pleiades, located more than 400 light years away, could
have no effect on Earth, and that the Solar System, rather than getting closer
to the Pleiades, is in fact moving farther away from them. Some media outlets
have tied the fact that the red supergiant star Betelgeuse will undergo a
supernova at some point in the future to the 2012 phenomenon. However, while
Betelgeuse is certainly in the final stages of its life, and will die as a
supernova, there is no way to predict the timing of the event to within 100,000
years. To be a threat to Earth, a supernova would need to be as close as 25
light years to the Solar System. Betelgeuse is roughly 600 light years away,
and so its supernova will not affect Earth. In December 2011, NASA's Francis
Reddy issued a press release debunking the possibility of a supernova occurring
in 2012. Another claim involves alien invasion. In December 2010, an article,
first published in examiner.com and later referenced in the English-language
edition of "Pravda" claimed, citing a Second Digitized Sky Survey photograph as
evidence, that SETI had detected three large spacecraft due to arrive at Earth
in 2012. Astronomer and debunker Phil Plait noted that by using the small-angle
formula, one could determine that if the object in the photo were as large as
claimed, it would have had to be closer to Earth than the Moon, which would
mean it would already have arrived. In January 2011, Seth Shostak, chief
astronomer of SETI, issued a press release debunking the claims. Public
reaction. The phenomenon has spread widely since coming to public notice,
particularly on the Internet. Hundreds of thousands of websites have been
posted on the subject. "Ask an Astrobiologist", a NASA public outreach website,
has received over 5000 questions from the public on the subject since 2007,
some asking whether they should kill themselves, their children or their pets.
In May 2012, an Ipsos poll of 16,000 adults in 21 countries found that 8
percent had experienced fear or anxiety over the possibility of the world
ending in December, 2012, while an average of 10 percent agreed with the
statement "the Mayan calendar, which some say â€˜endsâ€™ in 2012, marks the end
of the world", with responses as high as 20 percent in China, 13 percent in
Russia, Turkey, Japan and Korea, and 12 percent in the United States. At least
one suicide has been directly linked to fear of a 2012 apocalypse, with several
more anecdotally reported. A panel of scientists questioned on the topic at a
Plenary Session at the Astronomical Society of the Pacific contended that the
Internet has played a substantial role in allowing this doomsday date to gain
more traction than previous similar panics. In the United States, sales of
private underground blast shelters have increased noticeably since 2009. In
December 2009, Robert Vicino founded Vivos, a company that claims to offer
discount shelters for the less well off. Their site features a countdown clock
to December 2012. In Brazil, the Mayor of the City of SÃ£o Francisco de Paula,
DÃ©cio Colla, Rio Grande do Sul, has mobilized the population to prepare for
the end of the world by stocking up on food and supplies. In the city of
Corguinho, in the Mato Grosso do Sul, a colony is being built for survivors of
the tragedy. In Alto ParaÃ­so de GoiÃ¡s, the hotels also make specific
reservations for prophetic dates. On 11 October 2012, in the Brazilian city of
Teresina, police interrupted what was believed to have been an attempted mass
suicide by up to a hundred members of a cult headed by self-proclaimed prophet
Luis Pereira dos Santos, who predicted the end of the world on the feast day of
Our Lady of Aparecida. Santos was subsequently arrested. Cultural influence.
The 2012 phenomenon has been discussed or referenced in several media. Several
TV documentaries, as well as many contemporary fictional references to the year
2012 refer to 21 December as the day of a cataclysmic event. The History
Channel has aired a handful of special series on doomsday that include analysis
of 2012 theories, such as "Decoding the Past" (2005â€“2007), "2012, End of
Days" (2006), "Last Days on Earth" (2006), "Seven Signs of the Apocalypse"
(2007), and "Nostradamus 2012" (2008). The Discovery Channel also aired "2012
Apocalypse" in 2009, suggesting that massive solar storms, magnetic pole
reversal, earthquakes, supervolcanoes, and other drastic natural events may
occur in 2012. In 2012, the National Geographic Channel launched a show called
"Doomsday Preppers", a documentary series about survivalists preparing for
various cataclysms, including the 2012 doomsday. Hundreds of books have been
published on the topic. The bestselling book of 2009, Dan Brown's "The Lost
Symbol", featured a coded mock email number (2456282.5) that decodes, according
to "The Washington Post", as "December 21, 2012". The 2009 disaster film "2012"
was inspired by the phenomenon, and advance promotion prior to its release
included a stealth marketing campaign in which TV spots and websites from the
fictional "Institute for Human Continuity" called on people to prepare for the
end of the world. As these promotions did not mention the film itself, many
viewers believed them to be real and contacted astronomers in panic. Although
the campaign was heavily criticized, the film became one of the most successful
of its year, grossing nearly $770Â million worldwide. Lars von Trier's 2011
film "Melancholia" features a plot in which a planet emerges from behind the
Sun onto a collision course with Earth. Announcing his company's purchase of
the film, the head of Magnolia Pictures said in a press release, "As the 2012
apocalypse is upon us, it is time to prepare for a cinematic last supper". The
phenomenon has also inspired several pop music hits. As early as 1997, "A
Certain Shade of Green" by Incubus referred to the mystical belief that a shift
in perception would arrive in 2012 ("Are you gonna stand around till 2012 A.D.?
/ What are you waiting for, a certain shade of green?"). More recent hits
include "2012 (It Ain't the End)" (2010) performed by Jay Sean and "Till the
World Ends" (2011) performed by Britney Spears. In February 2012, American
automotive company GM aired an advertisement during the annual Super Bowl
football game in which a group of friends drive Chevrolet Silverados through
the ruins of human civilisation following the 2012 apocalypse. (When the
whereabouts of one of their friends is queried, it is revealed that he died
because he drove a Ford.) In 2011, the Mexico tourism board stated its
intentions to use the year 2012, without its apocalyptic connotations, as a
means to revive Mexico's tourism industry, which had suffered as the country
gained a reputation for drug wars and kidnapping. The initiative hopes to draw
on the mystical appeal of the Maya ruins. On 21 December 2011, the Maya town of
Tapachula in Chiapas activated an eight-foot digital clock counting down the
days until the end of b'ak'tun 13, while in Izapa, a nearby archaeological
site, Maya priests burned incense and prayed.
