American Family Association The American Family Association (AFA) is a United
States non-profit organization that promotes conservative fundamentalist
Christian values. It opposes same-sex marriage, pornography, and abortion. It
also takes a position on a variety of other public policy goals such as
deregulation of the oil industry and has lobbied against the Employee Free
Choice Act. It was founded in 1977 by Donald Wildmon as the National Federation
for Decency and is headquartered in Tupelo, Mississippi. The AFA defined itself
as "a Christian organization promoting the biblical ethic of decency in
American society with primary emphasis on television and other media," later
switching their stated emphasis to "moral issues that impact the family." It
engages in activism efforts, including boycotts, buycotts, action alert emails,
publications on the AFA's web sites or in the "AFA Journal", broadcasts on
American Family Radio, and lobbying. The organization is accredited by the
Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability (ECFA) and posted a 2011
budget of over US$16 million. AFA owns 200 American Family Radio stations in 33
states, seven affiliate stations in seven states, and one affiliate TV station
KAZQ TV) in New Mexico. AFA has been listed as a hate group by the Southern
Poverty Law Center as of November 2010 for the "propagation of known
falsehoods" and the use of "demonizing propaganda" against LGBT people.
Operations. Reverend Donald Wildmon served as chairman of AFA until he
announced his retirement on March 3, 2010. His son, Tim, is president of AFA.
AFA is governed by an independent Board of Directors. "AFA Journal" is a
monthly publication with a circulation of 180,000 containing news, features,
columns, and interviews. In addition to the publication, "AFA Journal" articles
are made available online. The journal reviews the content of prime-time
television shows, categorizing them based on profanity, sex, violence,
homosexuality, substance abuse, "anti-Christian" content, or "political
correctness". The categorization is accompanied by short descriptions of the
content of the episode under review. The review also lists the advertisers of
each show and invites readers to contact the advertisers or television networks
to express concern over program content. "American Family Radio" (AFR) is a
network of approximately 200 AFA-owned radio stations broadcasting Christian-
oriented programming. "OneNewsNow.com" (formerly AgapePress), the AFA news
division, provides online audio newscasts and a daily digest of news articles,
Associated Press stories, and opinion columns. "The AFA Foundation" is a
planned giving program that allows participants the ability to set up bequests,
charitable gift annuities, trusts and wills, that will provide income with tax
advantages while supporting charity. In July 2011 the Charity Navigator gave
the foundation a four star rating for sound fiscal management Center for Law
and Policy, the legal and political arm of the AFA, was shut down in 2007. It
specialized in First Amendment cases. The Center for Law and Policy lobbied
legislative bodies, drafted legislation, and filed religious-discrimination
lawsuits on behalf of individuals. Chief among its efforts were the recognition
of Christmas in seasonal print advertisements; the criminalization of
homosexuality; lobbying against same-sex marriage, and in opposition of equal-
rights and hate-crime legislation that would include sexual orientation and
gender identity under categories already protected and advocating censorship of
print and electronic media. Campaigns and issues. The AFA has a history of
activism by organizing its members in boycotts and letter-writing campaigns
aimed at promoting socially conservative values in the United States. The AFA
has promoted boycotts of a number of television shows, movies, and businesses
that the group considers to have promoted indecency, obscenity, or
homosexuality. In addition to promoting activism via mail to AFA members, 3.4
million subscribers receive AFA "Action Alerts" via email. Boycotts. The AFA
has boycotted companies for various reasons, most often relating to Christmas
controversies, pornography, support of pro-choice activism, support of violence
or sexual content in entertainment, and support of LGBT activism, including
same-sex partner employee benefits. These organizations include: 7-Eleven,
Abercrombie & Fitch, American Airlines, American Girl, Blockbuster Video,
Burger King, Calvin Klein, Carl's Jr., Clorox, Comcast, Crest, Ford, Hallmark
Cards, Kmart, Kraft Foods, S. C. Johnson & Son, Movie Gallery, Microsoft, MTV,
Mary Kay, NutriSystem, Old Navy, IKEA, Sears, Pampers, Procter & Gamble,
Target, Tide, Walt Disney Company, and PepsiCo. The AFA has criticized the
People's Republic of China for its persecution of Christians. In 1986, 7-Eleven
stopped selling "Playboy" and "Penthouse" magazines after a two-year boycott by
the AFA. In 1989 the AFA boycotted WaldenBooks in an attempt to persuade the
company to stop selling those same magazines. As a result, WaldenBooks launched
an advertisement campaign against censorship, asserting First Amendment rights.
WaldenBooks, American Booksellers Association, the Council for Periodical
Distributors Association, the International Periodical Distributors
Association, and Duval Bibb Services launched a lawsuit against the AFA in
October 1989, under the Federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations
Act (RICO) and the Florida State RICO Acts, which protect an organization's
right to conduct business without harassment or threats. The case was settled
by the parties without a court ruling. Christian Leaders for Responsible
Television (CLeaR-TV), affiliated with the AFA, has approached sponsors of
programs that it considered immoral. In 1989, CLeaR-TV successfully persuaded
General Mills, Ralston Purina, Domino's Pizza, Mazda, and Noxell to withdraw
advertising from "Saturday Night Live". AFA also boycotted PepsiCo that year
also for supporting Madonna, whose video for "Like a Prayer" Wildmon felt was
sacrilegious. During the summer of 1993 the AFA purchased full-page ads in "The
New York Times", "USA Today", and "Los Angeles Times" denouncing the sexual and
violent content of the upcoming ABC police drama "NYPD Blue". It also urged ABC
affiliates not to broadcast the program and citizens to boycott sponsors of
"Blue". About a quarter of the 225 existing ABC stations followed suit, but
such affiliates were mostly in rural areas of the US. The AFA campaign
increased hype for the show in larger American media markets, and "Blue" became
one of the most popular shows of the 1993â€“1994 television season. In 1996,
the AFA launched a boycott against Walt Disney Company when the company began
giving benefits to same-sex employees in domestic partnerships. The AFA has
claimed that Michael Eisner, the CEO of The Disney Company, "was involved in a
media group that actively promoted the homosexual agenda" and was pushing the
"gay agenda". The AFA ended the unsuccessful nine-year boycott in spring 2005
after Eisner left the company. Tim Wildmon stated "We feel after nine years of
boycotting Disney we have made our point." In 2003, the AFA, with the American
Decency Association, Focus on the Family, and Citizens for Community Values,
lobbied and boycotted Abercrombie & Fitch, calling on "A&F to stop using
blatant pornography in its quarterly catalog." In December 2003, the company
"recalled the holiday catalog from all its stores, saying it needed the space
on the counter for a new perfume" and stated it would stop printing catalogs
and start a new campaign. In 2005 the AFA boycotted the company American Girl,
seller of dolls and accessories, because the company supported the charity
Girls, Inc., which the AFA called "a pro-abortion, pro-lesbian advocacy group".
In Spring 2005 the AFA launched a boycott of Ford for advertising in gay
magazines, donating to gay rights organizations, and sponsoring gay pride
celebrations. After meeting with representatives of the group, Ford announced
it was curtailing ads in a number of major gay-themed publications, due not by
cultural but by "cost-cutting" factors. That statement was contradicted by the
AFA, which claimed it had a "good faith agreement" that Ford would cease such
ads. Soon afterwards, as a result of a strong outcry from the gay community,
Ford backtracked and announced it would continue ads in gay publications, in
response to which the AFA denounced Ford for "violating" the agreement, and
renewed threats of a boycott. The boycott ended in March 2008. On Independence
Day 2008, the AFA announced a boycott of McDonald's, which had a director on
the board of the National Gay and Lesbian Chamber of Commerce. In October 2008,
AFA announced the end of its boycott following the declaration to be "neutral
on same-sex marriage or any 'homosexual agenda' as defined by the American
Family Association" by McDonald's in a memo to franchisees. On August 25, 2008,
the AFA announced their boycott of Hallmark Cards for their decision to start
selling same-sex wedding cards. In December 2008, the AFA issued an "Action
Alert" which called for members to protest about the Campbell Soup Company,
which had purchased two two-page advertisements in the December 2008 and
January 2009 issues of LGBT magazine "The Advocate". The Action Alert said that
Campbell's "sent a message that homosexual parents constitute a family and are
worthy of support". The advertisements showed a married lesbian couple with
their son. AFA spokesman Randy Sharp said "the Campbell Soup Company is saying
'we approve of homosexual marriage.'" In November 2009, the AFA called for a
boycott against clothing retailer The Gap, Inc., claiming the retailer's
holiday television advertising campaign failed to mention Christmas. "Christmas
has historically been very good for commerce. But now Gap wants the commerce
but no Christmas" wrote an AFA spokesperson. The Gap soon released an
advertisement in response to the boycott, specifically referring to Christmas,
albeit with a number of other holidays that take place at the same time of year
and added the word "Christmas" to in-store decor. In 2012 they led a failed
boycott against Archie Comics when they published a comic book featuring a
same-sex marriage. In July 2012, they considered boycotting Google due to
Google's "Legalize Love" campaign which supports LGBT rights. Published media.
On April 16, 2007, following the Virginia Tech Massacre, the AFA released a
video titled "The Day They Kicked God out of the Schools", in which God tells a
student that students were killed in schools because God isn't allowed in
schools anymore. The video claims that the shootings at Virginia Tech and
Columbine, among others, are in part the result of: decreased discipline in
schools; no prayer in schools; sex out of wedlock; rampant violence in TV,
movies, and music; or abortions. "" is a 2008 documentary series hosted by
Janet Parshall. The documentary series explains the AFA's position against the
drive towards political correctness, and how various factors, such as hate
crime laws and other discriminatory actions, are threatening the Christians'
existence. In 2009, a one-hour special version of the program was produced and
aired on commercial television stations, where AFA purchased the air time.
Sexual morality. The AFA has repeatedly lobbied Congress to eliminate funding
for the National Endowment for the Arts. For example, in 2000, the AFA issued a
press release condemning the NEA's funding of "One of the Guys", a
controversial book by Robert Clark Young described by a senior AFA official as
"scatological." The complaint from the AFA was that the book included sexually
explicit material, in particular, a description of a young woman extracting
razor blades from her vagina during a performance in a sex club. In a
Washington Post editorial in response to the complaint, Young stated, "I find
it strange that an organization that claims to uphold family values and to
oppose the federal funding of obscenity is not protesting the part of the
military budget that goes to support pederasty in the Far East." Speaking in
defense of Mike Huckabee's statements that people with AIDS should be
quarantined, the head of the AFA of Pennsylvania said Huckabee's comments were
being taken out of context, and that the measures Huckabee recommended in
reference to people with AIDS were appropriate. View on media. Wildmon has been
accused of saying that he believes Hollywood and the theater world are heavily
influenced by Jewish people, and that television network executives and
advertisers have a genuine hostility towards Christians. Opposition to other
religions. On November 28, 2006, following the election of Keith Ellison, the
first Muslim elected to the United States Congress, the AFA released an "Action
Alert." The Action Alert, entitled "A first for America...The Koran replaces
the Bible at swearing-in oath: What book will America base its values on, the
Bible or the Koran?", requested subscribers write their Congressional
representatives and urge them to create a "law making the Bible the book used
in the swearing-in ceremony of representatives and senators." On July 13, 2007,
a Hindu prayer was conducted in the U.S. Senate. Rajan Zed, director of
interfaith relations at a Hindu temple, read the prayer at the invitation of
Senate majority leader Harry Reid, who defended his invitation based on the
ideals of Mahatma Gandhi. AFA sent out an "Action Alert" to its members to
email, write letters, or call their Senators to oppose the Hindu prayer,
stating it is "seeking the invocation of a non-monotheistic god." The "alert"
stated that "since Hindus worship multiple gods, the prayer will be completely
outside the American paradigm, flying in the face of the American motto "One
Nation Under God."" The convocation by Zed was in fact disrupted by three
protesters from a different Fundamentalist Christian activist group, Operation
Save America, in the gallery; they reportedly shouted "this is an abomination",
and called themselves "Christians and patriots". On August 10, 2010, Bryan
Fischer, AFA's director of Issue Analysis for Government and Public Policy,
posted on his blog that "Permits should not be granted to build even one more
mosque in the United States of America, let alone the monstrosity planned for
Ground Zero. This is for one simple reason: each Islamic mosque is dedicated to
the overthrow of the American government." This was in response to a 1991
memorandum circulated by the Muslim Brotherhood where they call for "grand
Jihad in eliminating and destroying the Western civilization from within and
'sabotaging' its miserable house", as well as the ongoing debate about building
the Park 51 mosque and Islamic community center near Ground Zero in Manhattan.
Fischer continued: "Because of this subversive ideology, Muslims cannot claim
religious freedom protections under the First Amendment." Homosexuality. The
AFA expresses public concern over what it refers to as the "homosexual agenda".
They state that the Bible "declares that homosexuality is unnatural and
sinful." The AFA actively lobbies against the social acceptance of homosexual
behavior (""We oppose the homosexual movement's efforts to convince our society
that their behavior is normal""). The AFA also actively promotes the idea that
homosexuality is a choice and that sexual orientation can be changed through
religious teachings in ex-gay ministries. In 1996, responding to a complaint
from an AFA member who was participating in an AFA campaign targeting gay
journalists, the "Fort Worth Star-Telegram" transferred a gay editor out of a
job that occasionally required him to work with schoolchildren. The AFA
targeted the editor due to cartoon strips he created, which were published in
gay magazines. The paper apparently acted on the AFA's unsubstantiated
statement that the editor was "preoccupied with the subjects of pedophilia and
incest." In 2000, vice president Tim Wildmon spoke out against gay-straight
alliance clubs in schools, stating, "We view these kinds of clubs as an
advancement of the homosexual cause." In 2004, the AFA raised concerns about
the movie "Shark Tale" because the group believed the movie was designed to
promote the acceptance of gay rights by children. On the October 11, 2005, AFA
broadcast, Tim Wildmon agreed with a caller that cable networks like Animal
Planet and HGTV featured "evidence of homosexuality and lesbian people" and
added that "you have to watch out for children's programs today as well because
they'll slip it in there as well." In 2007, the AFA spoke out against IKEA for
featuring gay families in their television ads. In June 2008, the AFA protested
a Heinz television advertisement, shown in the United Kingdom, which showed two
men kissing, which Heinz then withdrew. The AFA's founder, Don Wildmon, was
"instrumental" in initially setting up the Arlington Group, a networking
vehicle for social conservatives focusing on gay marriage. One Million Moms/One
Million Dads project. AFA created One Million Moms and One Million Dads, two
websites with the stated goal of mobilizing parents to "stop the exploitation
of children" by the media. It uses these websites to organize boycotts and urge
activists to send emails to mainstream companies employing advertising, selling
products, or advertising on television shows they find offensive. In 2012, the
group started and then backed off from a failed campaign against the hiring of
talk show host Ellen DeGeneres as a spokesperson for department store chain JC
Penney. They opposed this employment on the grounds that DeGeneres is "an open
homosexual". At a taping of her show, DeGeneres informed her audience of the
fizzled effort: "They wanted to get me fired and I am proud and happy to say JC
Penney stuck by their decision to make me their spokesperson." The One Million
Moms expressed opposition to Marvel and DC Comics issues which featured gay
characters. They described the story lines as a "brainwashing and desensitizing
experience" for children, written to "influence them in thinking that a gay
lifestyle choice is normal and desirable." Criticism and controversy.
Intellectual freedom. Individuals in the media industry have criticized Donald
Wildmon, the founder of AFA. Gene Mater, Senior Vice President of CBS
Television, has stated, "We look upon Wildmon's efforts as the greatest frontal
assault on intellectual freedom this country has ever faced" and Brandon
Tartikoff, former NBC Entertainment President, stated that Wildmon's boycott
campaign was "the first step toward a police state." Stance on homosexuality.
The AFA has been criticized by a number of organizations for their stance
against homosexuality. In 1998, the popular Internet filtering software
CyberPatrol blocked the AFA's web site, classifying it under the category
"intolerance," defined as "pictures or text advocating prejudice or
discrimination against any race, color, national origin, religion, disability
or handicap, gender or sexual orientation..." AFA spokesman Steve Ensley told
reporters, "Basically we're being blocked for free speech." CyberPatrol cited
quotes from the AFA for meeting its intolerance criteria, which included:
"Indifference or neutrality toward the homosexual rights movement will result
in society's destruction by allowing civil order to be redefined and by
plummeting ourselves, our children, and grandchildren into an age of
godlessness"; "A national 'Coming Out of Homosexuality' provides us a means
whereby to dispel the lies of the homosexual rights crowd who say they are born
that way and cannot change"; and "We want to outlaw public homosexuality...We
believe homosexuality is immoral and leads ultimately to personal and social
decay." Supervisor Leslie Katz denounces your rhetoric against gays, lesbians
and transgendered people. What happened to Matthew Shepard is in part due to
the message being espoused by your groups that gays and lesbians are not worthy
of the most basic equal rights and treatment. It is not an exaggeration to say
that there is a direct correlation between these acts of discrimination, such
as when gays and lesbians are called sinful and when major religious
organizations say they can change if they tried, and the horrible crimes
committed against gays and lesbians. During the same time, the City and County
of San Francisco passed two resolutions. Resolution No. 234-99 "calls for the
Religious Right to take accountability for the impact of their long-standing
rhetoric denouncing gays and lesbians, which leads to a climate of mistrust and
discrimination that can open the door to horrible crimes such as those
committed against Mr. Gaither." and Resolution No. 873-98 was specifically
directed at "anti-gay" television advertisements. AFA unsuccessfully challenged
these actions as violating the Free Speech and Free Exercise clauses of the
First Amendment in "American Family Association v. City and County of San
Francisco". In 1998, multiple organizations voiced criticism of a series of AFA
sponsored full-page newspaper advertisements that promoted religious ministries
involved in the ex-gay movement. In response to the advertisements, the
Religious Leadership Roundtable said the ads employed "language of violence and
hatred to denounce other people." IntegrityUSA criticized the ads, calling them
"evil" disregarding Christian teachings about the "dignity of every human
being." DignityUSA also criticized the advertisements, which they said were
"misleading and destructive." In July 2000, the AFA sent out emails and letters
calling for openly gay Arizona Republican United States House of
Representatives member Jim Kolbe to be barred from speaking at the Republican
National Convention. The AFA also said that Kolbe should be arrested when he
returned to his home state, as because Kolbe is gay, he was violating an
Arizona law that banned sodomy. Equality Mississippi, a statewide LGBT civil
rights organization which has voiced opposition and criticism towards the AFA's
activism regarding homosexuality, felt that AFA's action was constituting and
encouraging violence towards the gay community. In 2005, Equality Mississippi
publicly spoke out against the AFA for the use of copyrighted images on the AFA
web site in its boycott against Kraft Foods for being a sponsor of the 2006 Gay
Games in Chicago. The photographs, which were used without permission, were
owned by and retrieved from ChrisGeary.com. Equality Mississippi encouraged
ChrisGeary.com to file suit against the AFA and offered to support the suit. ,
the images were still on AFA's web site. The American Family Association has
objected to having their comments on homosexuality described as homophobia and
akin to racism or sexism, saying that their beliefs are based in religion.
Former AFA California leader Scott Lively is a co-author of "The Pink
Swastika", which claims that many leaders in the Nazi regime, including Adolf
Hitler himself, were gay. He has since co-founded Watchmen on the Walls. In May
2010, Bryan Fischer, the AFA's director of Issue Analysis for Government and
Public Policy, wrote a blog post on the AFA website detailing allegations that
Hitler was a homosexual, and concluding that gay people in the military caused
the Holocaust: "Nazi Germany became the horror that it was because it rejected
both Christianity and its clear teaching about human sexuality. These are
mistakes no sane culture should ever make again." In June 2008, AFA's news
website, "OneNewsNow"Â â€“ which had begun replacing all instances of "gay"
with "homosexual" in re-posted Associated Press articlesÂ â€“ changed an AP
profile of Olympic sprinter Tyson Gay, rendering his name as "Tyson
Homosexual". "OneNewsNow" similarly altered the name of basketball player Rudy
Gay, naming him "Rudy Homosexual". The gay rights website GoodAsYou.org, which
"has long chronicled the AFA's practice of changing AP copy to suit its
conservative agenda", spotted the errors. Tyson Gay was upset with the mistake.
In August, 2012, AFA Director of Issue Analysis Bryan Fischer compared the
children of gay parents to slaves, tweeting that "we need an Underground
Railroad to deliver innocent children from same-sex households". The Southern
Poverty Law Center, through its Teaching Tolerance program, had encouraged
schools across the U.S. to hold a "Mix It Up" day in order to encourage
children in schools to break up the cliques that tend to dominate children's
school lives and to prevent bullying. The program, started 11 years ago, has
been held in more than 2,500 schools. But in the autumn of 2012, the AFA
falsely branded the project "a nationwide push to promote the homosexual
lifestyle in public schools," even though the program makes no mention of
homosexuality, and urged parents to keep their children home from school on
October 30, 2012, and to call their children's schools to protest the event. "I
was surprised that they completely lied about what Mix It Up Day is," Maureen
Costello, the director of the center's Teaching Tolerance project, which
organizes the program, told The New York Times. "It was a cycnical, fear-
mongering tactic." Marilyn Manson. Paul Cambria, lawyer for rock band Marilyn
Manson, sent a cease and desist letter to AFA on April 25, 1997 in response to
allegations published in the "AFA Journal" that Manson encouraged audience
members to engage in sexual and violent acts in its concerts. "AFA Journal"
relied on testimony by two anonymous teenage concertgoers. The allegations were
independently proven to be false. Wildmon responded that his organization as a
whole was not responsible, but rather the AFA's Gulf Coast chapter in Biloxi,
Mississippi. Labeled a hate group. Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), in a
2005 report, stated that the AFA, along with other groups, engaged in hate
speech to "help drive the religious right's anti-gay crusade." Mark Potok of
the SPLC determined that the turning point was 2003's "Lawrence v. Texas", in
which the Supreme Court struck down Texas's anti-sodomy laws. After that, the
Christian right spent millions on advertisements, and on pastor briefings
organized by activists such as born-again Christian David Lane. Lane helped AFA
put constitutional opposite-sex marriage amendments on the ballots of 13
states. In November 2010, the SPLC changed their listing of AFA from a group
that used hate speech to the more serious one of being designated a hate group.
Potok said that the AFA's "propagation of known falsehoods and demonizing
propaganda" was the basis for the change. The AFA was greatly displeased with
the designation as a hate group, calling the list "slanderous". In response to
the SPLC's announcement, some members of the Christian right "called on
Congress to cut off their funding." J. Matt Barber of "The Washington Times"
said that the SPLC was "marginalizing" themselves by giving the AFA the same
hate group designation shared by the Ku Klux Klan and neo-Nazis. Tony Perkins,
the president of Family Research Council (FRC)Â â€“ an organization also named
a hate groupÂ â€“ asked the SPLC to strike the new designation, but they held
their position. Ken Williams commented that in reaction, the FRC and the AFA
joined with other "pro-family" organizations targeted by the SPLC to establish
a new website, an online petition called "Start Debating/Stop Hating" to
counter the SPLC, and they took out full page ads in two Washington D.C.
newspapers, defending their work "to protect and promote natural marriage and
the family." The advertisement stated the "undersigned stand in solidarity"
with the organizations designated as hate groups, and that they "support the
vigorous but responsible exercise of the First Amendment rights of free speech
and religious liberty that are the birthright of all Americans." House Speaker-
Designate John Boehner and the governors of Louisiana, Minnesota and Virginia
were among those signing the statement. The SPLC addressed the new website
statement; Potok was quoted by David Weigel of "Slate" magazine as saying, "the
SPLC's listings of these groups is based on their propagation of known
falsehoodsÂ â€“ claims about LGBT people that have been thoroughly discredited
by scientific authoritiesÂ â€“ and repeated, groundless name-calling." The
American Independent News Network (AINN) noted that the AFA had recently
denounced Supreme Court justice Elena Kagan as a lesbian unfit for officeÂ â€“
AINN stated that "she's not" a lesbianÂ â€“ and that Fischer said Hitler's
savage and brutal methods were only possible because he and most of his
stormtroopers were gay. Jillian Rayfield of "Talking Points Memo" noted the
irony in the website calling the SPLC a "radical Left" group "spreading hateful
rhetoric" yet elsewhere declaring that the debates of the Christian right "can
and must remain civilÂ â€“ but they must never be suppressed through personal
assaults that aim only to malign an opponent's character."
