Catholicism Catholicism is a broad term for the body of the Catholic faith, its
theologies and doctrines, its liturgical, ethical, spiritual, and behavioral
characteristics, as well as a religious people as a whole. For many the term
usually refers to Christians and churches, western and eastern, in full
communion with the Holy See, known alternatively as the Catholic Church or as
the Roman Catholic Church. However, many others use the term to refer to other
churches with historical continuity from the first millennium. In the sense of
indicating historical continuity of faith and practice, the term "catholicism"
is at times employed to mark a contrast to Protestantism, which tends to look
solely to the Bible as interpreted on the principles of the 16th-century
Protestant Reformation as its ultimate standard. It was thus used by the Oxford
Movement. According to Richard McBrien, Catholicism is distinguished from other
forms of Christianity in its particular understanding and commitment to
tradition, the sacraments, the mediation between God, communion, and the See of
Rome. According to Orthodox leaders like Bishop Kallistos Ware, the Orthodox
Church has these things as well, though the primacy of the See of Rome is only
honorific, showing non-jurisdictional respect for the Bishop of Rome as the
"first among equals" and "Patriarch of the West". Catholicism, according to
McBrien's paradigm, includes a monastic life, religious institutes, a religious
appreciation of the arts, a communal understanding of sin and redemption, and
missionary activity. History of the term "Catholic". The earliest recorded
evidence of the use of the term "Catholic Church" is the "Letter to the
Smyrnaeans" that Ignatius of Antioch wrote in about 107 to Christians in
Smyrna. Exhorting Christians to remain closely united with their bishop, he
wrote: "Wherever the bishop shall appear, there let the multitude the people
also be; even as, wherever Jesus Christ is, there is the Catholic Church."
Numerous other early writers including Cyril of Jerusalem (c. 315â€“386),
Augustine of Hippo (354â€“430) and others further developed the use of the term
"catholic" in relation to Christianity. Divergent interpretations. For some
confessions listed under category 3, the self-affirmation refers to the belief
in the ultimate unity of the universal church under one God and one Saviour,
rather than in one visibly unified institution (as with category 1, above). In
this usage, "catholic" is sometimes written with a lower-case "c". The Western
Apostles' Creed and the Nicene Creed, stating "I believe in ... one holy
catholic ... church", are recited in worship services. Among some denominations
in category 3, "Christian" is substituted for "catholic" in order to denote the
doctrine that the Christian Church is, at least ideally, undivided. Catholic
Church use. The Catholic Church considers Protestant and Anglican Christians
who are not in communion with the See of Rome to be "non-Catholics". It does
not consider their churches to be genuine churches and so uses the term
"ecclesial communities" to refer to them. It considers a "valid episcopate" and
Eucharist as necessary prerequsites for being a church. Because the Roman
Catholic Church does not consider these church bodies to have valid episcopal
orders capable of celebrating a valid Eucharist, it does not classify them as
churches "in the proper sense". Those churches not in communion with the Holy
See which consider themselves to be "Catholic" define the word as meaning an
adherence to the ancient Catholic beliefs and practices, absent any more recent
addition of a requirement for union with the Holy See. Latin and Eastern
Catholic Churches. The Latin and Eastern Catholic Churches together form the
"Catholic Church", or "Roman Catholic Church", the world's largest single
religious body and the largest Christian church, comprising over half of all
Christians (1.1Â billion Christians of 2.1Â billion) and nearly one-sixth of
the world's population. Richard McBrien would put the proportion even higher,
extending it to those who are in communion with the Bishop of Rome only in
"degrees". It comprises 23 component "particular churches" (also called "rites"
in the Second Vatican Council's Decree on the Eastern Catholic Churches), all
of which acknowledge a primacy of jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome and are in
full communion with the Holy See and each other. These particular churches or
component parts are the Latin Rite or Western Church (which uses a number of
different liturgical rites, of which the Roman Rite is the best known) and 22
Eastern Catholic Churches. Of the latter particular churches, 14 use the
Byzantine liturgical rite. Within the Church as a whole, each "particular
Church", whether Eastern or Western, is of equal dignity. Finally, in its
official documents, the Church, though made up of several particular Churches,
"continues to refer to itself as the 'Catholic Church or, less frequently but
consistently, as the 'Roman Catholic Church', owing to its essential link with
the Bishop of Rome. McBrien, in his book "Catholicism", disagrees with the
Church's usage of referring to itself as "Roman Catholic", saying: "But is
'Catholic' synonymous with 'Roman Catholic'? And is it accurate to refer to the
Roman Catholic Church as simply the 'Roman Church'? The answer to both
questions is no. The adjective 'Roman' applies more properly to the diocese, or
see, of Rome than to the worldwide Communion of Catholic Churches that is in
union with the Bishop of Rome. Indeed, it strikes some Catholics as
contradictory to call the Church 'Catholic' and 'Roman' at one and the same
time. Eastern-rite Catholics, of whom there are more than twenty million, also
find the adjective 'Roman' objectionable. In addition to the Latin, or Roman,
tradition, there are seven non-Latin, non-Roman ecclesial traditions: Armenian,
Byzantine, Coptic, Ethiopian, East Syrian (Chaldean), West Syrian, and
Maronite. Each to the Churches with these non-Latin traditions is as Catholic
as the Roman Catholic Church. Thus, not all Catholics are Roman Catholic." Thus
"to be Catholicâ€”whether Roman or non-Romanâ€”in the ecclesiological sense is
to be in full communion with the Bishop of Rome and as such to be an integral
part of the Catholic Communion of Churches." In spite of McBrien's affirmation
that, on an official level, what he calls the "Communion of Catholic Churches"
always refers to itself as "The Catholic Church", the term "Roman Catholic
Church" is in fact, as seen above, used by Popes and departments of the Holy
See. The Latin-Rite Archdiocese of Detroit lists eight Eastern (Catholic)
Churches, each with its own bishop, as having one or more parishes in what is
also the territory of the Latin archdiocese, yet each is designated as being in
"full communion with the Roman Church." Other traditions. Within Western
Christianity, the churches of the Anglican Communion, Continuing Anglicanism,
the Old Catholics, the Liberal Catholic Church, the Apostolic Catholic Church
(ACC), the Aglipayans (Philippine Independent Church), the African Orthodox
Church, the Polish National Catholic Church of America, and many Independent
Catholic Churches, which emerged directly or indirectly from and have beliefs
and practices largely similar to Latin Rite Catholicism, regard themselves as
"Catholic" without full communion with the Bishop of Rome, whose claimed status
and authority they generally reject. The Chinese Patriotic Catholic
Association, a division of the People's Republic of China's Religious Affairs
Bureau exercising state supervision over mainland China's Catholics, holds a
similar position, while attempting, as with Buddhism and Protestantism, to
indoctrinate and mobilize for Communist Party objectives. Anglicanism.
Introductory works on Anglicanism, such as "The Study of Anglicanism",
typically refer to the character of the Anglican tradition as "Catholic and
Reformed", which is in keeping with the understanding of Anglicanism
articulated in the Elizabethan Settlement of 1559 and in the works of the
earliest standard Anglican divines such as Richard Hooker and Lancelot
Andrewes. Yet different strains in Anglicanism, dating back to the English
Reformation, have emphasized either the Reformed, Catholic, or "Reformed
Catholic" nature of the tradition. Anglican theology and ecclesiology has thus
come to be typically expressed in three distinct, yet sometimes overlapping
manifestations: Anglo-Catholicism (often called "high church"), Evangelicalism
(often called "low church"), and Latitudinarianism ("broad church"), whose
beliefs and practices fall somewhere between the two. Though all elements
within the Anglican Communion recite the same creeds, Evangelical Anglicans
generally regard the word "catholic" in the ideal sense given above. In
contrast, Anglo-Catholics regard the communion as a component of the whole
Catholic Church, in spiritual and historical union with the Roman Catholic, Old
Catholic and several Eastern churches. Broad Church Anglicans tend to maintain
a mediating view, or consider the matter one of "adiaphora". These Anglicans,
for example, have agreed in the Porvoo Agreement to interchangeable ministries
and full eucharistic communion with Lutherans. The Catholic nature or strain of
the Anglican tradition is expressed doctrinally, ecumenically (chiefly through
organisations such as the Anglican Roman Catholic International Commission),
ecclesiologically (through its episcopal governance and maintenance of the
historical episcopate), and in liturgy and piety. Anglicans (except neo-
evangelicals) maintain belief in the Seven Sacraments. Many Anglo-Catholics
practice Marian devotion, recite the rosary and the angelus, practice
Eucharistic adoration, and seek the intercession of saints. In terms of
liturgy, most Anglicans use candles on the altar and many churches use incense
and sanctus bells in the Eucharist, which is often referred to by the Latin-
derived word "Mass" used in the first prayer book and in the American Prayer
Book of 1979. In numerous churches the Eucharist is celebrated facing the altar
(often with a tabernacle) by a priest assisted by a deacon and subdeacon. Some
Anglicans believe in the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist. However
different Eucharistic rites or orders contain different, if not necessarily
contradictory, understandings of salvation. For this reason, no single strain
or manifestation of Anglicanism can speak for the whole, even in ecumenical
statements (as issued, for example, by the Anglican - Roman Catholic
International Commission). The growth of Anglo-Catholicism is strongly
associated with the Oxford Movement of the 19th century. Two of its leading
lights, John Henry Newman and Henry Edward Manning, both priests, ended up
joining the Roman Catholic Church, becoming cardinals. Others, like John Keble,
Edward Bouverie Pusey, and Charles Gore became influential figures in
Anglicanism. The current Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams, is a patron
of the Anglican organisation, Affirming Catholicism, a more liberal movement
within Catholic Anglicanism. Conservative Catholic groups also exist within the
tradition, such as Forward in Faith. There are about 80Â million Anglicans in
the Anglican Communion, comprising 3.6% of global Christianity. Protestantism.
There are Catholic groups among the traditional Protestant churches. For
example, the 20th century "High Church Lutheranism" movement developed an
Evangelical Catholicity, combining justification by faith with Catholic
doctrine on sacraments, in some cases also restoring lacking Apostolic
Succession, especially in Germany. Certain Lutheran churches, incluiding the
Church of Sweden and several small American churches of recent origin â€” such
as the Lutheran Orthodox Church and the Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church-
consider themselves to be Catholic. In Reformed churches there is a Scoto-
Catholic grouping within the Presbyterian Church of Scotland. Such groups point
to their churches' continuing adherence to the "Catholic" doctrine of the early
Church Councils. The Articles Declaratory of the Constitution of the Church of
Scotland of 1921 defines that church legally as "part of the Holy Catholic or
Universal Church". Brief organizational history of the Church. According to the
theory of Pentarchy, the early Catholic Church came to be organised under the
three patriarchs of Rome, Alexandria and Antioch, to which later were added the
patriarchs of Constantinople and Jerusalem. The Bishop of Rome was at that time
recognized as first among them, as is stated, for instance, in canon 3 of the
First Council of Constantinople (381)â€”many interpret "first" as meaning here
first among equalsâ€”and doctrinal or procedural disputes were often referred
to Rome, as when, on appeal by St Athanasius against the decision of the
Council of Tyre (335), Pope Julius I, who spoke of such appeals as customary,
annulled the action of that council and restored Athanasius and Marcellus of
Ancyra to their sees. The Bishop of Rome was also considered to have the right
to convene ecumenical councils. When the Imperial capital moved to
Constantinople, Rome's influence was sometimes challenged. Nonetheless, Rome
claimed special authority because of its connection to Saint Peter and Saint
Paul, who, all agreed, were martyred and buried in Rome, and because the Bishop
of Rome saw himself as the successor of Saint Peter. The 431 Council of
Ephesus, the Third Ecumenical Council, was chiefly concerned with Nestorianism,
which emphasised the distinction between the humanity and divinity of Jesus and
taught that, in giving birth to Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary could not be
spoken of as giving birth to God. This Council rejected Nestorianism and
affirmed that, as humanity and divinity are inseparable in the one person of
Jesus Christ, his mother, the Virgin Mary, is thus Theotokos, God-bearer,
Mother of God. The first great rupture in the Church followed this Council.
Those who refused to accept the Council's ruling were largely Persian and are
represented today by the Assyrian Church of the East and related Churches,
which, however, do not now hold a "Nestorian" theology. They are often called
Ancient Oriental Churches. The next major break was after the Council of
Chalcedon (451). This Council repudiated Eutychian Monophysitism which stated
that the divine nature completely subsumed the human nature in Christ. This
Council declared that Christ, though one person, exhibited two natures "without
confusion, without change, without division, without separation" and thus is
both fully God and fully human. The Alexandrian Church rejected the terms
adopted by this Council, and the Christian Churches that follow the tradition
of non-acceptance of the Councilâ€”they are not Monophysite in doctrineâ€”are
referred to as Pre-Chalcedonian or Oriental Orthodox Churches. The next great
rift within Christianity was in the 11th century. Longstanding doctrinal
disputes, as well as conflicts between methods of Church government, and the
evolution of separate rites and practices, precipitated a split in 1054 that
divided the Church, this time between a "West" and an "East". England, France,
the Holy Roman Empire, Poland, Bohemia, Slovakia, Scandinavia, the Baltic
countries, and Western Europe in general were in the Western camp, and Greece,
Romania, Russia and many other Slavic lands, Anatolia, and the Christians in
Syria and Egypt who accepted the Council of Chalcedon made up the Eastern camp.
This division between the Western Church and the Eastern Church is called the
East-West Schism. The fourth major division in the Church occurred in the 16th
century with the Protestant Reformation, after which many parts of the Western
Church either entirely rejected the teachings and structure of the Western
Church at that time and became known as "Reformed" or "Protestant", or else
repudiated papal authority and the teaching office in the Western Church for
the authority of a civil ruler in religious matters (e.g., in Anglicanism and
parts of the Lutheran Church). A much less extensive rupture occurred when,
after the Roman Catholic Church's First Vatican Council, in which it officially
proclaimed the dogma of papal infallibility, small clusters of Catholics in the
Netherlands and in German-speaking countries formed the Old-Catholic
(Altkatholische) Church. Distinctive beliefs and practices. Due to the
divergent interpretations of the word "Catholicism", any listing of beliefs and
practices that distinguish Catholicism from other forms of Christianity must be
preceded by an indication of the sense employed. If Catholicism is understood
as the Roman Catholic Church understands it, identification of beliefs is
relatively easy, though preferred expressions of the beliefs vary, especially
between the Latin Church, the Eastern Catholic Churches of Greek tradition, and
the other Eastern Catholic Churches. Liturgical and canonical practices vary
between all these particular Churches constituting the Roman and Eastern
Catholic Churches (or, as Richard McBrien calls them, the "Communion of
Catholic Churches"). In the understanding of another Church that identifies
Catholicism with itself, such as the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox
Churches, clear identification of certain beliefs may sometimes be more
difficult, because of the lack of a central authority like that of the Roman
and Eastern Catholic Churches. On the other hand, practices are more uniform,
as indicated, for instance, in the single liturgical rite employed, in various
languages, within the Eastern Orthodox Church, in contrast to the variety of
liturgical rites in the Roman Catholic Church. In all these cases the beliefs
and practices of Catholicism would be identical with the beliefs and practices
of the Church in question. If Catholicism is extended to cover all who consider
themselves spiritual descendants of the Apostles, a search for beliefs and
practices that distinguish it from other forms of Christianity would be
meaningless. Sacraments or sacred mysteries. Churches in the Catholic tradition
administer seven sacraments or "sacred mysteries": Baptism, Confirmation or
Chrismation, Eucharist, Penance, Anointing of the Sick, Holy Orders, and
Matrimony. In some Catholic churches this number is regarded as a convention
only. In Catholicism, a sacrament is considered to be an efficacious visible
sign of God's invisible grace. While the word "mystery" is used not only of
these rites, but also with other meanings with reference to revelations of and
about God and to God's mystical interaction with creation, the word "sacrament"
(Latin: "a solemn pledge"), the usual term in the West, refers specifically to
these rites.
