Dhimmi A ( "" ), (collectively "/", "the people of the "dhimma"") is a
historical term referring to non-Muslim citizens of an Islamic state. Dhimma
allows rights of residence in return for taxes. According to scholars, dhimmis
had their rights fully protected in their communities, but as citizens in the
Islamic state, had certain restrictions. They were excused or excluded from
specific duties assigned to Muslims, and otherwise equal under the laws of
property, contract and obligation. Under sharia law, dhimmi status was
originally afforded to Jews, Christians, and Sabians. The protected religions
later came to include Zoroastrians, Mandaeans, Hindus and Buddhists.
Eventually, the Hanafi, the largest school of Islamic legal thought, applied
this term to all non-Muslims living in Islamic lands outside the sacred area
surrounding Mecca, Saudi Arabia. As an example of the distinctions between
Muslims, dhimmis, and others, sharia law permits the consumption of pork and
alcohol by non-Muslims living in Islamic countries, although they may not be
openly displayed. These same commodities are expressly forbidden to Muslims.
Modern Hanfi scholars do not make any legal distinction between a non-Muslim
dhimmi and a Muslim citizen. The "dhimma contract". Based on Quranic verses and
Islamic traditions, classical sharia distinguishes between Muslims, followers
of other Abrahamic monotheistic religions, and pagans or people belonging to
other polytheistic religions. As monotheists, Jews and Christians have
traditionally been considered "People of The Book," and afforded a special
status known as "dhimmi" derived from a theoretical contract - "dhimma" or
"residence in return for taxes". There are parallels for this in Roman and
Jewish law. Muslim governments in the Indus basin readily extended the dhimmi
status to the Hindus and Buddhists of India. Eventually, the largest school of
Islamic scholarship applied this term to all non-Muslims living in Islamic
lands outside the sacred area surrounding Mecca, Saudi Arabia. Classical sharia
attributes different legal rights and obligations to different religious
groups; in practice, this consisted of curbs on the rights and freedoms of non-
Muslims. Classical sharia incorporated the religious laws and courts of
Christians, Jews and Hindus, as seen in the early Caliphate, Al-Andalus, Indian
subcontinent, and the Ottoman Millet system. In medieval Islamic societies, the
"qadi" (Islamic judges) usually could not interfere in the matters of non-
Muslims unless the parties voluntarily choose to be judged according to Islamic
law, thus the dhimmi communities living in Islamic states usually had their own
laws independent from the sharia law, such as the Jews who would have their own
"Halakha" courts. These courts did not cover cases involved other religious
groups, or capital offences or threats to public order. By the 18th century,
however, dhimmis frequently attended the Ottoman Muslim courts, where cases
were taken against them by Muslims, or they took cases against Muslims or other
dhimmis. Oaths sworn by dhimmis in these courts were tailored to their beliefs.
Non-Muslims were allowed to engage in certain practices (such as the
consumption of alcohol and pork) that were usually forbidden by Islamic law.
Zoroastrian "self-marriages", that were considered incestuous under sharia,
were also tolerated. Ibn Qayyim (1292â€“1350) opined that non-Muslims were
entitled to such practices since they could not be presented to sharia courts
and the religious minorities in question held it permissible. This ruling was
based on the precedent that the prophet Muhammad did not forbid such self-
marriages among Zoroastrians despite coming into contact with Zoroastrians and
knowing about this practice. Religious minorities were also free to do whatever
they wished in their own homes, provided they did not publicly engage in
illicit sexual activity in ways that could threaten public morals. However, the
classical dhimma contract is no longer enforced. Western influence has been
instrumental in eliminating the restrictions and protections of the dhimma
contract, thereby contributing to the current state of relations between
Muslims and non-Muslims living in Islamic lands. According to law professor H.
Patrick Glenn of the Canadian McGill University, located in Montreal, Quebec,
"it is said that the dhimmi are 'excluded from the specifically Muslim
privileges, but on the other hand they are excluded from the specifically
Muslim duties' while (and here there are clear parallels with western public
and private law treatment of aliensÂ â€“ Fremdenrecht, la condition de
estrangers), '[for the rest, the Muslim and the dhimmi are equal in practically
the whole of the law of property and of contracts and obligations'." The dhimma
contract and sharia law. The dhimma contract is an integral part of traditional
Islamic sharia law. From the 9th century AD, the power to interpret and refine
law in traditional Islamic societies was in the hands of the scholars (ulema).
This separation of powers served to limit the range of actions available to the
ruler, who could not easily decree or reinterpret law independently and expect
the continued support of the community. Through succeeding centuries and
empires, the balance between the ulema and the rulers shifted and reformed, but
the balance of power was never decisively changed. At the beginning of the 19th
century, the Industrial Revolution and the French Revolution introduced an era
of European world hegemony that included the domination of most of the lands of
Islam. At the end of the Second World War, the European powers found themselves
too weakened to maintain their empires. The wide variety of forms of
government, systems of law, attitudes toward modernity and interpretations of
sharia are a result of the ensuing drives for independence and modernity in the
Muslim world. Muslim states, sects, schools of thought and individuals differ
as to exactly what sharia law entails. In addition, Muslim states today utilize
a spectrum of legal systems. Most states have a mixed system implementing
certain aspects of sharia while acknowledging constitutional supremacy. A few,
such as Turkey, have declared themselves secular. Local and customary laws may
take precedence in certain matters, as well. Islamic law is therefore
polynormative, and despite several cases of regression in recent years, the
trend is towards modernization and liberalization. Questions of human rights
and the status of minorities cannot be generalized with regards to Islam and
the Muslim world. They must instead be examined on a case-by-case basis, within
specific political and cultural contexts, using perspectives drawn from the
historical framework. The end of the dhimma contract. The status of the dhimmi
"was for long accepted with resignation by the Christians and with gratitude by
the Jews" but the rising power of Christendom and the radical ideas of the
French revolution caused a wave of discontent among Christian dhimmis. The
continuing and growing pressure from the European powers combined with pressure
from Muslim reformers gradually relaxed the inequalities between Muslims and
non-Muslims. The collection of the jizya tax from non-Muslims was widespread
throughout the history of Islam. In the mid-19th century, the Ottoman empire
significantly relaxed the restrictions and taxes placed on its non-Muslim
residents under Ottomanism. These relaxations occurred gradually as part of the
Tanzimat reform movement, which began in 1839 with the accession of the Ottoman
Sultan Abd-ul-Mejid I. On November 3, 1839, the Hatt-i Sharif of Gulhane edict
was put forth by the Sultan, in part proclaiming the principle of equality
among all subjects regardless of religion. Part of the motivation for this was
a desire to gain support from the British Empire, whose help was needed in a
conflict with Egypt. On February 18, 1856, the Hatt-i Humayan edict was issued,
building upon the 1839 edict. It came about partly as a result of pressure from
and the efforts of the ambassadors of England, France, and Austria, whose
respective countries were needed as allies in the Crimean War. It again
proclaimed the principle of equality between Muslims and non-Muslims, and
produced many specific reforms to this end. For example, the jizya tax was
abolished and non-Muslims were allowed to join the army. Dhimmi communities.
The dhimmi communities had their own chiefs and judges, with their own family,
personal and religious laws, and "generally speaking, Muslim tolerance of
unbelievers was far better than anything available in Christendom, until the
rise of secularism in the 17th century". "Muslims guaranteed freedom of worship
and livelihood, provided that they remained loyal to the Muslim state and paid
a poll tax". "Muslim governments appointed Christian and Jewish professionals
to their bureaucracies", and thus, Christians and Jews "contributed to the
making of the Islamic civilization". However, dhimmis faced social and symbolic
restrictions, and a pattern of stricter, then more lax, enforcement developed
over time. Marshall G.S. Hodgson, a historian of Islam, writes that during the
era of the High Caliphate (7thâ€“13th Centuries), zealous Shariah-minded
Muslims gladly elaborated their code of symbolic restrictions on the dhimmis.
From an Islamic legal perspective, the pledge of protection granted dhimmis the
freedom to practice their religion and spared them forced conversions. The
dhimmis were also serving a variety of useful purposes, mostly economic, which
was another point of concern to jurists. Religious minorities were free to do
whatever they wished in their own homes, but could not "publically engage in
illicit sex in ways that threaten public morals". In some cases, religious
practices that Muslims found repugnant were allowed. One example was the
Zoroastrian practice of incestuous "self-marriage" where a man could marry his
mother, sister or daughter. According to the famous Islamic legal scholar Ibn
Qayyim (1292â€“1350), non-Muslims had the right to engage in such religious
practices even if it offended Muslims, under the conditions that such cases not
be presented to Islamic Sharia courts and that these religious minorities
believed that the practice in question is permissible according to their
religion. This ruling was based on the precedent that the prophet Muhammad did
not forbid such self-marriages among Zoroastrians despite coming in contact
with them and having knowledge of their practices. The Arabs generally
established garrisons outside towns in the conquered territories, and had
little interaction with the local dhimmi populations for purposes other than
the collection of taxes. The conquered Christian, Jewish, Mazdean and Buddhist
communities were otherwise left to lead their lives as before. Christians. The
Arab conquerors included Christian as well as Muslim tribes. The Christian
Arabs were regarded as fellow Arabs rather than dhimmis. Local Christians in
Syria, Iraq, and Egypt were non-Chalcedonians and many may have felt better off
under early Muslim rule than under that of the orthodox Greeks of
Constantinople. In 1095 AD, Pope Urban II urged western European Christians to
come to the aid of the Christians of Palestine. The subsequent Crusades brought
Roman Catholic Christians into contact with Orthodox Christians whose beliefs
they discovered to differ from their own perhaps more than they had realised,
and whose position under the rule of the Muslim Fatimid dynasty was less
uncomfortable than had been supposed. Consequently, the Eastern Christians
provided perhaps less support to the Crusaders than had been expected. When the
Arab East came under Ottoman rule in the 16th century AD, Christian populations
and fortunes rebounded significantly. The Ottomans had long experience dealing
with Christian and Jewish minorities, and were more tolerant towards religious
minorities than the former Muslim rulers, the Mamluks of Egypt. By the 19th
century AD European pressure had removed all dhimma restrictions on Ottoman
religious minorities. Jews. Accustomed to survival in adverse circumstances
after many centuries of discrimination and persecution within the Roman Empire,
both pre-Christian and Christian, Jews saw the Islamic conquests as just
another change of rulers, this time for the better. MarÃ­a Rosa Menocal, argues
that the Jewish dhimmis living under the Caliphate, while allowed fewer rights
than Muslims, were still better off than in the Christian parts of Europe. Jews
from other parts of Europe made their way to "al-Andalus", where in parallel to
Christian sects regarded as heretical by Catholic Europe, they were not just
tolerated, but where opportunities to practise faith and trade were open
without restriction save for the prohibitions on proselytisation. According to
the French historian Claude Cahen, Islam has "shown more toleration than Europe
towards the Jews who remained in Muslim lands." Comparing the treatment of Jews
in the medieval Islamic world and medieval Christian Europe, Mark R. Cohen
notes that, in contrast to Jews in Christian Europe, the "Jews in Islam were
well integrated into the economic life of the larger society", and that they
were allowed to practice their religion more freely than they could do in
Christian Europe. According to the scholar Mordechai Zaken, tribal chieftains
(also known as aghas) in tribal Muslim societies such as the Kurdish society in
Kurdistan would tax their Jewish subjects. The Jews were in fact civilians
protected by their chieftains in and around their communities; in return they
paid part of their harvest as dues, and contributed their skills and services
to their patron chieftain. Hindus and Buddhists. By the 10th century, the Turks
of Central Asia had brought Islam to the mountains north of the Indic plains.
It was not long before they swept south across the Punjab. The Indus basin held
a substantial Buddhist population in addition to the ruling Hindu castes, and
most converted to Islam over the next two centuries. At the end of the 12th
century, the Muslims advanced quickly into the Ganges plain. In one decade, a
Muslim army led by Turkic slaves consolidated resistance around Lahore and
brought northern India, as far as west Bengal, under Muslim rule. From these
Turkic slaves would come sultans, including the founder of the sultanate of
Delhi. Muslims and dhimmis alike participated in urbanization and urban
prosperity. By the 15th century, Islamic and Hindu civilization had evolved in
a complementary manner, with the Muslims taking the role of a ruling caste in
Hindu society. Nevertheless, the Muslims retained their Islamic identities, and
were in some ways regarded by Hindus in much the same light as their own lowest
castes. In the 16th century AD, India came under the influence of the Mughals
(Mongols). Babar, a ruler of the Mongol Timuri empire, established a foothold
in the North which paved the way for further expansion by his successors. Until
it was eclipsed by European hegemony in the 18th century, the Timuri Moghul
emperors oversaw a period of coexistence and tolerance between Hindus and
Muslims. The emperor Akbar has been described as a universalist. He sought to
establish tolerance and equality between all communities and religions, and
instituted far reaching social and religious reforms. Not all the Mughal
emperors endorsed the ideals espoused by Akbar, indeed Aurangzeb was inclined
towards a more traditional, communal approach. The entire subcontinent fell
under European colonial rule during the 18th century. Independence from their
former European colonial rulers, and the subsequent struggles for political
power, have brought ethnic and religious strife to this area of the world in
modern times. Relevant texts. Qur'anic verses as a basis for Islamic policies
toward dhimmis. Lewis states Hadith. A hadith by Muhammad, "Whoever killed a
"Mu'ahid" (a person who is granted the pledge of protection by the Muslims)
shall not smell the fragrance of Paradise though its fragrance can be smelt at
a distance of forty years (of traveling)", is considered to be a foundation for
the protection of the People of the Book in Muslim ruled countries. Majid
Khadduri cites a similar hadith in regard to the status of the dhimmis:
"Whoever wrongs one with whom a compact(treaty) has been made "a dhimmi" and
lays on him a burden beyond his strength, I will be his accuser." Constitution
of Medina. A precedent for the dhimma contract was established with the
agreement between the Islamic prophet Muhammad and the Jews of Khaybar, an
oasis near Medina. Khaybar was the first territory attacked and conquered by
Muslims. When the Jews of Khaybar surrendered to Muhammad after a siege,
Muhammad allowed them to remain in Khaybar in return for handing over to the
Muslims one half their annual produce. Pact of Umar. The Pact of Umar,
traditionally believed to be between caliph Umar I and the conquered Christians
of Jerusalem, was another source of regulations pertaining to dhimmis. However,
Western orientalists doubt the authenticity of the Pact, arguing it is usually
the victors and not the vanquished who impose rather than propose, the terms of
peace, and that it is highly unlikely that the people who spoke no Arabic and
knew nothing of Islam could draft such a document. Academic historians believe
the Pact of Umar in the form it is known today was a product of later jurists
who attributed it to the venerated caliph Umar I in order to lend greater
authority to their own opinions. The similarities between the Pact of Umar and
the Theodosian and Justinian Codes of the Eastern Roman Empire suggest that
perhaps much of the Pact of Umar was borrowed from these earlier codes by later
Islamic jurists. At least some of the clauses of the pact mirror the measures
first introduced by the Umayyad caliph Umar II or by the early Abbasid caliphs.
Restrictions. Jews and Christians living under early Muslim rule were
considered dhimmis, a status that was later also extended to other non-Muslims
like Hindus. They were allowed to "practice their religion, subject to certain
conditions, and to enjoy a measure of communal autonomy" and guaranteed their
personal safety and security of property, in return for paying tribute and
acknowledging Muslim rule. Taxation from the perspective of dhimmis who came
under the Muslim rule, was "a concrete continuation of the taxes paid to
earlier regimes" (but lower under the Muslim rule). They were also exempted
from the zakaat tax paid by Muslims. The dhimmi communities living in Islamic
states had their own laws independent from the Sharia law, such as the Jews who
had their own "Halakha" courts. The dhimmi communities had their own chiefs and
judges, with their own family, personal and religious laws, and "generally
speaking, Muslim tolerance of unbelievers was far better than anything
available in Christendom, until the rise of secularism in the 17th century".
However, there were a number of restrictions on dhimmis. In modern sense the
dhimmis would be described as second class citizens. Although dhimmis were
allowed to perform their religious rituals, they were obliged to do so in a
manner not conspicuous to Muslims. Display of non-Muslim religious symbols,
such as crosses or icons, was prohibited on buildings and on clothing (unless
mandated as part of "distinctive clothing"). Loud prayers were forbidden, as
were the ringing of church bells or the trumpeting of shofars. They were also
were not allowed to build or repair churches without Muslim consent. Moreover
dhimmis were not allowed to seek converts among Muslims. In the Mamluk Egypt,
where non-Mamluk Muslims were not allowed to ride horses and camels, dhimmis
were prohibited even from riding donkeys inside cities. Sometimes, Muslim
rulers issued regulations requiring dhimmis to attach distinctive signs to
their houses. Most of the restrictions were social and symbolic in nature, and
a pattern of stricter, then more lax, enforcement developed over time. The
major financial disabilities of the dhimmi were the jizya poll tax and the fact
dhimmis and Muslims could not inherit each from other. which would create
incentive to convert if someone from the family was already converted. The
jurists and scholars of Islamic sharia law called for humane treatment of the
dhimmis. Islamic law and custom prohibited the enslavement of free dhimmis
within lands under Islamic rule. Jizya tax. Payment of the "jizya" obligated
Muslim authorities to protect dhimmis in civil and military matters. Sura
stipulates that "jizya" be exacted from non-Muslims as a condition required for
jihad to cease. Failure to pay the "jizya" could result in the pledge of
protection of a dhimmi's life and property becoming void, with the dhimmi
facing the alternatives of conversion, enslavement or death (or imprisonment,
as advocated by Abu Yusuf, the chief "qadi" â€” religious judge â€” of Abbasid
caliph Harun al-Rashid). Taxation, from the perspective of dhimmis who came
under Muslim rule, was "a concrete continuation of the taxes paid to earlier
regimes". Lewis observes that the change from Byzantine to Arab rule was
welcomed by many among the Dhimmis who found the new yoke far lighter than the
old, both in taxation and in other matters, and that some even among the
Christians of Syria and Egypt preferred the rule of Islam to that of
Byzantines. In some places, for example Egypt, the obligations of the Jizya tax
created economic incentives for Christians to convert to Islam. The importance
of dhimmis as a source of revenue for the Muslim community is illuminated in a
letter ascribed to Umar I and cited by Abu Yusuf: "if we take dhimmis and share
them out, what will be left for the Muslims who come after us? By God, Muslims
would not find a man to talk to and profit from his labors." Most Islamic
scholars agree that "jizya" must be levied only upon adult males. In an
important early account, Malik's Muwatta reports that the jizya was collected
from non-Muslim men only, and additional taxes were to be levied against
dhimmis who travelled on business: "The Sunnah is that there is no jizya due
from women or children of people of the Book, and that jizya is only taken from
men who have reached puberty. The people of dhimma ... do not have to pay any
zakat ... This is because zakat is imposed on the Muslims to purify them and to
be given back to their poor, whereas jizya is imposed on the people of the Book
to humble them." () Lewis notes there are varying opinions among scholars as to
how much of a burden "jizya" was. According to Norman Stillman: ""Jizya" and
"kharaj" were a crushing burden for the non-Muslim peasantry who eked out a
bare living in a subsistence economy." Both agree that ultimately, the
additional taxation on non-Muslims was a critical factor that drove many
dhimmis to leave their religion and accept Islam. However, in some regions the
jizya on populations was significantly lower than the zakat, meaning dhimmi
populations maintained an economic advantage. The early Islamic scholars took a
relatively humane and practical attitude towards the collection of "jizya",
compared to the 11th century commentators writing when Islam was under threat
both at home and abroad. The jurist Abu Yusuf, the chief judge of the Caliph
Harun Al-Rashid, rules as follows regarding the manner of collecting the jizya
No one of the people of the dhimma should be beaten in order to exact payment
of the jizya, nor made to stand in the hot sun, nor should hateful things be
inflicted upon their bodies, or anything of that sort. Rather they should be
treated with leniency. In the border provinces, dhimmis were sometimes
recruited for military operations. In such cases, they were exempted from
"jizya" for the year of service. Administration of law. Religious pluralism
existed in medieval Islamic law and ethics. The religious laws and courts of
other religions, including Christianity, Judaism and Hinduism, were usually
accommodated within the Islamic legal framework, as exemplified in the
Caliphate, Al-Andalus, Ottoman Empire and Indian subcontinent. In medieval
Islamic societies, the "qadi" (Islamic judges) usually could not interfere in
the matters of non-Muslims unless the parties voluntarily chose to be judged
according to Islamic law. The dhimmi communities living in Islamic states
usually had their own laws independent from the Sharia law, such as the Jews
who had their own "Halakha" courts. Dhimmis were allowed to operate their own
courts following their own legal systems. However, dhimmis frequently attended
the Muslim courts in order to record property and business transactions within
their own communities. Cases were taken out against Muslims, against other
dhimmis and even against members of the dhimmiâ€™s own family. Dhimmis often
took cases relating to marriage, divorce or inheritance to the Muslim courts so
these cases would be decided under sharia law. Oaths sworn by dhimmis in the
Muslim courts were sometimes the same as the oaths taken by Muslims, sometimes
tailored to the dhimmisâ€™ beliefs. Muslim men could generally marry dhimmi
women who are considered "People of the Book," however Islamic jurists rejected
the possibility any non-Muslim man might marry a Muslim woman. Bernard Lewis
notes that "similar position existed under the laws of Byzantine Empire,
according to which a Christian could marry a Jewish woman, but a Jew could not
marry a Christian woman under pain of death". Cultural interactions and
cultural differences. During the Middle Ages, local associations known as
futuwwa clubs developed across the Islamic lands. There were usually several
futuwwah in each town. These clubs catered to varying interests, primarily
sports, and might involve distinctive manners of dress and custom. They were
known for their hospitality, idealism and loyalty. They often had a
militaristic aspect, purportedly for the mutual protection of the membership.
These clubs commonly crossed social strata, including among their membership
local notables, dhimmi and slaves â€“ to the exclusion of those associated with
the local ruler, or amir. Muslims and Jews were sometimes partners in trade,
with the Muslim taking days off on Fridays and jews taking off on Saturdays.
Andrew Wheatcroft describes how some social customs such as different
conceptions of dirt and cleanliness made it difficult for the religious
communities to live close to each other, either under Muslim or under Christian
rule.
