Divine Light Mission The Divine Light Mission (DLM) (Divya Sandesh Parishad)
was an organization founded in 1960 by guru Shri Hans Ji Maharaj for his
following in northern India. During the 1970s, the DLM gained prominence in the
West under the leadership of his fourth and youngest son, Guru Maharaj Ji (Prem
Rawat). Some scholars noted the influence of the Bhagavad Gita and the Sant Mat
tradition, but the western movement was widely seen as a new religious
movement, a cult, a charismatic religious sect or an alternative religion. DLM
officials said the movement represented a church rather than a religion. When
Shri Hans Ji Maharaj died in 1966, he was succeeded as guru by Prem Rawat, then
just eight years old, despite rival claims from other family members. Although
Prem Rawat was accepted as his father's successor, because of his age his
family retained effective control of the DLM. In 1971, Rawat defied his mother
by travelling to the UK and the US, where local branches of DLM were
established and rapidly expanded. By 1973, DLM had over a million followers in
India and tens of thousands of followers in the West, along with dozens of
ashrams and hundreds of centers. As Rawat grew older, he began to take a more
active role in the movement and, when he turned sixteen, following the
financially disastrous Millennium '73 festival, he took administrative control
of the US branch. His increasing independence and his marriage to a non-Indian
in 1974 caused a permanent rift with his mother and two of his brothers. They
returned to India, where his eldest brother Satpal Maharaj gained control of
the Indian DLM. In the early 1980s, Rawat began disbanding the western DLM. He
closed the ashrams and eliminated the remaining Indian influences from his
presentation to make it independent of any specific culture or religion. In the
US, UK, France and Australia, Elan Vital was formed to replace the DLM in
supporting Rawat in his role as teacher. History. Founding and early years in
India. Shri Hans Maharaj Ji, initiated by the Sant Mat guru Sri Swarupanand Ji,
began teaching in the Sind and Lahore provinces of India in the 1930s. In 1950
he began initiating "Mahatmas", followers who could themselves initiate
devotees, and formed a magazine called "Hansadesh." In 1960 in the city of
Patna, he founded the Divine Light Mission ("Divya Sandesh Parishad") to
organize followers across Northern India. At the time of his death on July 19,
1966, the Divine Light Mission had six million members in India. During the
customary 13 days of mourning, his mother and senior officials of the
organization discussed the succession. Prem Rawat, who was 8 years-old at the
time, addressed the crowd and was accepted by them as their teacher and
"Perfect Master". Because of his age, effective control of the DLM was shared
by the whole family. International expansion. In 1971, Rawat, then known as
Guru Maharaji Ji, travelled to the West against his mother's wishes. DLMs were
established in the U.S. and the U.K. The U.S. branch was headquartered in
Denver, Colorado. It was registered there as a non-profit corporation and in
1974 was recognized as a church by the United States Internal Revenue Service
under section 501(c)(3). By 1972 DLM was operating in North and South America,
Europe and Australia. By 1973, DLM was operating in 37 countries, tens of
thousands of people had been initiated (become premies) and several hundred
centers and dozens of ashrams formed in the U.S. and the U.K. DLM said it had
8,000 devotees and forty ashrams. In the United States, the staff at the
headquarters grew to 125, and Telexes connected the headquarters with the
ashrams. Social service facilities, including a medical clinic in New York
City, were opened. A Women's Spiritual Right Organization dedicated to reaching
out to persons in prisons, mental institutions and hospitals, was organized.
The U.S. DLM published two periodicals: "And It Is Divine" ("AIID"), a monthly
magazine with a circulation of 90,000; and "Divine Times", a biweekly newspaper
with a circulation of 60,000. The cover price of "AIID" was $1 but most were
given away free, as were the advertisements. The World Peace Corps (WPC) was
established as a security force to provide protection for Rawat. After Bob
Mishler, the DLM President, was removed from power he said that Rawat got the
idea to start a bodyguard unit after watching "The Godfather". The WPC became
the organizing agent of meetings and businesses. A variety of businesses were
founded under US DLM auspices including laundromats, used clothing stores, a
plane charter agency ("Divine Travel Services"), a repair service, and the
"Cleanliness-is-Next-to-Godliness" janitorial service. Detroit incident.
On August 8, 1973 while Rawat was at the Detroit City Hall to receive a
testimonial resolution praising his work, Pat Halley, who was at the time a
reporter from Detroit's underground periodical Fifth Estate, slapped him in the
face with a shaving cream pie. Rawat responded by saying that he did not want
his attacker arrested or hurt, but the reporter was attacked by two men a few
days later and seriously injured. When local members heard of the incident they
notified Rawat in Los Angeles who extended his regrets and condolences to Pat
Halley's family, and requested that the DLM conduct a full investigation. The
assailants, one of them an Indian mahatma, were identified. They admitted their
part in the incident and offered to turn themselves in. The Chicago police were
immediately notified. The Detroit police declined to initiate extradition
proceedings, variously claiming that they were unable to locate the assailants,
or that the cost of extraditing them from Chicago to Detroit made it
impractical. The arrest warrant remained outstanding. This lack of action by
the Detroit police was attributed by some to Halley's radical politics. A
spokesman later stated that the Indian national had been "shipped off to
Europe". Festivals. Festivals were a regular part of the Divine Light Mission's
activities and a source of revenue. Members would pay from $50 to $100 to
attend, and Darshan events would generate considerable donations. The DLM
celebrated three main festivals: Holi, which is celebrated in late March or
early April; Guru Puja, which was held in July; and Hans Jayanti, which falls
in November. Hans Jayanti marks the birthday of the DLM's founder. According to
Marc Galanter, the members at a festival in Orlando, Florida "looked as though
they had been drawn from the graduate campus of a large universityâ€”bright,
not too carefully groomed, casually dressed. They were lively, good-tempered,
and committed to their mutual effort. There was no idleness, brashness,
marijuana, beer, loud music, or flirtationâ€”all hallmarks of a more typical
assembly of people in their twenties". Other festivals were held nationally and
locally, and sometimes organized with little advance notice. Attending as many
as ten festivals a year meant many members were unable to hold regular full-
time jobs, and required sacrificing leisure and community activities in order
to devote time to earning the money needed to attend. In 1972 seven jumbo jets
were chartered to bring members from the U.S. and other countries to the Hans
Jayanti festival held at the main ashram near New Delhi. 2500 foreign members
camped out at the mission's "city of love" for a month. The event attracted a
reported total of 500,000 attendees. When Rawat flew to India to attend he was
accused of attempting to smuggle $65,000 worth of cash and jewelry into the
country, but no charges were ever filed, and the Indian government later issued
an apology. The accusation led to negative coverage in the Indian press and
hard feelings between Rawat and his mother, who had persuaded him to return to
India for the festival. In June 1973 the British DLM, with Prem Rawat's mother
acting on behalf of her son, organized the "Festival of Love" at the Alexandra
Palace in London. While it drew thousands of attendees, Rawat began receiving
hostile press coverage, partly due to his showing up late, or not at all, at
scheduled appearances. The large membership had grown up very rapidly but the
organizers had no clear idea where to lead the following, nor did they have the
financial resources to maintain so many full-time workers. Millennium '73. The
1973 Hans Jayanti festival was held at the Astrodome in Houston, Texas, and
publicized as "Millennium '73". The free three-day event was billed as "the
most significant event in human history" that would herald "a thousand years of
peace for people who want peace", the idea being that peace could come to the
world as individuals experienced inner peace. To promote the event Prem Rawat's
20-year old brother, Bhole Ji Rawat toured with a 60-piece band, "Blue
Aquarius" for two weeks giving free concerts. The 500-member tour was dubbed
"Soul Rush" and traveled to seven cities on the way to Houston. Rennie Davis,
well known as one of the defendants in the Chicago Seven trial, attracted
extensive media coverage as a spokesperson for Rawat. At the event Davis
declared that "All I can say is, honestly, very soon now, every single human
being will know the one who was waited for by every religion of all times has
actually come." In a press conference at Millennium, Rawat denied being the
Messiah, and when asked by reporters about the contradictions between what he
said about himself and what his followers said about him, Rawat replied, "Why
don't you do me a favorÂ ... why don't you go to the devotees and ask their
explanation about it?" While Rawat's brother Satpal was nominally in charge of
the festival, Davis was the "General Coordinator" and handled the details.
Expectations for the event were very high, with predictions that it would
attract more than 100,000, or even as many as 400,000 people from Satpal. Davis
privately said he thought 22,000 was a more realistic estimate and reserved
22,000 hotel beds. There was even talk about a space in the parking lot
reserved for a flying saucer to land. When Satpal heard about the flying saucer
he said, "If you see any, just give them some of our literature". The actual
attendance was estimated at 35,000, and at 10,000 by police. The event featured
spectacular staging, a 56-piece rock band and a giant video screen that showed
a barrage of shots from the tumultuous 1960s. Though it was not covered by the
national television news, it did get extensive coverage in the print media. The
premies were reported to be "cheerful, friendly and unruffled, and seemed
nourished by their faith". To the 400 premie parents who attended, Rawat "was a
rehabilitator of prodigal sons and daughters". Media people found a "confused
jumble of inarticulately expressed ideas." It was depicted in the award-winning
U.S. documentary "Lord of the Universe" broadcast by PBS Television in 1974.
The event was called the "youth culture event of the year". Singer-songwriter
Loudon Wainwright III visited the festival and later remarked that while the
premies inside were looking happy the ones outside were arguing with Jesus
Freaks and Hare Krishnas. Wainwright's song "I am the Way" was partly inspired
by Prem Rawat. At the festival, Larry Bernstein, a prize-winning, 41-year-old
architect described a "Divine City" to be built from the ground up starting the
following year. It was to feature translucent hexagonal plastic houses stacked
on concrete columns and connected with monorails. Polluting vehicles would be
replaced by electric vehicles, and solar power would be used to provide energy.
Cards would replace cash. The use of advanced technologies to ensure pollution-
free air, Rennie Davis told a journalist, would be a practical demonstration of
what it means to have Heaven on Earth. Two sites were suggested: either the
Blue Ridge Mountains or somewhere near Santa Barbara, California. The former
president and vice president of the DLM later said that Prem Rawat had spoken
frequently of building such a city. Plans for the city were delayed amid the
fiscal crisis following the Millennium festival. Incorporation papers for the
formation of the "City of Love and Light Unlimited, Inc." were filed in
Colorado in 1974, and there was a failed attempt in 1975 to build the community
near San Antonio, Texas. The DLM incurred a debt estimated between $600,000 and
over $1 million, attributed to poor management and low attendance. The debt
severely damaged the DLM's finances. Event-related expenses were covered by
short-term credit based on the expectation that contributions would pour in
following the free festival. DLM's post-Millennium financial troubles forced it
to close ashrams, sell its printing business and real estate, and to drop the
lease on its IBM computer. Monthly donations fell from $100,000 to $70,000.
According to Messer, "to pay the debts remaining from the Houston event,
devotees all over the country turned over their own possessions to Divine
Sales, which had crash garage sales, attended flea markets, and invented
numerous activities to dispose of the goods." By 1976 it was able to reduce the
debt to $80,000. Consequently, the festival necessitated policy shifts within
the movement organization. Marriage and rift. Because of Prem Rawat's age, Mata
Ji, his mother, and her eldest son, Satpal Rawat had managed the affairs of the
worldwide DLM. As Prem Rawat approached sixteen he wanted to take a more active
part in guiding the movement. According to Downton, "this meant he had to
encroach on his mother's territory and, given the fact that she was accustomed
to having control, a fight was inevitable". In December 1973, when he turned
16, Rawat took administrative control of the Mission's U.S. branch and began to
assert his independence from his mother who returned to India with Satpal. In
May 1974, a judge gave Rawat his consent to marry without parental permission.
His marriage to his secretary, Marolyn Johnson, a 24-year old follower from San
Diego, California, was celebrated at a non-denominational church in Golden,
Colorado. Rawat's mother, Mata Ji, had not been invited. As a result of his
marriage Rawat became an emancipated minor. He called his wife "Durga Ji",
after the Hindu goddess Durga. Rawat's decision to marry a Westerner
precipitated a struggle for control of DLM. His mother claimed that Rawat had
broken his spiritual discipline by marrying, and had become a "playboy". She
appointed Satpal as the new head of DLM India, but the Western premies remained
loyal to Rawat. The marriage led to a permanent rift between Prem Rawat and his
mother, and was also credited with causing a profound disruption in the
movement. Many followers left the ashrams to get married, and the base of
support inevitably shifted from the ashrams to the wider premie community.
Others felt "almost betrayed", in part because he had championed celibacy, one
of the requirements of ashram life, before getting married himself. The bad
press from the festivals and the rift caused by Prem Rawat's marriage in 1974
marked the end of the movement's growth phase. In 1975 Prem Rawat returned to
India in an attempt to gain control of the Indian DLM. A court-ordered
settlement resulted in his eldest brother Satpal retaining control of the
Indian DLM, while Rawat maintained control of the DLM outside of India.
Westernization. Following the rift with his mother, Rawat announced that he was
replacing the predominantly Indian image with a Western one and began to wear
business suits instead of his all-white Indian attire. The Indian mahatmas were
replaced with Westerners, and Indian terminology fell from use. Rawat
encouraged premies to leave the ashrams. According to one estimate, the
worldwide membership had declined from 6 million to 1.2 million by 1976, and in
the U.S. the 50,000 claimed initiates had dwindled to 15,000 regular
contributors. A spokesman for the Mission explained in 1976 that the higher
numbers had been inflated due to poor record-keeping. One estimate had from 500
to 1200 members living in ashrams in the mid-1970s. By the end of the 1970s,
the movement had lost an estimated 80% of its followers in the U.S. Bromley and
Hammond attribute the decline of groups including the Divine Light Mission to
internal factors, but also in part to the news media's "discrediting reports
about their activities", accounts which created a "wide-spread public
perception of 'mind control' and other 'cult' stereotypes." The Divine Light
Mission also attracted the attention of the anti-cult movement. Some members
were violently kidnapped and deprogrammed. Some former members became outspoken
critics of the organization and attacked the group with what Melton calls
"standard anti-cult charges of brainwashing and mind control". In reference to
ex-followers, DLM spokesman Joe Anctil said that "A lot of people were just on
a trip in the beginning. They felt they had to be 'hyped', and some didn't stay
long enough to get beyond that. But we've changed as our understanding has
changed." Bob Mishler, the founding president of the DLM in the U.S., was
removed by Rawat in 1977 and gave an interview in 1979, along with the former
vice president, in which he said he was concerned that the DLM was becoming a
"tax evasion for the guru", and said he feared a repeat of Jonestown. They also
accused Rawat of engaging in inappropriate behavior. Mishler's charges found
little support and did not affect the progress of the Mission. In the 1980s,
Prem Rawat removed the Indian trappings from his message, and adopted a more
Western style. Melton said the mission was disbanded Prem Rawat personally
renounced the trappings of Indian culture and religion, to make his teachings
independent of culture, beliefs and lifestyles. Prem Rawat was no longer to be
venerated as a god or regarded as a Perfect Master. The ashrams were closed
along with the Denver headquarters (1979). The Divine Light Mission
organization was replaced by Elan Vital; the U.S. organization's name was
changed to Elan Vital in 1983, by filing an entity name change. Prem Rawat
asked to be referred to as "Maharaji" instead of "Guru Maharaj Ji." Geaves
(2004), pp. 45-62 Since then the Elan Vital has been "virtually invisible."
Rawat stopped granting interviews and making public announcements of his
visits. As of 2008 he has continued to write, lecture, and tour with the
support of the Elan Vital and the Prem Rawat Foundation. DLM in India. In 1975
Mata Ji took control of the DLM in India as a result of the rift and installed
her eldest son, Satpal Rawat, as its head. A lawsuit in India resulted in his
brother Satpal gaining control of the Divine Light Mission in India, and Rawat
continuing to lead DLM in the rest of the world. Satpal Rawat, now known as
Shri Satpal Ji Maharaj, teaches "Manav Dharam" (the "Dharam of Mankind"). He is
also a politician and former Union Minister in India, and founded Manav Utthan
Sewa Samiti, which he describes as "an all-India registered voluntary social
welfare and charitable organization", that is also "making freely available the
spiritual Knowledge which is the essence of all religions." Satpal Rawat's
supporters now assert that he is the rightful successor to his father, Hans Ji
Maharaj. Scholars that have written about the succession report that Satpal and
the rest of the family accepted and supported Prem's declaration of succession
for eight years. The Divine United Organization (DUO) was an organization
registered under the Societies Registration Act 21 of 1860 with the Registrar
of Delhi in 1977, to disseminate the teachings of Prem Rawat in India.
According to Geaves, DUO remained in India until it was replaced by Raj Vidya
Bhavan name="Geaves2006" /> Raj Vidya Kender (Center for the King of Knowledge)
states on its website that it was registered under the societies Registration
Act in 1977, with registration No. 8845/77, "by individuals eager to help in
the dissemination of Maharaji's message of hope and peace." Beliefs and
practices. According to some scholars, Shri Hans was influenced by both the
Sant tradition and the Bhagavad Gita. Reinhart Hummel wrote that from the
former came the reduction of Hinduism to the inner realization of the divine
and the veneration of the guru, and from the latter the emphasis on the
practical life. Hummel also noted that the DLM never developed a systematic
doctrine, either during Hans' time or Prem Rawat's time. Hummel further
asserted that the influence of the North Indian Sant tradition was dominant in
Hans' eclectic thinking, and that from the Sant tradition also came the
rejection of outward rituals and ceremonies; the rejection of asceticism in
favor of life as a householder; the rejection of veneration of idols, and the
focus on the guru as the manifestation of the divine. Hummel also noted that
the four meditation techniques are of central importance to Prem, as they were
to Hans. No rules or regulations were imposed, and no beliefs or ethical
practices were taught. The fundamental practices of inner peace were embodied
and experienced through satsang, service and meditation, the sum of which is an
experience called "Knowledge." Members of the DLM meditated formally twice
daily and attended discourses on the Knowledge (known as satsang) when
possible. According to Galanter "satsang could be delivered to active members
or to those with only a casual interest. It was something of a polemic
interspersed with parables, and because members were bright and sophisticated,
these discourses tended to be engaging, making use of both Hindu mythology and
Western philosophy". In a study by Flo Conway and Jim Siegelman former
followers said that they had spent 32.9 hours per week in group-related
processes and ritual and 19.9 hours in additional study or indoctrination
(lectures, seminars, workshops etc). Vegetarianism was encouraged but not
enforced except in ashrams and Divine Centers. In the United States, the early
years of the Divine Light Mission were marked by the rapid growth of loosely
affiliated local ashrams, united mainly by a shared devotion to Guru Maharaj
Ji. As the DLM became more and more structured and centralized, leadership and
power came to be concentrated in the Denver headquarters. According to
scholars, Prem Rawat's desire to consolidate his power and authority over the
U.S. movement led to increasing formalization, with rules and regulations for
ashram living, standards for recruited "candidates," and pressure towards
certification of the movement's teachers. According to scholars Foss and van
der Lans, the teachings of Hans Ji Maharaj were minimized after 1975, and
followers were expected to accept Prem Rawat as their personal savior. David V.
Barrett noted that the DLM movement was often criticized for emphasizing the
superiority of subjective emotional experience over intellect. The sociologists
Ralph Larkin and Daniel A. Foss made similar observations in 1978. In response,
the religious scholar Ron Geaves, himself a member of the movement, accused
Foss and Larkin of bias. A 1981 article based on the Dutch branch of the Divine
Light Mission stated that the DLM had little philosophical background and that
the all its central creeds and tenets were described in the song associated
with the Hindu ritual called aarti. Arti was sung to Prem Rawat in the morning
and evening in ashrams. Rawat says he does not charge for teaching people the
techniques of Knowledge. Related organizations that support the dissemination
of Rawat's message are funded by donations. According to the Prem Rawat
Foundation, it is supported by people who appreciate Rawat's message and wish
to help make it available to others. Members. In a comparison of new religious
movements, Gartrell and Shannon noted that people appeared to seek out such
religious organizations to get answers to questions about ultimate meaning as
well as answers to more prosaic issues. In discussing the differences in
recruiting tactics employed by these groups, they placed the Divine Light
Mission in the middle ground between movements in which recruits were love
bombed, or overwhelmed by waves of intense sentiment, and those in which
affective bonds were discouraged. They reported that close ties between
newcomers and DLM members developed gradually over a period of three to four
months, between initial contact and their attending a "Knowledge session", and
the emergent friendships were an important forum in which recruits aired doubts
and discussed DLM beliefs. These relationships thus supplemented a very
cognitive conversion process, in which active consideration of the movement's
ideas and beliefs was encouraged from the outset. They found little evidence to
suggest that social rewards were orchestrated by the movement, either in degree
or timing. Downton (1979), p. 210 According to Carroll Stoner and Jo Anne
Parke, when they visited an ashram the premies "appeared to be in control of
their own lives and seemed to be achieving some measure of peace as a by-
product of a lifestyle they feel is constructive and healthy". When the same
members attended an appearance by Prem Rawat a week later, "they lost control,
sobbed and swayed and knelt to kiss his feet." According to Foss and van der
Lans, members who joined before 1975 tended to be young people from the
counterculture who had used psychedelic drugs. Later members, they asserted,
were older and more responsible with ordinary jobs who were disillusioned with
conventional religions or other Eastern movements. A study of group
cohesiveness carried out by Marc Galanter in 1974, based on questionnaire
responses given by 119 DLM members randomly chosen from festival registration
lines, found that after two years involvement with DLM, members reported a
considerable decline in psychological distress and drug use compared to their
pre membership status. The study found that 45% of those surveyed had used
marijuana daily before joining, while only 7% did so at the time of the study.
Seventy-one percent reported psychological stress before joining compared to
37% at the time of the study. Overall, 38% had sought professional help for
psychological problems before joining. These observations led to what
Galanter's describes as "an apparent overall improvement in psychiatric state
derived from conversion and its retention through continued membership", and
that members, whether they were seriously distressed or not before joining,
reported an improved emotional state after joining. Galanter reports that 82%
of members surveyed were single, 97% were white, and 73% were in their
twenties. The percentage of these with Catholic or Protestant backgrounds
mirrored the general population, while there were ten times as many members
with Jewish backgrounds as in the general population (21% versus 2%). Three-
quarters of them had attended college. James V. Downton conducted a comparative
study of 41 DLM members from three US cities, 29 members of the Hare Krishna
movement and 40 college students. Among the DLM members the average age was 23
and ranged from 19 to 29. They came from middle-class backgrounds, all were
white and had attended an average of 1.5 years of college, similar to the Hare
Krishna sample, though DLM members were less likely to have come from broken
homes. Sixty-five percent of DLM members reported having religious experiences
while tripping on LSD. Overall, 95% of DLM members had used psychedelic drugs,
compared to 89% of Hare Krishna and 67% of the college student cohort. Compared
to the college students, fewer DLM members had had religious upbringings and
they tended to have had worse family experiences though only 17% came from
"broken homes". One member, writing in the 1970s said that followers were
"nagged to donate funds of their own" and some devotees signed pledges to
donate a dollar a day to provide the Mission with some reliable income. One
former accountant for the DLM said that new followers were asked to turn over
their entire savings, sometimes hundreds of thousands of dollars, and in
several cases their families contested the donations. He was quoted as saying
"it takes a lot of money to keep a guru." Bob Mishler, the mission's executive
director, talked one person into signing over power of attorney shortly after
she joined. Mishler was sacked by Rawat in 1976. Ashrams. In India. The Divine
Light Mission began creating ashrams in India in the 1960s, starting with a
small one in Rajasthan and a larger one called Satlok ("Place of Truth")
between Delhi and Haridwar. Khushwant Singh, who visited the Mission's
headquarters in Delhi in 1973 described it as being like a fortress with -high
walls, an iron grilled gate enclosing a courtyard and a complex of buildings
capable of housing 100 and with the capacity to feed 50,000 visitors on special
occasions. Singh also described "the lavish use of marble, wall-to-wall
carpets, chandeliers and modern furnishings" as evidence of affluence. In the
West. Only a small fraction of the overall DLM membership lived in organized
ashrams during its short history but several dozen ashrams were formed in the
U.S., Britain, Europe and Australia. Ashrams were run by "general secretaries"
appointed by the national office. Each ashram had a "house mother" who oversaw
cooking, washing, ironing, and food service but the normal isolation of the
housewife and cook became a communal, everyone-pitchin-and-help festival.
Followers ("premies") who lived in them often worked part or full time at
ordinary jobs and gave a sizable portion â€“ sometimes all â€“ of their income
to the movement. Ashrams typically had an associated business, such as a Divine
Sales outlet and a Divine Service Company. The ashram premies became the core
of the Mission in the United States, but the ashrams themselves were not a
source of income, never becoming more than self-sufficient. Followers wishing
to stay in the ashrams established by Rawat were required to fill out detailed
applications that focused on their trust funds, insurance policies, and other
assets. In Australia in the early 1970s a small percentage of premies lived in
ashrams. Some premies choose to live in an ashram for a couple of months, to
get into their meditation, and then moved out into households or shared houses.
Ashram rules demanded celibacy and abstinence from meat, alcohol, cigarettes
and drugs. Married people, as well as single, lived in ashrams and, in their
case, the practice of celibacy meant that they had sexual relations only with
their marital partner. About three hundred people chose to live in communal
houses and almost all households were non-smoking, non-drinking and vegetarian
and, in some, the finances and energies were pooled for the good of all. Each
household made its own decisions about life styles and often contained students
and married couples. In addition to the ashrams there were many more residences
with less formality. "Premie Centers", were households committed to the
Mission's activity that donated 30% of their income and followed dietary rules,
but that allowed married, non-celibate couples and children, and which weren't
subject to orders from the national Mission. "Premie houses" were informal
households (with as many as 30 followers) held together by their shared
commitments and values. Ashrams served as local coordinating centers for all
the local devotees. Carroll Stoner and Jo Anne Parke wrote in 1977 of their
visits to several ashrams that "there was no persuasion or cajoling for us to
become part of this group. We did feel a sense of calm and peace in the
ashrams. Marc Galanter, wrote in 1989 of his visit to a DLM ashram that â€”
Galanter (1999), p. 25 Reception. The Divine Light Mission was described in
various and sometimes conflicting terms. It was called a new religious
movement, a cult, a charismatic religious sect, an offshoot of Sant Mat, an
alternative religion or spin-off from other traditional religions, a youth
religion, a Radhasoami offshoot, an orthodox Sikh community, an Advait Mat
related tradition, a proselytizing religion ("Guru-ism"), and a defunct
religious movement. A study of terms used in U.S. newspapers and news
magazines, which examined the media's failure to use the more neutral
terminology favored by social scientists, found that the Divine Light Mission
was referred to as a "sect" in 10.3% of articles, as a "cult" in 24.1%, and as
both in 13.8%. It was referred to as a "sect" in 21.4% of headlines, with 0%
for "cult". The president and spokesman of the DLM said in 1977 that "they
represent a church rather than a religion". In some countries, the DLM faced
persecution and even banning. In 1972, in Argentina, as part of a crackdown on
small religious groups by the military junta, 87 members of the DLM were
arrested in Mar del Plata on charges of using drugs and practising their faith.
The DLM, the Hare Krisnas and the Jehovah's Witnesses were banned, reportedly
at the behest of the Roman Catholic Church. The Government Junta of Chile
(1973) arrested over 200 members, including 12 foreigners, in 1974. The DLM was
banned by Singapore authorities in the late 1980s. Bromley and Hammond
described the Divine Light Mission as belonging in a "medium tension category",
among movements that were seen by the public as peculiar rather than
threatening, and to which society responded with watchfulness and ostracism.
Psychiatrist Saul V. Levine wrote that the DLM, along with other groups such as
the Unification Church, was widely held in low esteem â€“ families felt their
children were being financially exploited while the groups' leaders lived in
"ostentation and offensive opulence." Ron Geaves states that the Divine Light
Mission "developed into a vigorous new religious movement with its own specific
traits that included characteristics of a contemporary North Indian Sant panth
(sectarian institution) and nirguna bhakti was combined with intense reverence
for the living satguru and millennial expectations of the western counter-
culture." According to sociologist Pilarzyk the youth culture response â€”
mainly from decidedly leftist political ideologies â€” was somewhat ambiguous,
combining indifference with some instances of overt hostility. Pilarzyk
mentioned that these criticisms usually focused on what they perceived as
phoniness of the "blissed-out premies", and referring to the "hocuspocus"
aspects of the meditation, and the "materialistic fixations" and physical
condition of the guru. These accounts are described by Pilarzyk as being quite
negative and full of distortions from the DLM's adherents point of view, which
drew responses from them that varied from bewilderment and amusement to extreme
defensiveness. Positive comments came from youth culture "folk heroes" as anti-
war activist as Rev. Daniel Berrigan, radical lawyer William Kunstler, and
singer-songwriter Cat Stevens. Summarizing his 1985 review of studies of a
number of new religious movements, such as The Jesus Movement, the Unification
Church, the Children of God group in Europe and the Divine Light Mission, James
T. Richardson stated that "life in the new religions is often therapeutic
instead of harmful", and suggested that the young people attracted to these
movements were affirming their idealism by their involvement. Richardson
asserted that his review found there was little data to support the almost
completely negative picture of these groups painted by a few mental health
professionals and others.
