Last Supper [[File:Última Cena - Da Vinci 5.jpg|thumb|400px|right| Depictions
of the Last Supper in Christian art have been undertaken by artistic masters
for centuries, Leonardo da Vinci's late 1490s mural painting in Milan, Italy,
being perhaps the best known example.]] The Last Supper is the final meal that,
according to Christian belief, Jesus shared with his Apostles in Jerusalem
before his crucifixion. The Last Supper is commemorated by Christians
especially on Maundy Thursday. Moreover, The Last Supper provides the
scriptural basis for the Eucharist, also known as "Holy Communion" or "The
Lord's Supper". The First Epistle to the Corinthians is the earliest known
mention of the Last Supper. The four canonical Gospels all state that the Last
Supper took place towards the end of the week, after Jesus' triumphal entry
into Jerusalem and that Jesus and his disciples shared a meal shortly before
Jesus was crucified at the end of that week. During the meal Jesus predicts his
betrayal by one of the disciples present, and foretells that, before next
morning, Peter will deny knowing him. The three Synoptic Gospels and the First
Epistle to the Corinthians include the account of the institution of the
Eucharist in which Jesus takes bread, breaks it and gives it to the disciples,
saying: "This is my body which is given for you". The Gospel of John does not
include this episode, but tells of Jesus washing the feet of the Apostles,
giving the new commandment "to love one another as I have loved you", and has a
detailed farewell discourse by Jesus, calling the Apostles who follow his
teachings "friends and not servants", as he prepares them for his departure.
Scholars have looked to the Last Supper as the source of early Christian
Eucharist traditions. Others see the account of the Last Supper as derived from
1st-century eucharistic practice as described by Paul in the mid-50s. The name
and its usage. The term "Last Supper" does not appear in the New Testament.
However, traditionally, many Christians refer to the New Testament accounts of
the last meal Jesus shared with his disciples as the Last Supper. The Last
Supper was likely a retelling of the events of the last meal of Jesus among the
early Christian community, and became a ritual which recounted that meal.
Anglicans and Presbyterians use the term "Lord's Supper", stating that the term
"last" suggests this was one of several meals and not "the" meal. The term
"Lord's Supper" refers both to the biblical event and the act of Eucharistic
celebration within liturgy. Many Protestants also use the term Lord's Supper.
The Eastern Orthodox use the term "Mystical Supper" which refers both to the
biblical event and the act of Eucharistic celebration within liturgy.
Scriptural basis. The last meal that Jesus shared with his disciples is
described in all four canonical Gospels, namely in , , and . This meal later
became known as the Last Supper. Paul's First Epistle to the Corinthians (),
which was likely written before the Gospels, includes a reference to the Last
Supper but emphasizes the theological basis rather than giving a detailed
description of the event or its background. Background and setting. The overall
narrative that is shared in all Gospel accounts that leads to the Last Supper
is that after the Triumphal entry into Jerusalem early in the week, and
encounters with various people and the Jewish elders, Jesus and his disciples
share a meal towards the end of the week. After the meal Jesus is betrayed,
arrested, tried and then crucified. Key events in the meal are the preparation
of the disciples for the departure of Jesus, the predictions about the
impending betrayal of Jesus, and the foretelling of the upcoming denial of
Jesus by Apostle Peter. Prediction of Judas' betrayal. In , , and during the
meal, Jesus predicted that one of his Apostles would betray him. Jesus is
described as reiterating, despite each Apostle's assertion that he would not
betray Jesus, that the betrayer would be one of those who were present, and
saying that there would be "woe to the man who betrays the Son of man! It would
be better for him if he had not been born." In and Judas is specifically
identified as the traitor. In the Gospel of John, when asked about the traitor
Jesus states: "He it is, for whom I shall dip the sop, and give it him. So when
he had dipped the sop, he taketh and giveth it to Judas, the son of Simon
Iscariot." Institution of the Eucharist. The Eucharist, which "is recorded as
celebrated by the early Christian community at Jerusalem and by St. Paul on his
visit to Troas", is held to have been instituted by Christ. The institution of
the Lord's Supper is recorded in the three Synoptic Gospels and in Paul's first
epistle to the Corinthians. The words of institution differ slightly in each
account, reflecting a Marcan tradition (upon which Matthew is based) and a
Pauline tradition (upon which Luke is based). In addition, Luke 22:19b-20 is a
disputed text, which does not appear in some of the early manuscripts of Luke.
Some scholars therefore believe that it is an interpolation, while others have
argued that it is original. A comparison of the accounts given in the Gospels
and 1 Corinthians is shown in the table below, with text from the ASV. The
disputed text from Luke 22:19b-20 is in italics. Jesus' actions in sharing the
bread and wine have been linked with Isaiah 53:12, which refers to a blood
sacrifice that, as recounted in Exodus 24:8, Moses offered in order to seal a
covenant with God: scholars often interpret the description of Jesus' action as
asking his disciples to consider themselves part of a sacrifice, where Jesus is
the one due to physically undergo it . Although the Gospel of John does not
include a description of the bread and wine ritual during the Last Supper, most
scholars agree that (the Bread of Life Discourse) has a Eucharistic nature and
resonates with the "words of institution" used in the Synoptic Gospels and the
Pauline writings on the Last Supper. Prediction of Peter's denial. In , , and
Jesus predicts that Peter will deny knowledge of him, stating that Peter will
disown him three times before the rooster crows the next morning. The three
Synoptic Gospels mention that after the arrest of Jesus Peter denied knowing
him three times, but after the third denial, heard the rooster crow and
recalled the prediction as Jesus turned to look at him. Peter then began to cry
bitterly. Elements unique to the Gospel of John. In John, Jesus has his last
supper and is executed not on the day Nisan 15 (the first night of Passover)
but on Nisan 14, when the Passover lambs were slaughtered. Presumably the
author preferred this date because it associated Jesus as the Lamb of God with
the sacrificial lambs of Passover. includes the account of the washing the feet
of the Apostles by Jesus before the meal. In this episode, Apostle Peter
objects and does not want to allow Jesus to wash his feet, but Jesus answers
him, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me." after which Peter agrees.
In the Gospel of John, after the departure of Judas from the Last Supper, Jesus
tells his remaining eleven disciples () that he will be with them for only a
short time, then gives them a New Commandment, stating: "A new commandment I
give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love
one another. By this shall all "men" know that ye are my disciples, if ye have
love one to another." in . Two similar statements also appear later in : "This
is my commandment, that ye love one another, even as I have loved you." and :
"These things I command you, that ye may love one another." At the Last Supper
in the Gospel of John, Jesus gives an extended sermon to his disciples. This
discourse resemble farewell speeches called testaments, in which a father or
religious leader, often on the deathbed, leaves instructions for his children
or followers. This sermon is referred to as the Farewell discourse of Jesus,
and has historically been considered a source of Christian doctrine,
particularly on the subject of Christology. is generally known as the "Farewell
Prayer" or the "High Priestly Prayer", given that it is an intercession for the
coming Church. The prayer begins with Jesus' petition for his glorification by
the Father, given that completion of his work and continues to an intercession
for the success of the works of his disciples and the community of his
followers. Time and place. Date. In the New Testament, the date of the Last
Supper is very close to the date of the crucifixion of Jesus (hence its name).
Scholarly estimates for the date of the crucifixion generally fall in the range
AD 30-36. Physicist Colin Humphreys rules out the year 36 on astronomical
grounds, and adduces other grounds for holding that the crucifixion of Jesus
occurred in the afternoon of Friday 3 April 33 and that this was 14 Nisan in
the official Jewish calendar that year. The Gospels say that Jesus died on a
Friday and that his body was left in the tomb for the whole of the next day,
which was a Sabbath (Saturday). The Synoptic Gospels present as a Passover meal
the Last Supper, the meal that they seem to present as held on the evening
before the crucifixion (although in no Gospel is it unequivocally said that
this meal took place on the night before Jesus died). This would mean that the
Passover feast (15 Nisan) began at sunset on what now would commonly be called
Thursday evening and lasted until sunset on Friday (the Jewish calendar reckons
a date as beginning at sunset, not at midnight). On the contrary, the Gospel of
John presents the feast as beginning on the evening "following" the afternoon
death of Jesus. This would mean that the Friday of the crucifixion was the day
of preparation for the feast (14 Nisan), not the feast itself. Various attempts
to reconcile these two accounts have been made, some of which are indicated in
the article on the Last Supper by Francis Mershman in the 1912 Catholic
Encyclopedia. In the 1950s Annie Jaubert argued that, while in the year of
Jesus' death the official lunar calendar had Passover begin on a Friday
evening, a 364-day year was also used, for instance by the Qumran community,
and that Jesus celebrated the Passover on the date given in that calendar,
which always had the feast begin on Tuesday evening. More recently, Humphreys,
who holds that the "Palm Sunday" entry of Jesus into Jerusalem occurred on
Monday, not Sunday, argued that the Last Supper took place on the evening of
Wednesday 1 April 33. If the Last Supper was on Tuesday (Jaubert) or Wednesday
(Humphreys), this would allow more time than in the traditional view (Last
Supper on Thursday) for interrogation of Jesus and his presentation to Pilate
before he was crucified on Friday. Location. According to later tradition, the
Last Supper took place in what is called today The Room of the Last Supper on
Mount Zion, just outside of the walls of the Old City of Jerusalem, and is
traditionally known as "The Upper Room". This is based on the account in the
Synoptic Gospels that states that Jesus had instructed a pair of unnamed
disciples to go to "the city" to meet "a man carrying a jar of water", who
would lead them to a house, where they would find "a large upper room furnished
and ready". In this upper room they "prepare the Passover". No more specific
indication of the location is given in the New Testament, and the "city"
referred to may be a suburb of Jerusalem, such as Bethany, rather than
Jerusalem itself. The traditional location is in an area that, according to
archaeology, had a large Essene community, a point made by scholars who suspect
a link between Jesus and the group (Kilgallen 265). Saint Mark's Syrian
Orthodox Church in Jerusalem is another possible site for the room in which the
Last Supper was held, and contains a Christian stone inscription testifying to
early reverence for that spot. Certainly the room they have is older than that
of the current coenaculum (crusader - 12th century) and as the room is now
underground the relative altitude is correct (the streets of 1st century
Jerusalem were at least twelve feet (3.6 metres) lower than those of today, so
any true building of that time would have even its upper storey currently under
the earth). They also have a revered Icon of the Virgin Mary, reputedly painted
from life by St Luke. Bargil Pixner claims the original Church of the Apostles
is located under the current structure of the Cenacle on Mount Zion. Theology
of the Last Supper. St. Thomas Aquinas viewed The Father, Christ, and the Holy
Spirit as teachers and masters who provide lessons, at times by example. For
Aquinas the Last Supper and the Cross form the summit of the teaching that
wisdom flows from intrinsic grace, rather than external power. For Aquinas, at
the Last Supper Christ taught by example, showing the value of humility (as
reflected in John's foot washing narrative) and self-sacrifice, rather than by
exhibiting external, miraculous powers. And Aquinas stated that based on (in
the Farewell discourse) in which Jesus said: "No longer do I call you servants;
... but I have called you friends" those who follow the path Christ, and
partake in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, become his friends, as those
gathered at the table of the Last Supper. For Aquinas, at the Last Supper
Christ made the promise to be present in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and be
with those who partake in it, as he was with those at the Last Supper. Given
that John Calvin believed only in the two sacraments of Baptism and the "Lord's
Supper" (i.e. Eucharist), his analysis of the Gospel accounts of the Last
Supper were an important part of his entire theology. Calvin related the
Synoptic Gospel accounts of the Last Supper with the Bread of Life Discourse in
that states: "I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will never go hungry."
Calvin also believed that the acts of Jesus at the Last Supper should be
followed as an example, stating that just as in Jesus gave thanks to the Father
before breaking the bread, those who go to the "Lord's Table" to receive the
sacrament of the Eucharist must give thanks for the "boundless love of God" and
celebrate the sacrament with both joy and thanksgiving. Remembrances. The
institution of the Eucharist at the Last Supper is remembered by Roman
Catholics as one of the Luminous Mysteries of the Rosary, the First Station of
the Scriptural Way of the Cross and by most Christians as the "inauguration of
the New Covenant", mentioned by the prophet Jeremiah, fulfilled at the last
supper when Jesus "took bread, and after blessing it broke it and gave it to
them, and said, 'Take; this is my body.' And he took a cup, and when he had
given thanks he gave it to them, and they all drank of it. And he said to them,
'This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many.'" Other
Christian groups consider the Bread and Wine remembrance to be a change to the
Passover ceremony, as Jesus Christ has become "our Passover, sacrificed for us"
(I Corinthians 5:7), and hold that partaking of the Passover Communion (or
fellowship) is now the sign of the New Covenant, when properly understood by
the practicing believer. These meals evolved into more formal worship services
and became codified as the Mass in the Catholic Church, and as the Divine
Liturgy in the Eastern Orthodox Church; at these liturgies, Catholics and
Eastern Orthodox celebrate the Sacrament of the Eucharist. The name "Eucharist"
is from the Greek word "εὐχαριστία" (eucharistia) which means
"thanksgiving". Early Christianity observed a ritual meal known as the "agape
feast" These "love feasts" were apparently a full meal, with each participant
bringing food, and with the meal eaten in a common room. They were held on
Sundays, which became known as the Lord's Day, to recall the resurrection, the
appearance of Christ to the disciples on the road to Emmaus, the appearance to
Thomas and the Pentecost which all took place on Sundays after the Passion.
Possible parallels. Raymond Brown has argued that during the Jewish Passover
Seder, the first cup of wine is drunk before the eating of the (unleavened)
bread, but here it occurs after. This may indicate that the event was not the
first Passover Seder (which occurs on Nisan 15), and hence more in line with
John's chronology which places it on Nisan 14, although the meal could easily
have been altered during the Last Supper for symbolic or religious purposes.
Among Christian denominations, the Eastern Orthodox Church holds that this
Eucharistic meal was not the Passover Seder, but a separate meal. The
Presbyterian Church documents also specifically rejects the Seder arguments and
state that given that no Jewish Seder texts exist earlier than the 9th century,
it is historically implausible to attempt a reconstruction of the Seder to
create a parallel to the Last Supper, and that the Gospel accounts clearly
indicate that the purpose of the Last Supper was not the annual repetition of
the Exodus. The fifth chapter in Quran, "Al-Ma'ida" (the table) contains a
reference to a meal (Sura 5:113) with a table sent down from God to ʿĪsá
(i.e. Jesus) and the apostles (Hawariyyin). However, there is nothing in Sura
5:113 to indicate that Jesus was celebrating that meal regarding his impending
death. Thus although, Sura 5:113 refers to "a meal", there is no indication
that it is the Last Supper. Historicity. Some scholars consider the Lord's
supper to have derived not from Jesus' last supper with the disciples but
rather from the gentile tradition of memorial dinners for the dead. In this
view, the Last Supper is a tradition associated mainly with the gentile
churches that Paul established, rather than with the earlier, Jewish
congregations. Luke is the only Gospel in which Jesus tells his disciples to
repeat the ritual of bread and wine. Bart D. Ehrman states that these
particular lines do not appear in certain ancient manuscripts and might not be
original to the text. However, many early Church Fathers have attested to the
belief that at the Last Supper, Christ made the promise to be present in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, with attestations dating back to the first century
AD. The teaching was also affirmed by many councils throughout the Church's
history. Artistic depictions. The Last Supper has been a popular subject in
Christian art. Depictions of the Last Supper in Christian art date back to
early Christianity and can be seen in the Catacombs of Rome. Byzantine artists
frequently focused on the Apostles receiving Communion, rather than the
reclining figures having a meal. By the Renaissance, the Last Supper was a
favorite topic in Italian art. There are three major themes in the depictions
of the last supper. The first theme is the dramatic and dynamic depiction of
Jesus' announcement of his betrayal. The second theme is the moment of the
institution of the tradition of the Eucharist. The depictions here are
generally solemn and mystical. The third major theme is the farewell of Jesus
to his disciples, in which Judas Iscariot is no longer present, having left the
supper. The depictions here are generally melancholy, as Jesus prepares his
disciples for his departure. There are also other, less frequently depicted
scenes, such as the washing of the feet of the disciples. Well known examples
include Leonardo da Vinci's depiction, which is considered the first work of
High Renaissance art due to its high level of harmony, Tintoretto's depiction
which is unusual in that it includes secondary characters carrying or taking
the dishes from the table and Salvadore Dali's depiction combines the typical
Christian themes with modern approaches of Surrealism.
