Menachem Mendel Schneerson Menachem Mendel Schneerson (April 5, 1902 OS¬ ‚Äì
June 12, 1994 NS), known as the Lubavitcher Rebbe or just the Rebbe among his
followers, was a prominent Hasidic rabbi who was the seventh and last Rebbe
(Hasidic leader) of the Chabad-Lubavitch movement. He was fifth in a direct
paternal line to the third Chabad-Lubavitch Rebbe, Menachem Mendel Schneersohn.
In January 1951, a year after the death of his father-in-law, Rabbi Yosef
Yitzchok Schneersohn, he assumed the leadership of the Lubavitch movement. He
led the movement until his death in 1994, greatly expanding its worldwide
activities and founding a worldwide network of institutions to spread Orthodox
Judaism among the Jewish people. These institutions include schools,
kindergartens, synagogues, Chabad houses, and others, and are run under the
auspices of Merkos L'Inyonei Chinuch, the educational branch of the Chabad
movement. During his lifetime many of his followers had considered him to be
the Jewish Messiah. Early life. Birth and early years. The accepted date of his
birth is 11 Nissan 5662, which is equivalent to April 5, 1902 OS or April 18,
1902 NS. (Dates in March 1895 appear on his Russian passport and his
application for French citizenship, he swore on his 1941 visa application that
he "was born on the 1st day of March 1895 at Nicolaev, Kherson, Soviet Union"
(now Mykolaiv, Ukraine) and was already "46 years of age" in 1941, and he
affirmed on his U.S. draft registration card that he was 47 during World War
Two and was born in "Nicolaav" on "Mar 1 1895". These statements are not
considered credible evidence of his true date of birth because Jews born under
the czars may have needed to claim false ages to avoid the Russian army draft.)
Schneerson was the eldest of three sons of Levi Yitzchak Schneerson, an
authority on Kabbalah and Jewish law who served as the rabbi of Yekaterinoslav
from 1907 to 1939. He had two younger brothers, Dov Ber and Yisroel Aryeh Leib,
both of whom were reported to be of unusual character. His younger brother Dov
Ber was mentally disturbed from childhood and spent his years in an institution
for the mentally disabled near Nikolaiev. He died in 1944 at the hands of Nazi
collaborators. The youngest, Yisrael Aryeh Leib Schneerson, was close to his
brother, and often traveled with him. He was widely viewed as a genius and
studied science. In the late 1920s he became a Communist, later becoming a
Trotskyite. After he left the Soviet union he stopped being an observant Jew.
He changed his name to Mark Gourary and moved to Israel where he became a
businessman, but later moved to England where he began doctoral studies at
Liverpool University but died in 1952 before he completed them. His wife died
in 1996 and his children‚ÄîSchneerson's closest living relatives‚Äîcurrently
reside in Israel. Early education. During his youth, Rabbi Schneerson received
mostly private Jewish education. He was tutored by Zalman Vilenkin from 1909
through 1913. In 1977, he said of Vilenkin: ‚ÄúHe taught me and my brothers
Chumash, Rashi and Talmud. He put me on my feet. He was an illustrious
Jew...‚Äù When Schneerson was eleven years old, Vilenkin informed the boy's
father that he had nothing more to teach his son. Rabbi Schneerson later
studied independently under his father, who was his primary teacher. He studied
Talmud and rabbinic literature, as well as the Hasidic view of Kabbalah. He
received separate rabbinical ordinations from both the Rogatchover Gaon, Yosef
Rosen, and from Rabbi Yechiel Yaakov Weinberg (also known as the "Sridei
Aish"). Rabbi Schneerson's mother said her son never attended any Soviet
school, though he took the exams as an external student and did well on them
According to Avrum Ehrlich, he immersed himself in Jewish studies while
simultaneously qualifying for Russian secondary school. Throughout his
childhood Rabbi Schneerson was involved in the affairs of his father's office,
where his secular education and knowledge of the Russian language were useful
in assisting his father's public administrative work. He was also said to have
acted as an interpreter between the Jewish community and the Russian
authorities on a number of occasions. Early travels and marriage. In 1923 Rabbi
Schneerson visited Yosef Yitzchok Schneersohn for the first time. It was
presumably at that time that he met Schneersohn's middle daughter, Chaya
Mushka. He became engaged to her in Riga in 1923 and married her five years
later in 1928, after being away in Berlin. He returned to Warsaw for his
wedding, and in an article about his wedding in a Warsaw newspaper, "a number
of academic degrees" were attributed to him. Following the marriage, the
newlyweds went to live in Berlin. The marriage was long and happy (60 years),
but childless. Schneerson and Yosef Yitzchok Schneersohn are related through
Tzemach Tzedek, the third Rebbe of Chabad Lubavitch. Berlin. Studies.
Schneerson studied mathematics, physics and philosophy in Berlin, Germany for
five semesters from mid-1928 through 1930. Professor Menachem Friedman found
his records amongst the students who "audited courses at the university without
receiving academic credit." Whilst there, he wrote hundreds of pages of
original Torah discourses, subsequently published as "Reshimot, " and
corresponded with his father on Torah matters, which were published in the
1970s in the book "Likuttei Levi Yitzchak‚ÄîLetters". During his stay in
Berlin, R. Schneerson was assigned specific communal tasks by his father-in-
law, Rabbi Yosef Yitzchok Schneersohn, who also requested that he write
scholarly annotations to the responsa of Tzemach Tzedek. Yosef Yitzchok
Schneersohn also sought his annotations to various hasidic discourses. It was
during this period, between 1928 and 1932, that there took place a serious
interchange of halachic correspondence between R. Schneerson and the famed
talmudic genius known as the Rogachover Gaon. This correspondence is indicative
of Schneerson's talmudic erudition at the time. In 1933 he also met with Rabbi
Chaim Elazar Shapiro, as well as with famed talmudist Rabbi Shimon Shkop. With
his brother. His brother, Yisroel Aryeh Leib (known to Lubavitchers as 'Leibel'
and to others by his secular name, 'Liova'), joined him in Berlin in 1931,
traveling with false papers under the name 'Mark Gurary' to escape the Soviets.
He arrived and was cared for by his brother and sister-in-law as he was
seriously ill with typhoid fever. Leibel attended classes at the University of
Berlin from 1931 to 1933. In 1933, after Hitler took over Germany and began
instituting anti-Semitic policies, Mendel and his wife helped Leibel escape
from Berlin, before themselves fleeing to Paris. Leibel escaped to Mandate
Palestine in 1939 with his fiancee Regina Milgram, where they later married.
Despite Leibel's secularism, the two brothers maintained a relationship.
Encounters with Rabbi J. B. Soloveitchik. Some students of Rabbi Joseph B.
Soloveitchik, have asserted that Rabbi Schneerson met Soloveitchik while they
were studying in Berlin. Soloveitchik's daughter Dr. Atarah Twersky recalls
Soloveitchik saying that Rabbi Schneerson visited her father in his apartment
and the former asked the latter why he was studying in Berlin if his father-in-
law was opposed to it. Other sources deny this. According to Soloveitchik's son
Rabbi Dr. Haym Soloveitchik, Rabbi Soloveitchik only saw Rabbi Schneerson pass
by in Berlin and they did not meet while there. In 1964, Soloveitchik paid a
lengthy visit while Rabbi Schneerson was mourning the death of his mother.
Their conversation during this visit lasted approximately two hours.
Soloveitchik later visited again following the death of Rabbi Schneerson's
mother-in-law. In 1980, Soloveitchik attended a celebration marking 30 years of
Rabbi Schneerson's leadership at the Lubavitch headquarters in Brooklyn New
York. This visit lasted almost two hours. France. In 1933,Rabbi Schneerson
moved to Paris, France. He studied mechanics and electrical engineering at the
"√âcole sp√©ciale des travaux publics, du b√¢timent et de l'industrie" (ESTP),
a Grandes √©coles in the Montparnasse district. He graduated in July 1937 and
received a license to practice as an electrical engineer. In November 1937, he
enrolled at the Sorbonne, where he studied mathematics until World War II broke
out in 1939. Schneerson lived most of the time in Paris at 9 "Rue Boulard" in
the 14th arrondissement, in the same building as his wife's sister, Shaina, and
her husband, Mendel Hornstein, who was also studying at ESTP. Mendel Hornstein
failed the final exams and he and his wife returned to Poland; they were
murdered at Treblinka in late 1942. On June 11, 1940, three days before Paris
fell to the Nazis, the Schneersons fled to Vichy, and later to Nice, where they
stayed until their final escape from Europe. Rabbi Schneerson learned to speak
French, which he put to use in establishing his movement there after the war.
The Chabad movement in France later attracted many Jewish immigrants from
Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia. America and leadership. Escape from Europe. In
1941, Rabbi Schneerson escaped from Europe on the Serpa Pinto, which embarked
from Lisbon, Portugal. It was one of the last boats to cross the Atlantic
before the U-boat blockade began, and joined his father-in-law, Rabbi Yosef
Yitzchok Schneersohn, in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, New York.
Seeking to contribute to the war effort, he went to work in the Brooklyn Navy
Yard, drawing wiring for the battleship USS Missouri (BB-63), and other
classified military work. Rise in America. In 1942, his father-in-law appointed
him director of the Chabad movement's newly-founded central organizations,
placing him at the helm of building the movement's Jewish educational, social
services, and publishing networks across the United States, Israel, Africa,
Europe and Australia. However, Schneerson kept a low public profile within the
movement. He would speak publicly only once a month, delivering talks to his
father-in-law's followers. During the 1940s, Rabbi Schneerson became a
naturalized US citizen. For many years to come, he would speak about America's
special place in the world, and would argue that the bedrock of the United
States' power and uniqueness came from its foundational values, which were,
according to Rabbi Schneerson, '"E pluribus unum'‚Äîfrom many one", and "In God
we trust." In 1949, his father-in-law would become a U.S. citizen, with the
Rebbe assisting to coordinate the event. A special dispensation was arranged
wherein the federal judge came to "770" to officiate at Rabbi Yoseph Yitzchak's
citizenship proceedings, rather than the wheelchair-bound Rebbe travel to a
courthouse for the proceedings. Uniquely, the event was recorded on color
motion film. Candidate for Rebbe. Rabbi Yosef Yitzchok Schneersohn died in
1950. The two main candidates for leadership were Rabbi M. Schneerson and Rabbi
Shemaryahu Gurary, Rabbi Y. Schneersohn's elder son-in-law. Rabbi M. Schneerson
actively refused to accept leadership of the movement for the entire year after
Rabbi Y. Schneersohn's death, but was eventually cajoled into accepting the
post by his wife and followers. On the first anniversary of his father-in-law's
passing, 10 Shevat 1951, he delivered a Hasidic discourse, "(Ma'amar)", and
formally became the Rebbe. Activities as Rebbe. Jewish outreach. Rabbi
Schneerson believed that the American public was seeking to learn more about
their Jewish heritage. He stated, "America is not lost, you are not different.
You Americans sincerely crave to know, to learn. Americans are inquisitive. It
is Chabad's point of view that the American mind is simple, honest,
direct‚Äîgood, tillable soil for Hassidism, or just plain Judaism". Rabbi
Schneerson believed that Jews need not be on the defensive, but need to be on
the ground building Jewish institutions, day schools and synagogues. Rabbi
Schneerson said that we need "to discharge ourselves of our duty and we must
take the initiative". Rabbi Schneerson placed a tremendous emphasis on
outreach. He made great efforts to intensify this program of the Chabad
movement, bringing Jews from all walks of life to adopt Torah-observant
Judaism, and aggressively sought the expansion of the baal teshuva movement.
His work included organizing the training of thousands of young Chabad rabbis
and their wives, who were sent all over the world by him as "shluchim"
(emissaries) to promote Jewish observance and education. He oversaw the
building of schools, community centers, youth camps, and "Chabad Houses", and
established contacts with wealthy Jews and government officials around the
world. Rabbi Schneerson also instituted a system of "Chabad mitzvah campaigns"
called "mivtzoim" to encourage Jews to follow Orthodox Jewish practices. They
commonly centered on practices such as keeping kosher, lighting Shabbat
candles, studying Torah, putting on tefillin, helping to write sifrei Torah,
and teaching women to observe the laws of Jewish family purity. He also
launched a global Noahide campaign to promote observance of the Noahide Laws
among gentiles, and argued that involvement in this campaign is an obligation
for every Jew. Political activities. Israel. Rabbi Schneerson never visited the
State of Israel, where he had many admirers. However, many among Israel's top
leadership made it a point to visit him. One of Israel's presidents, Zalman
Shazar, who was of Lubavitch ancestry, would visit Schneerson and corresponded
extensively with him. Menachem Begin, Ariel Sharon, Yitzhak Rabin, Moshe
Katzav, and later, Benjamin Netanyahu - who was present at his funeral - also
paid visits and sought advice, along with numerous other less famous
politicians, diplomats, military officials, and media producers. In the
elections that brought Yitzhak Shamir to power, Schneerson publicly lobbied his
followers and the Orthodox members in the Knesset to vote against the Labor
alignment. It attracted the media's attention and led to articles in "Time",
"Newsweek", and many newspapers and TV programs, and led to considerable
controversy within Israeli politics. He lobbied Israeli politicians to pass
legislation in accordance with Jewish religious law on the question "Who is a
Jew?" and declare that "only one who is born of a Jewish mother or converted
according to Halakha is Jewish." This caused a furor in the United States. Some
American Jewish philanthropies stopped financially supporting Chabad-Lubavitch
since most of their members were connected to Reform and Conservative Judaism.
These unpopular ideas were toned down by his aides, according to Avrum Erlich.
"The issue was eventually quietened so as to protect Chabad fund-raising
interests. Controversial issues such as territorial compromise in Israel that
might have estranged benefactors from giving much-needed funds to Chabad, were
often moderated, particularly by...Krinsky." Rabbi Immanuel Jakobovits argued
that Chabad moderated its presentation of anti-Zionist ideology and right-wing
politics in England and downplayed its messianic fervor so as not to antagonize
large parts of the English Jewish community. Iran. Beginning in the winter of
1979, during the tumultuous days of the Islamic Revolution in Iran, Rabbi
Schneerson directed his emissaries to make arrangements to rescue Jewish
teenagers from Iran and place them in foster homes within the Lubavitcher
community in Brooklyn. This mission, while not political in nature, was
originally started as a secretive quest in order not to jeopardize the safety
of the Iranian Jewish community at large. Many of Rabbi Schneerson's followers
in Brooklyn were asked to open their homes to these Jewish children and help
save their lives from another potential Holocaust in the making. The new
Islamic government in Iran was vocally opposed to the existence of Israel and
created a genuine concern in world Jewish circles by accusing many in the
Jewish community of being Zionists. The execution of the leader of the Iranian
Jewish community, Habib Elghanian, had made this a tangible threat to the very
existence of the community. Ultimately, while more than a dozen members of the
Jewish community were executed by the new Iranian government, Jews were allowed
to continue to live in Iran and there would be no Holocaust. Hundreds of Jewish
children from Tehran and other major cities in Iran were flown from Tehran to
New York with the help of Schneerson's emissaries, placed in foster homes in
Crown Heights and educated in Chabad schools. Many would adopt the Lubavitcher
lifestyle and later, some even served as Chabad emissaries and religious
leaders. Many others would later reunite with their biological parents after
their parents and other family members emigrated to the United States.
Scholarship. Rabbi Schneerson is known for his scholarship both in the Talmud
and hidden parts of the Torah (both Kabbalah and Chasidus). He is especially
renowned for his insights on, and analysis of Rashi's Torah commentary. In
halachic matters, he normally deferred to members of the Crown Heights "Beth
Din" headed by Rabbi Zalman Shimon Dvorkin, and advised the movement to do
likewise in the event of his death. While Rabbi Schneerson rarely chose to
involve himself with questions of "halakha" (Jewish law), some notable
exceptions were with regard to the use of electrical appliances on Shabbat,
sailing on Israeli boats staffed by Jews, and halakhic dilemmas related to
certain religious observances which may arise when crossing the International
Date Line. Public addresses. Rabbi Schneerson was known for delivering regular
lengthy addresses to his followers at public gatherings, "in precise Yiddish
without a text or even any notes". These talks usually centered on the weekly
Torah portion and were then transcribed by followers known as "choizerim" and
distributed widely. Many of them were later edited by him and distributed
worldwide in small booklets, later to be compiled in the "Likkutei Sichot" set.
He also penned tens of thousands of replies to requests and questions. The
majority of his correspondence is printed in "Igrot Kodesh", partly translated
as "Letters from the Rebbe". His correspondence fills more than two hundred
published volumes. "770". Rabbi Schneerson rarely left Crown Heights in
Brooklyn except for frequent lengthy visits to his father-in-law's gravesite in
Queens, New York. A year after the death of his wife, Chaya Mushka, in 1988,
when the traditional year of Jewish mourning had passed, he moved into his
study above the central Lubavitch synagogue at 770 Eastern Parkway. It was from
this location that Rabbi Schneerson directed his emissaries' work and managed
the movement's development. His public roles included celebrations called
"farbrengens" (gatherings) on Shabbats, Jewish holy days, and special days on
the Chabad calendar, when he would give lengthy sermons to crowds. In later
years, these would often be broadcast on cable television and via satellite to
Lubavitch branches around the world. Later life. Illness. In 1977, Rabbi
Schneerson suffered a massive heart attack while celebrating the "hakafot"
ceremony on Shemini Atzeret. Despite the best efforts of his doctors to
convince him to change his mind, he refused to be hospitalized. This
necessitated building a mini-hospital in his headquarters at "770." Although he
did not appear again in public for many weeks, Rabbi Schneerson continued to
deliver talks and discourses from his study via intercom. His chief
cardiologist, Dr. Ira Weiss, later stated that despite his own protestations
against the Rebbe's being treated in 770, in retrospect, it had turned out to
be the correct decision, and "the Rebbe, in fact received better medical care
in 770 than he would have had we taken him to the hospital." On Rosh Chodesh
Kislev, he left his study for the first time in more than a month to go home.
His followers celebrate this day as a holiday each year. Honors. On March 25,
1983, on the occasion of his 80th birthday, the United States Congress
proclaimed Rabbi Schneerson's birthday as "Education Day, USA," and awarded him
the National Scroll of Honor. "Sunday Dollars". As the Chabad movement grew and
more demands were placed on Rabbi Schneerson's time, he limited his practice of
meeting followers individually in his office. After his heart attack in 1977,
he reduced the frequency of his twice-weekly practice of all-night
"Yechidut"‚Äîprivate audiences with whomever would request an appointment, and
from then until 1982 only foreign visitors, and families with a momentous
occasion such as a wedding or bar-mitzva were allowed private meetings
‚Äîthough community leaders and Israeli government officials would also still
occasionally meet with the Rebbe in private for lengthy discussions. These
private audiences had generally taken place on Sundays and Thursdays, starting
at 8pm and often continuing until 8am. At such private audiences he would meet
over three thousand people. In 1986,Rabbi Schneerson again began to regularly
greet people individually. This time, the personal meetings took the form of a
weekly receiving line in "770". Almost every Sunday, thousands of people would
line up to meet briefly with Schneerson and receive a one-dollar bill, which
was to be donated to charity. People filing past Schneerson would often take
this opportunity to ask him for advice or to request a blessing. This event is
usually referred to as "Sunday Dollars." Beginning in 1989, these events were
recorded on videotape. Posthumously, hundreds of thousands these encounters
have been posted online for public access. Death of his wife. Following the
death of his wife in 1988, Schneerson withdrew from some public functions. For
example, he stopped delivering addresses during weekdays, instead holding
gatherings every Shabbat. He later edited these addresses, which have since
been released in the "Sefer HaSichos" set. According to Ehrlich, towards the
end of his life, particularly after his heart attack in 1977, Schneerson's
scholarship began to fade. He writes that one of Schneerson's editors, David
Olidort, "told how most of Rabbi Schneerson‚Äôs aides and editors adored him
and saw him as virtually infallible, despite their numerous corrections of his
failing scholarship." Final years. "Moshiach" (Messiah) fervor. Some of Rabbi
Schneerson's followers believed he was the Jewish Messiah, the "Moshiach," and
have persisted in that belief since his death. The reverence with which he was
treated by followers led many Jewish critics from both the Conservative and
Reform communities to allege that a cult of personality had grown up around
him. His obituary in the New York Times said he "was attacked by Jews both to
the right and the left of him," for different reasons. But the New York Times
said "from both sides, Rabbi Schneerson was attacked for allowing a cult of
personality to grow around him." Moshe D. Sherman, an associate professor at
Touro College wrote that "as Schneerson's empire grew, a personality cult
developed around him... portraits of Rabbi Schneerson were placed in all
Lubavitch homes, shops, and synagogues, and devoted followers routinely
requested a blessing from him prior to their marriage, following an illness, or
at other times of need." His own stated goals. From his childhood and
throughout the years of his leadership, the Rebbe explained that his goal was
to "make the world a better place," and to eliminate suffering. In 1954, in a
letter to Yitzchak Ben Tzvi, Israel's second President, the Rebbe wrote: "From
the time that I was a child attending cheder, and even before, the vision of
the future Redemption began to take form in my imagination ‚Äì the Redemption
of the Jewish People from their final Exile, a redemption of such magnitude and
grandeur through which the purpose of the suffering, the harsh decrees and
annihilation of Exile will be understood... " Final declarations. In 1991, he
declared to his followers: "I have done everything I can bring "Moshiach", now
I am handing over to you mission; do everything you can to bring "Moshiach"!" A
campaign was then started to usher in the Messianic age through "acts of
goodness and kindness," and some of his followers placed advertisements in the
mass media, including many full-page ads in the "New York Times", declaring in
Rabbi Schneerson's name that the "Moshiach"'s arrival was imminent, and urging
everyone to prepare for and hasten it by increasing their good deeds. Crown
Heights riot. In 1991, Schneerson was indirectly involved in the start of a
riot in his neighborhood of Crown Heights. The riot began when a car
accompanying his motorcade‚Äîreturning from one of his regular cemetery visits
to his father-in-law's grave‚Äîaccidentally struck two seven-year-old African
American children, killing one boy. In the rioting, Australian-born Jewish
graduate student Yankel Rosenbaum was murdered, many Lubavitchers were badly
beaten, and much property was destroyed; also, rioters hurled rocks and bottles
at the Jews over police lines. Final illness. In 1992, Schneerson suffered a
serious stroke while praying at the grave of his father-in-law. The stroke left
him unable to speak and paralyzed on the right side of his body. Nonetheless,
he continued to respond daily to thousands of queries and requests for
blessings from around the world. His secretaries would read the letters to him
and he would indicate his response with head and hand motions. During this
time, the belief in Schneerson as the Messiah (Moshiach) became more
widespread. Despite his deteriorating health, Schneerson once again refused to
leave "770". Several months into his illness, a small room with tinted glass
windows and an attached balcony was built overlooking the main synagogue. This
allowed Rabbi Schneerson to pray with his followers, beginning with the Rosh
Hashanah services, and to appear before them after services either by having
the window opened or by being carried out onto the balcony. His final illness
led to a split between two groups of aides who differed in their
recommendations as to how Schneerson should be treated, with the two camps led
by Leib Groner and Yehuda Krinsky. Aides argued over whether Schneerson had the
same physical makeup as other humans, and if the illness should be allowed to
run its course without interference. Krinsky argued that the latest and most
suitable medical treatment available should be used in treating Schneerson,
while Groner thought that "outside interference in ‚Äôs medical situation might
be just as dangerous as inaction. They saw his illness as an element in the
messianic revelation; interference with Schneerson‚Äôs physical state might
therefore affect the redemptive process, which should instead be permitted to
run its natural course." Death and burial. Schneerson died at the Beth Israel
Medical Center on June 12, 1994 (3 Tammuz 5754) and was buried at the Ohel next
to his teacher and father-in-law, Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak Schneersohn, at
Montefiore Cemetery in Queens, New York, in 1994. The "Ohel" had been built
around the previous Rebbe's grave in 1950. Ohel Chabad-Lubavitch Center. Soon
after Schneerson's death, philanthropist Joseph Gutnick of Melbourne, Australia
established the Ohel Chabad-Lubavitch Center on Francis Lewis Boulevard,
Queens, New York, which is located adjacent to the Rebbe's Ohel. Following the
age-old Jewish tradition of turning the resting place of a "tzadik" into a
place of prayer, thousands of people flock to the Rebbe's resting place every
week. Many more send faxes and e-mails with requests for prayers to be read at
the grave site. U.S. Government awards. Starting with President Carter in 1978,
the U.S. Congress and President have issued proclamations each year, declaring
that Rabbi Schneerson's birthday ‚Äî usually a day in March or April that
coincides with his recognized Hebrew calendar birthdate of 11 Nissan ‚Äî be
observed as Education and Sharing Day in the United States. The Rebbe would
usually respond with a public address on the importance of education in modern
society, and holding forth on the United States' special role in the world.
Honored by Congress. After Schneerson's death, a bill was introduced in the
U.S. House of Representatives‚Äîsponsored by Congressman Charles Schumer and
cosponsored by John Lewis, Newt Gingrich, and Jerry Lewis, as well as 220 other
Congressmen‚Äîto posthumously bestow upon Schneerson the Congressional Gold
Medal. Other posthumous commendations. In 2009, the National Museum of American
Jewish History selected Schneerson as one of eighteen American Jews to be
included in their "Only in America" Hall of Fame. Controversy. Wills. There is
considerable controversy within Chabad about Schneerson's will. It is widely
accepted that two wills exist, the first will was signed by Schneerson and
transferred stewardship of all the major Chabad institutions to Rabbi Yehuda
Krinsky. This will is indisputable as it was officially filed and a record of
its signing exists in the archives of New York State. The second will gave the
bulk of control to three senior Chabad rabbis, Rabbis Mindel, Pikarski and
Hodakov (contemporary of Rabbi Schneerson) and gave Krinsky only a minor role.
The only copy of this will, that was drafted by others, is unsigned. Supporters
of Krinsky argue that the will was merely presented to Schneerson, who chose
not to sign it. Supporters of the messianist camp, led by Leib Groner argue
that the will was signed but that interested parties destroyed or hid the
signed copy to gain power. Krinsky was called to testify before the Chabad
"Beit Din" on the authenticity or otherwise of the disputed second will, but he
refused to do so, contending that a local Crown Heights rabbinic body had no
authority over international Lubavitch institutions. Krinsky's stewardship of
the movement has been a bone of contention amongst Chabad followers and
emissaries who see him as trying to control the movement by subsuming it under
the umbrella of the AGUCH. Rabbi Schneerson as the Jewish Messiah. Before
Schneerson's death in 1994 many Chabad Hasidim believed that he was soon to
become manifest as the Messiah (moshiach) ‚Äî an event that would herald the
Messianic Age and the construction of the Third Temple. Books and pamphlets
were written arguing that the Rabbi was the Messiah (moshiach). In Schneerson's
later years a movement arose believing that it was their mission to convince
the world of his messiahship, and that general acceptance of this claim would
lead to his revelation. Adherents to this belief were termed Meshichist. In the
early '90s, his followers sang the song ""Yechi Adoneinu Moreinu v'Rabbeinu
Melech haMoshiach l'olom vo'ed!"" (English: " Live our Master, our Teacher, and
our Rabbi, King Moshiach, for ever and ever!"), and Rabbi Schneerson encouraged
them with hand motions. After his stroke the singing and the encouragement
became routine. A spectrum of beliefs exists today within the Chabad movement
regarding Schneerson and his purported position as the Messiah. While some
believe that he died but will return as the Messiah, others believe that he is
merely "hidden." Other groups believe that he has God-like powers, while a few
negate the idea that he is the messiah entirely. The prevalence of these views
within the movement is disputed, though very few will openly say that
Schneerson cannot be the Messiah. Beginnings. The belief that Schneerson is the
Messiah (Moshiach) can be traced to the 1950s; it picked up momentum during the
decade preceding Schneerson's death in 1994, and has continued to develop since
his death. The response of the wider Haredi and Modern Orthodox communities to
this belief has been antagonistic; the issue remains controversial within the
Jewish world. Among his followers. Schneerson's followers continue to visit his
resting place at the Ohel, believing, in the words of the Tanya‚Äîthe seminal
work of Chabad Hasidism‚Äîthat "The righteous, in their passing, can bless
those in this world more so than during their lifetimes". However, some of his
followers take this belief a step further, contending that he is able to answer
their questions from beyond the grave, through a process of bibliomancy using
his collected letters. This practice is known as ""Igrot Kodesh"", by which
answers to questions are derived through consulting the published collections
of Schneerson‚Äôs letters known as the "Igrot Kodesh". Works. Collections and
esoterica. Esoterica continue to be released by individual families for family
occasions such as weddings, known as "Teshurot". External links. Historical
sites. ImageSize = width:590 height:120 PlotArea = width:570 height:25 left:
5 bottom:60 TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal DateFormat = yyyy Period = from:-
250 till:2000 AlignBars = early ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:200 start:-200
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:50 start:-200 Colors = Define $hx = 15 # shift
text to right side of bar PlotData = LineData = Legend = columns:4 left:125
top:25 columnwidth:150 Colors =
