New Age The New Age movement is a Western spiritual movement that developed in
the second half of the 20th century. Its central precepts have been described
as "drawing on both Eastern and Western spiritual and metaphysical traditions
and infusing them with influences from self-help and motivational psychology,
holistic health, parapsychology, consciousness research and quantum physics".
It aims to create "a spirituality without borders or confining dogmas" that is
inclusive and pluralistic. It holds to "a holistic worldview", emphasising that
the Mind, Body and Spirit are interrelated and that there is a form of monism
and unity throughout the universe. It attempts to create "a worldview that
includes both science and spirituality" and embraces a number of forms of
mainstream science as well as other forms of science that are considered
fringe. The origins of the movement can be found in Medieval astrology and
alchemy, such as the writings of Paracelsus, in Renaissance interests in
Hermeticism, in 18th century mysticism, such as that of Emanuel Swedenborg, and
in beliefs in animal magnetism espoused by Franz Mesmer. In the 19th and early
20th centuries, authors such as Godfrey Higgins and the esotericists Eliphas
Levi, Helena Blavatsky, and George Gurdjieff articulated specific histories,
cosmologies, and some of the basic philosophical principles that would
influence the movement. It experienced a revival as a result of the work of
individuals such as Alice Bailey and organizations such as the Theosophical
Society. It gained further momentum in the 1960s, taking influence from
metaphysics, perennial philosophy, self-help psychology, and the various Indian
gurus who visited the West during that decade. In the 1970s, it developed a
social and political component. The New Age movement includes elements of older
spiritual and religious traditions ranging from monotheism through classical
pantheism, naturalistic pantheism, pandeism, panentheism, and polytheism
combined with science and Gaia philosophy; particularly archaeoastronomy,
astronomy, ecology, environmentalism, the Gaia hypothesis, psychology and
physics. New Age practices and philosophies sometimes draw inspiration from
major world religions: Buddhism, Taoism, Chinese folk religion, Christianity,
Hinduism, Islam (especially Sufism), Judaism (especially Kabbalah), Sikhism;
with strong influences from East Asian religions, Gnosticism, Neopaganism, New
Thought, Spiritualism, Theosophy, Universalism and Western esotericism. The
term "New Age" refers to the coming astrological Age of Aquarius. History.
Origins. The author Nevill Drury claimed there are "four key precursors of the
New Age," who had set the way for many of its widely held precepts. The first
of these was Emanuel Swedenborg (1688â€“1772), a Swedish scientist who after a
religious experience devoted himself to Christian mysticism, believing that he
could travel to Heaven and Hell and commune with angels, demons and spirits,
and who published widely on the subject of his experiences. The second person
was Franz Mesmer (1734â€“1815), who had developed a form of healing using
magnets, believing that there was a force known as "animal magnetism" that
affected humans. The third figure was the Russian Helena Blavatsky
(1831â€“1891), one of the founders of the Theosophical Society, through which
she propagated her religious movement of Theosophy, which itself combined a
number of elements from Eastern religions like Hinduism and Buddhism with
Western elements. The fourth figure was George Gurdjieff (c. 1872â€“1949), who
founded the philosophy of the Fourth Way, through which he conveyed a number of
spiritual teachings to his disciples. A fifth individual whom Drury identified
as an important influence upon the New Age movement was the Indian Swami
Vivekananda (1863â€“1902), an adherent of the philosophy of Vedanta who first
brought Hinduism to the West in the late 19th century. The term "New Age" was
used as early as 1809 by William Blake who described a coming era of spiritual
and artistic advancement in his preface to "Milton a Poem" by stating:
"...Â when the New Age is at leisure to pronounce, all will be set rightÂ ..."
Some of the New Age movement's constituent elements appeared initially in the
19th-century metaphysical movements: Spiritualism, Theosophy, and New Thought
and also the alternative medicine movements of chiropractics and naturopathy.
These movements have roots in Transcendentalism, Mesmerism, Swedenborgianism,
and various earlier Western esoteric or occult traditions, such as the hermetic
arts of astrology, magic, alchemy, and Kabbalah. The term "New Age" was used in
this context in Madame Blavatsky's book "The Secret Doctrine", published in
1888. A weekly journal of Christian liberalism and socialism titled "The New
Age" was published as early as 1894; it was sold to a group of socialist
writers headed by Alfred Richard Orage and Holbrook Jackson in 1907.
Contributors included H. G. Wells, George Bernard Shaw, and William Butler
Yeats; the magazine became a forum for politics, literature, and the arts.
Between 1908 and 1914, it was instrumental in pioneering the British avant-
garde from Vorticism to Imagism. Orage met P. D. Ouspensky, a follower of
Gurdjieff, in 1914 and began correspondence with Harry Houdini; he became less
interested in literature and art with an increased focus on mysticism and other
spiritual topics; the magazine was sold in 1921. According to Brown University,
"The New Age" "...Â helped to shape modernism in literature and the arts from
1907 to 1922." Development. Popularisation behind these ideas has roots in the
work of early 20th century writers such as D. H. Lawrence and William Butler
Yeats. In the early- to mid-1900s, American mystic, theologian, and founder of
the Association for Research and Enlightenment Edgar Cayce was a seminal
influence on what later would be termed the "New Age movement"; he was known in
particular for the practice some refer to as "channeling". The psychologist
Carl Jung was a proponent of the concept of the Age of Aquarius. In a letter to
his friend Peter Baynes, dated 12 August 1940, Jung wrote a passage: "...Â This
year reminds me of the enormous earthquake in 26 B.C. that shook down the great
temple of Karnak. It was the prelude to the destruction of all temples, because
a new time had begun. 1940 is the year when we approach the meridian of the
first star in Aquarius. It is the premonitory earthquake of the New AgeÂ ..."
Former Theosophist Rudolf Steiner and his Anthroposophical movement are a major
influence. Neo-Theosophist Alice Bailey published the book "Discipleship in the
New Age" (1944), which used the term "New Age" in reference to the transition
from the astrological age of Pisces to Aquarius. While claims of racial bias in
the writings of Rudolf Steiner and Alice Bailey were made, Bailey was firmly
opposed to the Axis powers; she believed that Adolf Hitler was possessed by the
"Dark Forces", and Steiner emphasized racial equality as a principle central to
anthroposophical thought and humanity's progress. Any racial elements from
these influences have not remained part of the Anthroposophical Society as
contemporary adherents of the society have either not adopted or repudiated
these beliefs. Another early usage of the term, was by the American artist,
mystic, and philosopher Walter Russell, who spoke of "...Â this New Age
philosophy of the spiritual re-awakening of manÂ ...Â Man's purpose in this New
Age is to acquire more and more knowledgeÂ ..." in his essay "Power Through
Knowledge," which was also published in 1944. Contemporary usage of the term.
The subculture that later became known as "New Age" already existed in the
early 1970s, based on and adopting ideas originally present in the
counterculture of the 1960s. Two entities founded in 1962: the Esalen Institute
in Big Sur, California and the Findhorn Foundationâ€”an intentional community
which continues to operate the Findhorn Ecovillage near Findhorn, Moray,
Scotlandâ€”played an instrumental role during the early growth period of the
New Age movement. Widespread usage of the term "New Age" began in the mid-1970s
(reflected in the title of monthly periodical "New Age Journal") and probably
influenced several thousand small metaphysical book- and gift-stores that
increasingly defined themselves as "New Age bookstores." As a result of the
large-scale activities surrounding the Harmonic Convergence in 1987, the
American mass-media further popularised the term as a label for the alternative
spiritual subculture, including practices such as meditation, channeling,
crystal healing, astral projection, psychic experience, holistic health, simple
living, and environmentalism; or belief in phenomena such as Earth mysteries,
ancient astronauts, extraterrestrial life, unidentified flying objects, crop
circles, and reincarnation. Several New Age publications appeared by the late
1980s such as "Psychic Guide" (later renamed "Body, Mind & Spirit"), "Yoga
Journal", "New Age Voice", "New Age Retailer", and "NAPRA ReView" by the New
Age Publishers and Retailers Alliance. Several key events occurred, which
raised public awareness of the New Age subculture: the production of the
musical "Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical" (1967) with its opening
song "Aquarius" and its memorable line ""This is the dawning of the Age of
Aquarius""; publication of Linda Goodman's best-selling astrology books "Sun
Signs" (1968) and "Love Signs" (1978); the release of Shirley MacLaine's book
"Out on a Limb" (1983), later adapted into a television mini-series with the
same name (1987); and the "Harmonic Convergence" planetary alignment on August
16 and 17, 1987, organized by JosÃ© ArgÃ¼elles at Sedona in the U.S. state of
Arizona. The claims of channelers Jane Roberts (Seth Material), Helen Schucman
("A Course in Miracles"), J. Z. Knight (Ramtha), Neale Donald Walsch
("Conversations with God") (note that Walsch denies being a "channeler" and his
books make it obvious that he is not one, though the text emerged through a
dialogue with a deeper part of himself in a process comparable to automatic
writing), and Rene Gaudette (The Wonders) contributed to the movement's growth.
Relevant New Age works include the writings of James Redfield, Eckhart Tolle,
Barbara Marx Hubbard, Christopher Hills, Marianne Williamson, Deepak Chopra,
John Holland, Gary Zukav, Wayne Dyer, and Rhonda Byrne. While J. Gordon Melton,
Wouter Hanegraaff, and Paul Heelas have emphasised personal aspects, Mark
Satin, Theodore Roszak, Marilyn Ferguson, and Corinne McLaughlin have described
New Age as a values-based sociopolitical movement. Spirituality. While the New
Age lacks any unified belief-system, many spiritual practices and philosophies
feature commonly among adherents of the movementâ€”sometimes referred to as
"New Agers". Lifestyle. New Age spirituality has led to a wide array of
literature on the subject and an active niche market, with books, music,
crafts, and services in alternative medicine available at New Age stores,
fairs, and festivals. Demographics. People who practice New Age spirituality or
who embrace its lifestyle are included in the "Lifestyle of Health and
Sustainability" (LOHAS) demographic market segment, currently in a growth
phase, related to sustainable living, green ecological initiatives, and
generally composed of a relatively affluent and well-educated segment. The
LOHAS market segment in 2006 was estimated at USD$300 billion, approximately 30
percent of the United States consumer market. According to "The New York
Times", a study by the Natural Marketing Institute showed that in 2000, 68
million Americans were included within the LOHAS demographic. The sociologist
Paul H. Ray, who coined the term "Cultural Creatives" in his book "" (2000),
states, "What you're seeing is a demand for products of equal quality that are
also virtuous." The New Age is strongly gendered; sociologist Ciara O'Connor
argues that it shows a tension between commodification and women's empowerment.
Community. Some New Agers advocate living in a simple and sustainable manner to
reduce humanity's impact on the natural resources of Earth; and they shun
consumerism. The New Age movement has been centered around rebuilding a sense
of community to counter social disintegration; this has been attempted through
the formation of intentional communities, where individuals come together to
live and work in a communal lifestyle. Holistic health. Practitioners of New
Age spirituality may use alternative medicine in addition to or in place of
conventional medicine; while some conventional physicians have adopted aspects
or the complete approach of holistic health. The mainstreaming of the Holistic
Health movement in the UK is discussed by Maria Tighe. The inter-relation of
holistic health with the New Age movement is illustrated in Jenny Butler's
ethnographic description of "Angel therapy" in the Republic of Ireland. Music.
New Age music is peaceful music of various styles intended to create
inspiration, relaxation, and positive feelings while listening. Studies have
determined that New Age music can be an effective component of stress
management. The style began in the 1970s with the works of free-form jazz
groups recording on the ECM label; such as Oregon, the Paul Winter Consort, and
other pre-ambient bands; as well as ambient music performer Brian Eno and
classical avant-garde musician Daniel Kobialka. In the early 1970s, it was
mostly instrumental with both acoustic and electronic styles. New Age music
evolved to include a wide range of styles from electronic space music (like
Constance Demby's) using synthesizers and acoustic instrumentals using Native
American flutes and drums, singing bowls, and world music sounds to spiritual
chanting from other cultures. Reception. Organized religion. Mainstream
religious institutions have been critical of New Age spirituality. Author
Johanna Michaelson published her own experiences with various New Age practices
in "The Beautiful Side of Evil" (1982); after concluding these activities were
demonic, she converted to Christianity. Michigan attorney and activist
Constance Cumbey offered the first major criticism of the New Age movement from
a Christian perspective in "The Hidden Dangers of the Rainbow: The New Age
Movement and Our Coming Age of Barbarism" (1983). The Roman Catholic Church
published "A Christian reflection on the New Age" in 2003, following a six-year
study; the 90-page document criticizes New Age practices such as yoga,
meditation, feng shui, and crystal healing. According to the Vatican, euphoric
states attained through New Age practices should not be confused with prayer or
viewed as signs of God's presence. Cardinal Paul Poupard, then-president of the
Pontifical Council for Culture, said the "New Age is a misleading answer to the
oldest hopes of man." Monsignor Michael Fitzgerald, then-president of the
Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue, stated at the Vatican
conference on the document: the "Church avoids any concept that is close to
those of the New Age." Expressing agreement with the Vatican's position,
Richard Land of the Southern Baptist Convention stated that many Baptists would
regard New Age ideas as contrary to Christian tradition and doctrine. Integral
theory. The author Ken Wilber posits that most New Age thought falls into what
he termed the "pre/trans fallacy". According to Wilber, human developmental
psychology moves from the pre-personal, through the personal, then to the
transpersonal (spiritually advanced or enlightened) level. He regards 80
percent of New Age spirituality as pre-rational (pre-conventional) and as
relying primarily on mythic-magical thinking; this contrasts with a post-
rational (including and transcending rational) genuinely world-centric
consciousness. Despite his criticism of most New Age thought, Wilber has been
categorized as New Age due to his emphasis on a transpersonal view, and more
recently, as a philosopher. Indigenous peoples of the Americas. Some adherents
of traditional disciplines, such as the Lakota peopleâ€”a tribe of the
indigenous peoples of the Americas, reject "the expropriation of ceremonial
ways by non-Indians." They see the New Age movement as either not fully
understanding, deliberately trivializing, or distorting their disciplines. They
have coined the term "plastic medicine men" to describe individuals, from
within their own communities "who are prostituting our spiritual ways for their
own selfish gain, with no regard for the spiritual well-being of the people as
a whole." The term "plastic shaman" has been applied to outsiders who identify
themselves as shamans, holy people, or other traditional spiritual leaders, but
who have no genuine connection to the traditions or cultures they claim to
represent. The academic Ward Churchill criticized the New Age movement as an
instrument of cultural imperialism that is exploitative of indigenous cultures
by reducing them to a commodity to be traded. In "Fantasies of the Master
Race", he criticized the cultural appropriation of Native American culture and
symbols in not only the New Age movement, but also in art and popular culture.
However, many of Churchill's allegations and research findings have been called
into question by other academics, leading to an academic misconduct
investigation and subsequent firing by the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Goddess movement. Followers of the Goddess movement have severely criticized
the New Age as fundamentally patriarchal, analytical rather than intuitive, and
as supporting the status quo, particularly in its implicit gender roles. Monica
SjÃ¶Ã¶ (1938â€“2005) wrote that New Age channelers were virtually all women,
but the spirits they purported to channel, offering guidance to humanity, were
nearly all male. SjÃ¶Ã¶ was highly critical of Theosophy, the "I AM" Activity,
and particularly Alice Bailey, whom she saw as promoting Nazi-like Aryan
ideals. SjÃ¶Ã¶'s writings also condemn the New Age for its support of
communication and information processing technologies which, she believes, may
produce harmful low-level electromagnetic radiation. Academia. In the 2003 book
"" written by Michael Barkun, professor emeritus of political science at the
Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs Barkun argues New age beliefs
have been greatly facilitated by the advent of the internet which has exposed
people to beliefs once consigned to the outermost fringe of political and
religious life. He identifies two trends which he terms, " the rise of
improvisational millennialism" and "the popularity of stigmatized knowledge".
He voices concern that these tends could lead to mass hysteria and could have a
devastating effect on American political life. Social and political movement.
While many commentators have focused on the personal aspects of the New Age
movement, it also has a social and political component. The New Age political
movement became visible in the 1970s, peaked in the 1980s, and continued into
the 1990s. In the 21st century, the political movement evolved in new
directions. Late 20th century. After the political turmoil of the 1960s, many
activists in North America and Europe became disillusioned with traditional
reformist and revolutionary political ideologies. Some began searching for a
new politics that gave special weight to such topics as consciousness, ecology,
personal and spiritual development, community empowerment, and global unity. An
outpouring of books from New Age thinkers acknowledged that search and
attempted to articulate that politics. According to some observers, the first
was Mark Satin's "New Age Politics" (1978). It originally appeared in Canada in
1976. Other books that have been described as New Age political include
Theodore Roszak's "Person / Planet" (1978), Marilyn Ferguson's "The Aquarian
Conspiracy" (1980), Alvin Toffler and Heidi Toffler's "The Third Wave" (1980),
Hazel Henderson's "The Politics of the Solar Age" (1981), Fritjof Capra's "The
Turning Point" (1982), Robert Muller's "New Genesis" (1982), John Naisbitt's
"Megatrends" (1982), Willis Harman's "Global Mind Change" (1988), James
Redfield's "The Celestine Prophecy" (1993), and Corinne McLaughlin and Gordon
Davidson's "Spiritual Politics" (1994). All these books were issued by major
publishers. Some became international bestsellers. By the 1980s, New Age
political ideas were being discussed in big-city newspapers and established
political magazines. In addition, some of the New Age's own periodicals were
regularly addressing social and political issues. In the U.S., observers
pointed to "Leading Edge Bulletin", "New Age Journal", "New Options
Newsletter", and "Utne Reader". Other such periodicals included "New Humanity"
(England), "Alterna" (Denmark), "Odyssey" (South Africa), and "World Union"
from the Sri Aurobindo Ashram (India). As with any political movement,
organizations sprang up to generate popular support for New Age political ideas
and policy positions. In the U.S., commentators identified the New Age Caucus
of California, the New World Alliance, Planetary Citizens, and John
Vasconcellos's Self-Determination: A Personal / Political Network as New Age
political organizations. So, on occasion, did their own spokespeople. There may
have been more New Age political organizing outside the U.S.; writer-activists
pointed to the Future in Our Hands movement in Norway (which claimed 20,000
adherents out of a population of four million), the early European Green
movements, and the Values Party of New Zealand. Over time, these themes began
to cohere. By the 1980s, observers in both North America and Europe were
acknowledging the emergence of a New Age political "ideology". Political
objections at centuryâ€™s end. Toward the end of the 20th century, criticisms
were being directed at the New Age political project from many quarters, but
especially from the liberal left and religious right. On the left, scholars
argued that New Age politics is an oxymoron: that personal growth has little or
nothing to do with political change. One political scientist said New Age
politics fails to recognize the "realities" of economic and political power;
another faulted it for not being opposed to the capitalist system, or to
liberal individualism. Antinuclear activist Harvey Wasserman argued that New
Age politics is too averse to social conflict to be effective politically. On
the right, some worried that the drive to come up with a new consciousness and
new values would topple time-tested old values. Others worried that the
celebration of diversity would leave no strong viewpoint in place to guide
society. The passion for world unity â€“ one humanity, one planet â€“ was said
to lead inevitably to the centralization of power. Some doubted that networking
could provide an effective counterweight to centralization and bureaucracy.
Neither left nor right was impressed with the New Age's ability to organize
itself politically. Many explanations were offered for the New Age's practical
political weakness. Some said that the New Age political thinkers and activists
of the 1970s and 1980s were simply too far in advance of their time. Others
suggested that New Age activists' commitment to the often frustrating process
of consensus decision-making was at fault. After it dissolved, New World
Alliance co-founder Marc Sarkady told an interviewer that the Alliance was too
"New Age counter-cultural" to appeal to a broad public. New directions in the
21st century. In the 21st century, writers and activists continue to pursue a
political project with New Age roots. However, it differs from the project that
had come before, in part as a result of learning from the criticisms that had
been directed at the earlier wave of New Age political actors. The principal
difference was anticipated in texts like "New Age Politics" author Mark Satin's
essay "Twenty-eight Ways of Looking at Terrorism" (1991), human potential
movement historian Walter Truett Anderson's essay "Four Different Ways to Be
Absolutely Right" (1995), and mediator Mark Gerzon's book "A House Divided"
(1996). In these texts, the New Age political perspective is recognized as
legitimate. But it is presented as merely one among many, with strong points
and blind spots just like all the rest. The result was to alter the nature of
the New Age political project. If every political perspective had unique
strengths and significant weaknesses, then it no longer made sense to try to
convert everyone to the New Age political perspective, as had been attempted in
the 1970s and 1980s. It made more sense to try to construct a higher political
synthesis that took every poliical perspective into account, including that of
the New Age. Many 21st century books have attempted to articulate foundational
aspects of this approach to politics and social change. They include Ken
Wilber's "A Theory of Everything" (2001), Mark Satin's "Radical Middle" (2004),
David Korten's "The Great Turning" (2006), Steve McIntosh's "Integral
Consciousness and the Future of Evolution" (2007), Marilyn Hamilton's "Integral
City" (2008), and Carter Phipps's "Evolutionaries" (2012). In addition, many
organizations are providing opportunities for focused political listening and
learning that can contribute to the construction of a higher political
synthesis. They include AmericaSpeaks, Association Reset-Dialogues on
Civilizations, Listening Project, Search for Common Ground, Spiral Dynamics
Integral, and World Public Forum: Dialogue of Civilizations. Another difference
between the two eras of political thought is that, in the 21st century, few
political actors use the term "New Age" or even "post-New Age" to describe
themselves or their work. Some observers attribute this to the negative
connotations that the term "New Age" had acquired. Instead, other terms are
employed that connote a similar sense of personal and political development
proceeding together over time. For example, according to an anthology from
three political scientists, many writers and academics use the term
"transformational" as a substitute for such terms as New Age and new paradigm.
Ken Wilber has popularized use of the term "integral", Carter Phipps emphasizes
the term "evolutionary", and both terms can be found in some authors' book
titles.
