Rashad Khalifa Rashad Khalifa (; November 19, 1935â€“January 31, 1990) was an
Egyptian-American biochemist, closely associated with the United Submitters
International. He was assassinated in 1990. Life. Khalifa was born in Egypt on
November 19, 1935. His father was a Sufi who is reported to have led a group
with thousands of followers. Khalifa obtained an honours degree from Ain Shams
University, Egypt, before he emigrated to the United States in 1959, later
earning a Master's Degree in biochemistry from Arizona State University and a
PhD. from University of California. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen and
lived in Tucson, Arizona. Khalifa worked as a science adviser for the Libyan
government for about one year, after which he worked as a chemist for the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, then became a senior
chemist in Arizona's State Office of Chemistry in 1980. Khalifa's son, Sam
Khalifa, played for the Pittsburgh Pirates and was the first major league
player of Egyptian descent. He was central to the founding of the United
Submitters International, (USI), an offshoot Islamic group that usually prefers
not to use the terms "Muslim" or "Islam," instead using the English equivalents
"Submitter" and "Submission." Doctrine. Khalifa said that he was a messenger
("rasool") of God and that the Archangel Gabriel 'most assertively' told him
that chapter 36, verse 3, of the Quran, 'specifically' referred to him. His
followers refer to him as God's Messenger of the Covenant. He promoted a strict
monotheism and was a prominent Quranist, rejecting the "hadith" and "sunnah" as
fabrications attributed to prophet Muhammad by later scholars. He is most
notable for his statement that the Quran contains a mathematical structure
based on the number 19 and making the highly controversial claim that the last
two the verses of chapter nine in the Quran were not canonical, telling his
followers to reject them. Starting in 1968, Khalifa used computers to analyze
the frequency of letters and words in the Quran. In 1974, he claimed that he
had discovered a mathematical code in the text of the Qur'an involving the
number 19. The details of this analysis are available in his book, "Quran, the
Final Testament". Khalifa's research did not receive much attention in the
West. In 1980, Martin Gardner mentioned it in "Scientific American". Gardner
later wrote a more extensive and critical review of Khalifa and his work.
Khalifa's first publicized report in the Arab world appeared in the Egyptian
magazine "Akher Sa'a", in January, 1973. Updates of his research were
subsequently published by the same magazine later that year and again in 1975.
Assassination. Owing to Rashad Kahlifa's doctrine, which was contrary to some
important tenets of Sunni Islam, a fatwa was issued on February 19, 1989, by
the Islamic Legal Council of Saudi Arabia. The fatwa, which was jointly issued
by some 38 scholars, decreed Rashad Khalifa as a heretic. Almost a year later
on January 31, 1990, Khalifa was murdered at Masjid Tucson. He was stabbed
multiple times and his body drenched in xylol but not set alight. Although
nobody has been convicted of his murder, James Williams, an alleged member of
the Jamaat ul-Fuqra organization, was convicted of conspiracy in the slaying.
Williams disappeared on the day of his sentencing and could not be found. In
2000 Williams was apprehended attempting to re-enter the United States and
sentenced to serve 69 years in prison. His convictions were upheld on appeal by
the Colorado Court of Appeals except for one count of forgery. CBS News
reported that Muslim extremist Wadih el-Hage was "connected to the 1990
stabbing death of... Rashad Khalifa was hated by Muslims opposed to his
teachings. He is considered a false prophet by Muslims. El-Hage who was
indicted for lying about the case, called the assassination 'a good thing.' On
Tuesday, April 28, 2009 the Calgary Police Services of Canada arrested Glen
Cusford Francis, a 52-year-old citizen of Trinidad and Tobago, on suspicion of
killing Rashad Khalifa. Investigators in Tucson learned that Francis, who was
going by the name Benjamin Phillips, had begun his studies under Khalifa in
January 1990. Phillips disappeared shortly after the slaying, and was said to
have left the country. An investigation revealed Phillips and Francis were the
same man upon discovering fingerprints found in Phillips apartment. A specialty
unit of the Tucson Police Department furthered in its investigation in 2006 and
in December 2008 and was able to use DNA testing on forensic evidence from the
crime scene to tie Francis to the assassination. In October 2009, a Canadian
judge ordered his extradition to the United States to face trial.
