Satanism Satanism is a broad term referring to a group of Western religions
comprising diverse ideological and philosophical beliefs. Their shared features
include symbolic association with, or admiration for the character of, Satan,
or similar rebellious, promethean, and, in their view, liberating figures.
Particularly after the European Enlightenment, some works, such as "Paradise
Lost", were taken up by Romantics and described as presenting the biblical
Satan as an allegory representing a crisis of faith, individualism, free will,
wisdom and enlightenment. Those works actually featuring Satan as a heroic
character are fewer in number, but do exist; George Bernard Shaw, and Mark
Twain (cf. "Letters from the Earth") included such characterizations in their
works long before religious Satanists took up the pen. From then on, Satan and
Satanism started to gain a new meaning outside of Christianity. Although the
public practice of Satanism began in 1966 with the founding of the atheistic
Church of Satan, some historical precedents exist: a group called the Ophite
Cultus Satanas was founded in Ohio by Herbert Arthur Sloane in 1948. Inspired
by Gnosticism and Gerald Gardner's Wicca, the coven venerated Satan as both a
horned god and ophite messiah. Satanist groups that appeared after the 1960s
are widely diverse, but two major trends are Theistic Satanism and Atheistic
Satanism. Theistic Satanists venerate Satan as a supernatural deity. In
contrast, Atheistic Satanists consider themselves atheists, agnostics,
ignostics or apatheists and regard Satan as merely symbolic of certain human
traits. This categorization of Satanism (which could be categorized in other
ways, for example "Traditional" versus "Modern"), is not necessarily adopted by
Satanists themselves, who usually do not specify which type of Satanism they
adhere to. Some Satanists believe in a god in the sense of a Prime Mover but,
like Atheistic Satanists, do not worship it, due to the deist belief that a god
plays no part in mortal lives. Despite heavy criticism from other religious
groups, there are signs that Satanistic beliefs have become more socially
tolerated. Satanism is now allowed in the Royal Navy of the British Armed
Forces, despite much opposition from Christians, and, in 2005, the Supreme
Court of the United States debated over protecting the religious rights of
prison inmates after a lawsuit challenging the issue was filed to them.
Contemporary Satanism is mainly an American phenomenon, the ideas spreading
with the effects of globalization and the Internet. The Internet promotes
awareness of other Satanists, and is also the main battleground for the
definitions of Satanism today. Satanism started to reach Eastern Europe in the
1990s, in time with the fall of the Soviet Union, and most noticeably in Poland
and Lithuania, predominantly Roman Catholic countries. Satanism developed in
the context of the Christian faith, as an ideological backlash to certain
tenets promoted in Christianity. The character of Satan revered by Satanists,
therefore, is mainly regarded as the prototypical anti-Christian figure. There
have been some Satanists, however, who have shown reverence for the similar,
albeit differently-characterized Islamic concept of Satan (Arabic: ÿ¥Ÿäÿ∑ÿßŸÜ
"Shay·π≠ƒÅn"), also known as Iblis (Arabic: ÿ•ÿ®ŸÑŸäÿ≥‚Äé " æIblƒ´s") although
this is much more uncommon as Satanist philosophy has primarily flourished in
the Occident, and has likely not reached any Muslim-majority countries. As he
is an antagonist in all of the major Abrahamic traditions, Satan is also
mentioned in certain Jewish literature, although he is treated more as a
nuisance than the primary enemy of God in Judaism. Accusations of Satanism.
Historically, some people or groups have been specifically described as
worshiping Satan or the Devil, or of being devoted to the work of Satan. The
widespread preponderance of these groups in European cultures is in part
connected with the importance and meaning of Satan within Christianity.
Atheistic/Deistic Satanism. LaVeyan Satanism. LaVeyan Satanism is a philosophy
(not considered a religion by many of its followers) founded in 1966 by Anton
Szandor LaVey. Its teachings are based on individualism, self-indulgence, and
"eye for an eye" morality. Unlike Theistic Satanists, LaVeyan Satanists are
atheists who regard Satan as a symbol of man's inherent nature. According to
religioustolerance.org, LaVeyan Satanism is a "small religious group that is
unrelated to any other faith, and whose members feel free to satisfy their
urges responsibly, exhibit kindness to their friends, and attack their
enemies". Its beliefs were first detailed in "The Satanic Bible" and it is
overseen by the Church of Satan. Symbolic Satanism. The Symbolic satanist views
Satan as a fictional, mental/mythic archetype, and admire the character as the
"Adversary" or the "Light-bringer". Theistic Satanism. Theistic Satanism (also
known as Traditional Satanism, Spiritual Satanism or Devil Worship) is a form
of Satanism with the primary belief that Satan is an actual deity or force to
revere or worship. Other characteristics of Theistic Satanism may include a
belief in magic, which is manipulated through ritual, although that is not a
defining criterion, and theistic Satanists may focus solely on devotion. Unlike
the LaVeyan Satanism founded by Anton LaVey in the 1960s, Theistic Satanism is
theistic as opposed to atheistic, believing that Satan is a real being rather
than a symbol of individualism. Luciferianism. Luciferianism can be understood
best as a belief system or intellectual creed that venerates the essential and
inherent characteristics that are affixed and commonly given to Lucifer.
Luciferianism is often identified as an auxiliary creed or movement of
Satanism, due to the common identification of Lucifer with Satan. Some
Luciferians accept this identification and/or consider Lucifer as the "light
bearer" and illuminated aspect of Satan, giving them the name of Satanists and
the right to bear the title. Others reject it, giving the argument that Lucifer
is a more positive and easy-going ideal than Satan. They are inspired by the
ancient myths of Egypt, Rome and Greece, Gnosticism and traditional Western
occultism. Palladists. Palladists are an alleged Theistic Satanist society or
member of that society. The name Palladian comes from Pallas and refers to
wisdom and learning. It is of no relation to Palladium or the palladian style
of Andrea Palladio. Our Lady of Endor Coven. Our Lady of Endor Coven, also
known as Ophite Cultus Satanas (originally spelled "Sathanas"), was a satanic
cult founded in 1948 by Herbert Arthur Sloane in Toledo, Ohio. The group was
heavily influenced by gnosticism (especially that found in the contemporary
book by Hans Jonas, "The Gnostic Religion"), and worshiped Satanas, their name
for Satan ("Cultus Satanas" is a Latin version of Cult of Satan). Satanas (or
Satan) was defined in gnostic terms as the Serpent in the Garden of Eden who
revealed the knowledge of the true God to Eve. That it called itself "Ophite"
is a reference to the ancient gnostic sect of the Ophites, who were said to
worship the serpent. Casual Satanism. Casual satanism is the use of satanic
symbols like the inverted pentagram/Sigil of Baphomet, the trappings of the
black mass, or demonic imagery to provide the impression of satanism. This is a
liminal experience, reserved primarily for shock value, and does not
necessarily indicate actual belief, or even interest, in the rites, symbolism,
and philosophies of the various forms of Satanist practice cited above.
Relationship to popular music. Black metal has often been connected with
Satanism, in part for the lyrical content of several bands and their frequent
use of imagery often tied to left hand path beliefs (such as the inverted
pentagram). More often than not musicians associating themselves with black
metal say they do not believe in legitimate Satanic ideology and often profess
to being atheists, agnostics, or religious skeptics. In some instances,
followers of right hand path religions use Satanic references for entertainment
purposes and shock value. Most of black metal's "first wave" bands¬ only used
Satanism for shock value; one of the few exceptions is Mercyful Fate singer
King Diamond, who follows LaVeyan Satanism and whom Michael Moynihan calls "one
of the only performers of the '80s Satanic Metal who was more than just a
poseur using a devilish image for shock value". Glen Benton, vocalist and
bassist of the band Deicide, once openly claimed to be a practitioner of
Theistic Satanism, and has spoken publicly on numerous occasions to profess
staunch anti-Christian sentiment. The controversial Dissection frontman Jon
N√∂dtveidt openly spoke about his "chaos-gnostic" satanic beliefs, being a
member of the Misanthropic Luciferian Order, and called his band "the sonic
propaganda unit of the MLO". Norwegian black metal artists such as Euronymous
from Mayhem and Infernus from Gorgoroth have also identified themselves as
Satanists and actively promoted their beliefs. Numerous church burnings that
covered parts of Norway in the early 1990s were also attributed to youths
involved in the black metal movement, which included people promoting theistic
Satanic beliefs and strong anti-LaVeyan attitudes. However, the legitimacy of
such actions as Satanic endeavors, rather than simply rebellious actions done
for publicity, is something that has been doubted by even some of those who
contribute to the genre. Organizations. The Church of Satan. The Church of
Satan is an organization dedicated to the acceptance of the carnal self, as
articulated in "The Satanic Bible", written in 1969 by Anton Szandor LaVey.
First Satanic Church. On Walpurgisnacht, April 30, 1966, Anton LaVey founded
the "The Satanic Church" (which he would later rename "Church of Satan"). After
his death in 1997 the Church of Satan was taken over by a new administration
and its headquarters was moved to New York. LaVey's daughter, the High
Priestess Karla LaVey, felt this to be a disservice to her father's legacy. The
First Satanic Church was re-founded on October 31, 1999 by Karla LaVey to carry
on the legacy of her father. She continues to run it out of San Francisco,
California. Temple of Set. The Temple of Set is an initiatory occult society
claiming to be the world's leading left-hand path religious organization. It
was established in 1975 by Michael A. Aquino and certain members of the
priesthood of the Church of Satan, who left because of administrative and
philosophical disagreements. ToS deliberately self-differentiates from CoS in
several ways, most significantly in theology and sociology. The philosophy of
the Temple of Set may be summed up as "enlightened individualism" ‚Äî
enhancement and improvement of oneself by personal education, experiment and
initiation. This process is necessarily different and distinctive for each
individual. The members do not all have the same view on whether Set is "real"
or not, and they're not expected to. Setianism, in theory, is similar to
theistic Satanism. The principle deity of Setianism is the ancient Egyptian god
Set, or Seth, the god of adversary. Set supposedly is the Dark Lord behind the
Hebrew entity Satan. Set, as the first principle of consciousness, is emulated
by Setians, who symbolize the concept of individual, subjective intelligence
distinct from the natural order as the "Black Flame". (Some people who are not
members of the Temple of Set find spiritual inspiration in the Egyptian god
Set, and may share some beliefs with the organization. The belief system in
general is referred to as Setianism.) Members of the Temple of Set are mostly
male, between the ages of twenty and fifty. Order of Nine Angles. The Order of
Nine Angles (ONA, O9A) "represent a dangerous and extreme form of Satanism" and
first attracted public attention during the 1980s and 1990s after being
mentioned in books detailing fascist Satanism. They were initially formed in
the United Kingdom and are presently organized around clandestine cells (which
it calls "traditional nexions") and around what it calls "sinister tribes".
