Universalism Universalism, in its primary sense, refers to religious,
theological, and philosophical concepts with universal application or
applicability. Religion in this context is defined as a set of beliefs
concerning the cause, nature, and purpose of the universe, especially when
considered as the creation of a superhuman agency or agencies, usually
involving devotional and ritual observances, and often containing a moral code
governing the conduct of human affairs. Universalism is a term used to identify
particular doctrines considering all people in their formation. Universalism in
the religious context claims that religion or religious man (sic) is a
universal quality. This can be contrasted with nonuniversalist religions. In
its secondary sense, a community that calls itself Universalist may emphasize
the universal principles of most religions and accept other religions in an
inclusive manner, believing in a universal reconciliation between humanity and
the divine. For example, some forms of Abrahamic religions happened to claim
the universal value of their doctrine and moral principles, and feel inclusive.
A belief in one common truth is also another important tenet. The living truth
is seen as more far-reaching than national, cultural, or religious boundaries.
Christianity. In Christianity, Universalism can refer to the beliefs that all
humans either may or will be saved through Jesus Christ and eventually come to
harmony in God's kingdom. This salvation is expressed as offered both to the
Jew, and also to the Gentile (, , ). It is opposed to the doctrines of
reprobation and double-predestination in Calvinism. The Greek term
"apokatastasis" came to be related by some to the beliefs of Christian
Universalism, but in early Patristic usage is distinct. Additionally the term
Catholic is derived from the Greek word "katholikos", which means universal.
The Catholic Church is universal in the sense that it embraces individuals
"from every race, nation, language, and people", but does not teach universal
salvation. Universalist writers such as George T. Knight have claimed that
Universalism was a widely held view among theologians in Early Christianity
However, some examples, such as Origen and Clement of Alexandria, used by
Knight and other Universalist writers are contested by writers such as Crouzel,
Root, Norris, and Itter. Christian Universalist ideas are first undisputedly
documented in 17th-century England and 18th-century Europe and America. Gerrard
Winstanley (1648), Richard Coppin (1652), Jane Leade (1697), and then George de
Benneville in America, taught that God would grant all human beings salvation.
Those in America teaching this became known as the Universalists. Aion,
transliterated aeon, is a period of longer or shorter duration, having a
beginning and an end, and complete in itself. Aristotle (peri ouravou, i. 9,15)
says: "The period which includes the whole time of one's life is called the
aeon of each one." Hence it often means the life of a man, as in Homer, where
one's life (aion) is said to leave him or to consume away (Iliad v. 685;
Odyssey v. 160). It is not, however, limited to human life; it signifies any
period in the course of events, as the period or age before Christ; the period
of the millenium; the mythological period before the beginnings of history...
The adjective aionios in like manner carries the idea of time. Neither the noun
nor the adjective, in themselves, carry the sense of endless or everlasting.
They may acquire that sense by their connotation, as, on the other hand,
aidios, which means everlasting, has its meaning limited to a given point of
time in Jude 6. Aionios means enduring through or pertaining to a period of
time. Both the noun and the adjective are applied to limited periods... Words
which are habitually applied to things temporal or material cannot carry in
themselves the sense of endlessness. Even when applied to God, we are not
forced to render aionios everlasting. Of course the life of God is endless; but
the question is whether, in describing God as aionios, it was intended to
describe the duration of his being, or whether some different and larger idea
was not contemplated." Hinduism. Hinduism embraces universalism by conceiving
the whole world as a single family that deifies the one truth, and therefore it
accepts all forms of beliefs and dismisses labels of distinct religions which
would imply a division of identity. "After long study and experience, I have
come to the conclusion that all religions are true; [2 all religions have some
error in them; all religions are almost as dear to me as my own Hinduism, in as
much as all human beings should be as dear to one as one's own close relatives.
My own veneration for other faiths is the same as that for my own faith;
therefore no thought of conversion is possible." (M. K. Gandhi, "All Men Are
Brothers: Life and Thoughts of Mahatma Gandhi as told in his own words", Paris,
UNESCO 1958, p 60.) Sikhism. "If you can't see God in all, you can't see God at
all". (Sri Singh Sahib, Yogi Bhajan) "There is no Hindu, there is no Muslim".
By this, Guru Nanak meant that there is no distinction between religion in
God's eyes, whether polytheist, monotheist, pantheist, or even atheist, all
that one needs to gain salvation is purity of heart, tolerance of all beings,
compassion and kindness. Unlike many of the major world religions, Sikhism does
not have missionaries, instead it believes men have the freedom to find their
own path to salvation. Judaism. Judaism teaches that God chose the Jewish
people to be in a unique covenant with God, and one of their beliefs is that
Jewish people were charged by the Torah with a specific missionÂ â€” to be a
light unto the nations, and to exemplify the covenant with God as described in
the Torah to other nations. Not explicitly a Universalist theology, this view,
however, does "not" preclude a belief that God also has a relationship with
other peoplesâ€”rather, Judaism holds that God had entered into a covenant with
all humanity as Noachides, and that Jews and non-Jews alike have a relationship
with God, as well as being universal in the sense that it is open to all
mankind. The Jewish Spiritual Leaders Institute (JSLI) believes in a more
inclusive version of Jewish Universalism, believing that "God equally chose all
nations to be lights unto the world, and we have much to learn and share with
each other. We can only accomplish "Tikkun Olam" by our unconditional
acceptance of each other's peaceful doctrines." Islam. Islam recognizes to a
certain extent the validity of the Abrahamic religions, the Qur'an identifying
Jews, Christians, and "Sabi'un" or "baptists" (usually taken as a reference to
the Mandeans) as "people of the book" ("ahl al-kitab"). Later Islamic
theologians expanded this definition to include Zoroastrians, and later even
Hindus, as the early Islamic empire brought many people professing these
religions under its dominion, but the Qur'an explicitly identifies only Jews,
Christians, and Sabians as People of the Book. Views of Muslims range along a
continuum, from the most inclusive teaching common among liberal Muslims summed
up in Surah 2:62,256 - "Verily! Those who believe and those who are Jews and
Christians, and Sabians, whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and do
righteous good deeds shall have their reward with their Lord, on them shall be
no fear, nor shall they grieve...let there be no compulsion in religion" - that
all monotheistic religions or people of the book have a chance of salvation, to
the most exclusive teaching common amongst Salafis and Wahhabis, and supported
by several works of medieval Islamic theology and by traditions ("hadith")
which are considered correct ("sahih") by Sunni Muslims, for the most part are
summed up in Surah 9:5,29: "Then, when the sacred months have passed, slay the
idolaters ["mushrikun"] wherever ye find them, and take them, and besiege them,
and lay in wait in every stratagem of war. But if they repent and establish
worship and pay the "jizya", then leave their way free. Lo! Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful...Fight against such of those who have been given the Scripture people
of the book as believe not in Allah nor the Last Day, and forbid not that which
Allah hath forbidden by His messenger, and follow not the Religion of Truth,
until they pay the "jizya" readily, being brought low submission." The
interpretation of all of these passages are hotly contested amongst various
schools of thought, traditionalist and reform-minded, and branches of Islam,
from the reforming Qur'anists and Ahmadiyya to the ultra-traditionalist Salafi,
as is the doctrine of abrogation ("naskh") which is used to determine which
verses take precedent, based on reconstructed chronology, with later verses
superseding earlier ones. The traditional chronology places Surah 9 as the last
or second-to-last surah revealed, thus, in traditional exegesis, it gains a
large power of abrogation, and verses 9:5,29,73 are held to have abrogated 2:
256 The ahadith also play a major role in this, and different schools of
thought assign different weightings and rulings of authenticity to different
hadith, with the four schools of Sunni thought accepting the Six Authentic
Collections, generally along with the Muwatta Imam Malik. Depending on the
level of acceptance of rejection of certain traditions, the interpretation of
the Koran can be changed immensely, from the Qur'anists and Ahmadiyya who
reject the ahadith, to the Salafi, or "ahl al-hadith", who hold the entirety of
the traditional collections in great reverence. Traditional Islam views the
world as bipartite, consisting of the House of Islam, that is, where people
live under the Islamic law - the Shariah - and the House of War, that is, where
the people do not live under Islamic law, which must be proselytized (see
"da'wah") using whatever resources available, including, in some traditionalist
and conservative interpretations, the use of violence, as holy struggle in the
path of Allah, to either convert its inhabitants to Islam, or to rule them
under the Shariah (cf. dhimmi); since the abolition of the Caliphate, there has
been debate about the proper role of divisions of the world in Islam, and
whether the traditional bipartite division is sufficient to meet the needs of
the "ummah" (world community of Muslims) and world moving in to the future. The
Ash'ari school of Sunni aqidah (theology) holds that those who had never heard
of the message of Islam, by virtue of isolation, can still be saved by the
grace of Allah, similar to Karl Rahner's concept of the Anonymous Christian.
Sufis generally hold to a much more inclusivist and tolerant view of other
faiths and religious systems than traditional Sunni and Shi'a Islam.
Zoroastrianism and Manicheanism. Some forms of Zoroastrian and Manichean belief
were universalistic in application to all races, but not universalist in the
sense of universal salvation. BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith. In BahÃ¡'Ã­ belief, a single God
has sent all the historic founders of the world religions in a process of
progressive revelation. The major world religions are seen as divine in origin
and are continuous in their purpose. In this view, there is unity among the
founders of world religions, but each revelation brings a more advanced set of
teachings in human history. Within this universal view, the unity of humanity
is one of the central teachings of the BahÃ¡'Ã­ Faith. The BahÃ¡'Ã­ teachings
state that since all humans have been created in the image of God, God does not
make any distinction between people regardless of race, colour or religion.
Thus, because all humans have been created equal, they all require equal
opportunities and treatment. Thus the BahÃ¡'Ã­ view promotes the unity of
humanity, and that people's vision should be world-embracing and that people
should love the whole world rather than just their nation. The teaching,
however, does not equal unity with uniformity, but instead the BahÃ¡'Ã­
writings advocate for the principle of "unity in diversity" where the variety
in the human race is valued. Yi Guan Dao. Yi Guan Dao (loosely translated as
"Universal Taoism", "the pervasive truth", or "the consistent path")
incorporates elements from Confucianism, Taoism, and Chinese Buddhism, and
recognizes the validity of non-Chinese religious traditions such as
Christianity and Islam as well. For this reason it is often classified as a
syncretistic sect, along with other similar religions in the Way of Former
Heaven (Xian Tian Dao) family. New Thought. Unity, Religious Science, Divine
Science are denominations within the New Thought movement. Each teaches that
there is a common thread of truth at the heart of all religions. New Thought is
an ever-evolving belief system which will incorporate "Truth" where ever it is
found, hence the name "New Thought". "All is God, But God transcends all". Non-
religious Universalism. Universalism is not only a set of values, but a world
view. To which any can prescribe if they observe and believe in the
universality of the human experience, and that of all sentient life - and work
to uphold the principles, ethics, and actions which safeguard these fundamental
things. Indeed many Universalists may be attracted to the logic of universally
applicable principles, rather than any belief or dogma. Human unity,
solidarity, and the perceived need for a sustainable and socially conscious
global order are among the tendencies of non-religious Universalist thought.
