Western world The Western world, also known as the West and the Occident (from
Latin: "occidens" "sunset, West"; as contrasted with the Orient), is a term
referring to different nations depending on the context. There is no agreed
upon definition about what all these nations have in common apart from having a
significant population of European descent and being heavily influenced by
Europe. The concept of the Western part of the earth has its roots in Greco-
Roman civilization in Europe, with the advent of Christianity. In the modern
era, the Western culture has been heavily influenced by the traditions of
Renaissance, Protestant Reformation, Age of Enlightenment, and shaped by the
expansive colonialism of the 15th-20th centuries. Its political usage was
temporarily changed by an internal antagonism during the Cold War in the mid-
to-late 20th Century (1947â€“1991). The term originally had a literal
geographic meaning, contrasting Europe with the linked cultures and
civilizations of the Middle East, North Africa, Near East, South Asia, South
East Asia and remote Far East, which used to be seen as the East by early-
modern Europeans, but today this has little geographic relevance, since the USA
is in the Americas, Russia expands to Northern Asia and New Zealand is a part
of Oceania. In the contemporary cultural meaning, the Western world includes
Europe, as well as many countries of European colonial origin with majority
European populations in the Americas and Oceania, such as the United States of
America, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Argentina etc. Introduction. Western
culture originated in the Mediterranean basin and its vicinity; Greece and Rome
are often cited as its originators. Over time, their associated empires grew
first to the east and west to include the rest of the Mediterraneanan and Black
Sea coastal areas, conquering, absorbing, and being influenced by many older
great civilizations of the ancient Near East (i.e. Phoenicia, Phoenician rooted
Carthage and also Egypt); later, they expanded to the north of the
Mediterranean Sea to include Western, Central, Southeastern, Eastern and
Northern Europe. Christianization of Bulgaria (9th century), Christianization
of Kievan Rus' (Russia, Ukraine, Belarus; 10th century), Christianisation of
Scandinavia (12th century) and Christianization of Lithuania (14th century)
brought the rest of European states to the Western civilisation. Historians,
such as Carroll Quigley ("Evolution of Civilizations"), contend that Western
civilization was born around 400 AD, after the total collapse of the Western
Roman Empire, leaving a vacuum for new ideas to flourish that were impossible
in Classical societies. In either view, between the fall of the Western Roman
Empire and the Renaissance, the West experienced a period of considerable
decline, known as the Middle Ages, which include the Dark Ages and the
Crusades. The knowledge of the ancient Western world was partly preserved
during this period due to the survival of the Eastern Roman Empire and the
institutions of the Catholic Church; it was also greatly expanded by the Arab
importation of both the Ancient Greco-Roman and new technology through Arabs
from the India and China to Europe. Since the Renaissance, the West evolved
beyond the influence of the ancient Greeks and Romans and the Islamic world due
to the Commercial, Scientific, and Industrial Revolutions, and the expansion of
the peoples of Western and Central European empires, and particularly the
globe-spanning empires of the 18th and 19th centuries. Numerous times, this
expansion was accompanied by Christian missionaries, who attempted to
proselytize Christianity. Generally speaking, the current consensus would
locate the West, at the very least, in the cultures and peoples of Europe, the
United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and a great part of Central and
South America like Argentina and Brazil. There is debate among some as to
whether Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) is in a category of its own. An
argument supporting Central and Eastern Europe being a part of the West is that
Central European, Southeastern European and Baltic countries such as Czech
Republic, Poland, Hungary, Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Bulgaria and Romania are now part of the European Union and NATO, which mostly
comprise Western countries. These countries were both heavily influenced by and
influenced the Western World, and share sociological values and culture. Greece
and Cyprus are geographically not located in western Europe, are usually
considered a part of the Western world. This is because Western culture has
Greek roots and partly due to political and economic reasons. Russia is often
not counted as a part of the Western World. However, Russian culture
(particularly literature, music and painting) is classified as a part of the
Western culture. Western culture. The term "Western culture" is used very
broadly to refer to a heritage of social norms, ethical values, traditional
customs, religious beliefs, political systems, and specific artifacts and
technologies. The concept of Western culture is generally linked to the
classical definition of the Western world. In this definition, Western culture
is the set of literary, scientific, political, artistic and philosophical
principles that set it apart from other civilizations. Much of this set of
traditions and knowledge is collected in the Western canon. The term has come
to apply to countries whose history is strongly marked by European immigration
or settlement, such as the Americas, and Australasia, and is not restricted to
Europe. Some tendencies that define modern Western societies are the existence
of political pluralism, laicism, generalization of middle class, prominent
subcultures or countercultures (such as New Age movements), increasing cultural
syncretism resulting from globalization and human migration. The modern shape
of these societies is strongly based upon the Industrial Revolution and the
societies' associated social and environmental problems, such as class struggle
and pollution, as well as reactions to them, such as syndicalism and
environmentalism. Historical divisions. The geopolitical divisions in Europe
that created a concept of "East" and "West" originated in the Roman Empire. The
Eastern Mediterranean was home to the highly urbanized cultures that had Greek
as their common language (owing to the older empire of Alexander the Great and
of the Hellenistic successors.), whereas the West was much more rural in its
character and more readily adopted Latin as its common language. After the fall
of the Western Roman Empire, Western and Central Europe was substantially cut
off from the East where "Byzantine" Greek culture and Eastern Christianity
became founding influences in the Arab/Muslim world and among the Eastern and
Southern Slavic peoples. Roman Catholic Western and Central Europe, as such,
maintained a distinct identity particularly as it began to redevelop during the
Renaissance. Even following the Protestant Reformation, Protestant Europe
continued to see itself as more tied to Roman Catholic Europe than other parts
of the perceived "civilized" world. Use of the term "West" as a specific
cultural and geopolitical term developed over the course of the Age of
Exploration as Europe spread its culture to other parts of the world. In the
past two centuries the term "Western world" has sometimes been used
synonymously with "Christian world" because of the numerical dominance of Roman
Catholicism and Protestantism compared to other Christian traditions, ancient
Roman ideas, and heresies. As secularism rose in Europe and elsewhere during
the 19th and 20th centuries, the term "West" came to take on less religious
connotations and more political connotations, especially during the Cold War.
Additionally, closer contacts between the "West" and Asia and other parts of
the world in recent times have continued to cloud the use and meaning of the
term. Hellenic. The Hellenic division between the barbarians and the Greeks
contrasted in many societies the Greek-speaking culture of the Greek
settlements around the Mediterranean to the surrounding non-Greek cultures.
Herodotus considered the Persian Wars of the early 5th century BC a conflict of
Europa versus Asia (which he considered to be all land north and east of the
Sea of Marmara, respectively). The terms "West" and "East" were not used by any
Greek author to describe that conflict. The anachronistic application of those
terms to that division entails a stark logical contradiction, given that, when
the term "West" appeared, it was used in opposition to the Greeks and Greek-
speaking culture. Western society traces its cultural origins, at least
partially, to Greek thought and Christian religion, thus following an evolution
that began in ancient Greece and the Levant, continued through the Roman
Empire, and spread throughout Europe. The inherently "Greek" classical ideas of
history (which one might easily say they invented) and art may, however, be
considered almost inviolate in the West, as their original spread of influence
survived the Hellenic period of Roman classical antiquity, The Dark Ages, its
resurgence during the Western Renaissance, and has managed somehow to keep and
exert its pervasive influence down into the present age, with every expectation
of it continuing to dominate any secular Western cultural developments.
However, the conquest of the Western parts of the Roman Empire by Germanic
peoples and the subsequent dominance by the Western Christian Papacy (which
held combined political and spiritual authority, a state of affairs absent from
Greek civilization in all its stages), resulted in a rupture of the previously
existing ties between the Latin West and Greek thought, including Christian
Greek thought. The Great Schism and the Fourth Crusade confirmed this
deviation. On the other hand, the Modern West, emerging after the Renaissance
as a new civilization, has been greatly influenced by (its own interpretation
of) Greek thought, which was preserved in the Roman Empire and the medieval
Islamic world during the Medieval West's Dark Ages and transmitted from there
by emigration of Greek scholars, courtly marriages, and Latin translations. The
Renaissance in the West emerged partly from currents within the Roman
(Byzantine) Empire. Roman Empire. Ancient Rome (510 BC-AD 476) was a
civilization that grew from a city-state founded on the Italian Peninsula about
the 9th century BC to a massive empire straddling the Mediterranean Sea. In its
12-century existence, Roman civilization shifted from a monarchy, to a
republic, to an autocratic empire. It came to dominate Western, Central and
Southeastern Europe and the entire area surrounding the Mediterranean Sea
through conquest using the Roman legions and then through cultural assimilation
by giving Roman privileges and eventually citizenship to the whole empire.
Nonetheless, despite its great legacy, a number of factors led to the eventual
decline of the Roman Empire. The Western Roman Empire eventually broke into
several kingdoms in the 5th century due to civil wars, corruption, and
devastating Germanic invasions from such tribes as the Goths, the Franks and
the Vandals. The Eastern Roman Empire, governed from Constantinople, is usually
referred to as the Byzantine Empire after 476, the traditional date for the
"fall of the Western Roman Empire" and for the subsequent onset of the Early
Middle Ages. The Eastern Roman Empire survived the fall of the West, and
protected Roman legal and cultural traditions, combining them with Greek and
Christian elements, for another thousand years. The Roman Empire succeeded the
about 500 year-old Roman Republic (510 BC - 1st century BC), which had been
weakened by the conflict between Gaius Marius and Sulla and the civil war of
Julius Caesar against Pompey and Marcus Brutus. During these struggles hundreds
of senators were killed, and the Roman Senate had been refilled with loyalists
of the First Triumvirate and later those of the Second Triumvirate. Several
dates are commonly proposed to mark the transition from Republic to Empire,
including the date of Julius Caesar's appointment as perpetual roman dictator
(44 BC), the victory of Caesar's heir Octavian at the Battle of Actium
(September 2, 31 BC), and the Roman Senate's granting to Octavian the honorific
"Augustus". (January 16, 27 BC). Octavian/Augustus officially proclaimed that
he had saved the Roman Republic and carefully disguised his power under
republican forms: Consuls continued to be elected, tribunes of the plebeians
continued to offer legislation, and senators still debated in the Roman Curia.
However, it was Octavian who influenced everything and controlled the final
decisions, and in final analysis, had the legions to back him up, if it became
necessary. Roman expansion began long before the state was changed into an
empire and reached its zenith under emperor Trajan with the conquest of Dacia
in AD 106. During this territorial peak, the Roman Empire controlled about
5Â 900Â 000Â kmÂ² (2,300,000 sq.mi.) of land surface and had a population of
100 million. From the time of Caesar to the Fall of the Western Empire, Rome
dominated Western Eurasia and the Mediterranean, comprising the majority of its
population. Ancient Rome has contributed greatly to the development of law,
war, art, literature, architecture, technology and language in the Western
world, and its history continues to have a major influence on the world today.
The Roman Empire is where the idea of the "West" began to emerge. Due to Rome's
central location at the heart of the Empire, "West" and "East" were terms used
to denote provinces West and east of the capital itself. Therefore, Iberia
(Portugal and Spain), Gaul (France), Africa (Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco) and
Britannia were all part of the "West", while Greece, Anatolia, Syria, and Egypt
were part of the "East." Italy itself was considered central, until the reforms
of Diocletian, when the idea of formally dividing the Empire into true two
halves: Eastern and Western. In 395, the Roman Empire formally split into a
Western Roman Empire and an Eastern one, each with their own emperors,
capitals, and governments, although ostensibly they still belonged to one
formal Empire. The dissolution of the Western half (nominally in 476, but in
truth a long process that ended by 500) left only the Eastern Roman Empire
alive. For centuries, the East continued to call themselves Eastern Romans,
while the West began to think in terms of Latins (those living in the old
Western Empire) and Greeks (those inside the Roman remnant to the east).
Christian schism. In the early 4th century, the Roman Emperor Constantine the
Great established the city of Constantinople as the capital of the Eastern
Roman Empire. The Eastern Roman Empire included lands east of the Adriatic Sea
and bordering on the Eastern Mediterranean and parts of the Black Sea. These
two divisions of the Eastern and Western Roman Empires were reflected in the
administration of the Christian Church, with Rome and Constantinople debating
and arguing over whether either city was the capital of Christianity. As the
Eastern (orthodox) and Western (firstly Catholic, then Protestant as well)
churches spread their influence, the line between Eastern and Western
Christianity was moving towards one another until it was fully set at the time
of Lithuanian Christianisation. The border of Western/Eastern Christianity was
moving and its movement was defined by the existence of the Byzantine empire
and the fluctuating power and influence of the church in Rome. Now its border
is East of Estonian border, via the very West of Ukraine until Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, not to mention enclaves in many countries such as
Romania, Northern Albania etc. From Middle Ages until late 20th century
religion was decreasingly important in Europe therefore the religious division
followed a cultural divide and vice versa. Huntington argued that this cultural
division still existed during the Cold War as the approximate Western boundary
of those countries that were allied with the Soviet Union. Others have fiercely
criticized these views arguing they confuse the Eastern Roman Empire with
Russia, especially considering the fact that the country that had the most
historical roots in Byzantium, Greece, expelled communists and was allied with
the West during the Cold War. Still, Russia accepted Eastern Christianity from
the Byzantine Empire (by the Patriarch of Constantinople: Photios I) linking
Russia very close to the Eastern Roman Empire world. Later on, in 16th century
Russia created own religious centre in Moscow. Religion survived in Russia
beside severe persecution carrying values alternative to the communist
ideology. Under Charlemagne, the Franks established an empire that was
recognized as the Holy Roman Empire by the Pope in Rome, offending the Roman
Emperor in Constantinople. The crowning of the Emperor by the Pope led to the
assumption that the highest power was the papal hierarchy, establishing, until
the Protestant Reformation, the civilization of West Christendom. The Latin
Rite Christian Church of western and central Europe headed by the Pope split
with the eastern, Greek-speaking Patriarchates during the Great Schism.
Meanwhile, the extent of each expanded, as British Isles, Germanic peoples,
Bohemia, Poland, Hungary, Scandinavia, Baltic peoples and the other non-
Christian lands of the northwest were converted by the West Church, while
Bulgaria, Romania, Russia, Belarus, Serbia, Caucasus and most of Ukraine were
converted by the Eastern Church. In this context, the Protestant reformation
may be viewed as a schism within the Latin Church. Martin Luther, in the wake
of precursors, broke with the pope and with the emperor, backed by many of the
German princes. These changes were adopted by the Scandinavian kings. Later,
the commoner Jean Cauvin (John Calvin) assumed the religio-political leadership
in Geneva, a former ecclesiastical city whose prior ruler had been the bishop.
The English King later improvised on the Lutheran model, but subsequently many
Calvinist doctrines were adopted by popular dissenters, leading to the English
Civil War. Both royalists and dissenters colonized North America, eventually
resulting in an independent United States of America. Colonial "West". The
Reformation, and consequent dissolution of West Christendom as even a
theoretical unitary political body, resulted in the Thirty Years War. The war
ended in the Peace of Westphalia, which enshrined the concept of the nation-
state and the principle of absolute national sovereignty in international law.
These concepts of a world of nation-states, coupled with the ideologies of the
Enlightenment, the coming of modernity, the Scientific Revolution, and the
Industrial Revolution, produced powerful political and economic institutions
that have come to influence (or been imposed upon) most nations of the world
today. Historians agree that the Industrial Revolution was one of the most
important events in history. This process of influence (and imposition) began
with the voyages of discovery, colonization, conquest, and exploitation of
Spain and Portugal; it continued with the rise of the Dutch East India Company,
and the creation and expansion of the British and French colonial empires. Due
to the reach of these empires, Western institutions expanded throughout the
world. Even after demands for self-determination from subject peoples within
Western empires were met with decolonization, these institutions persisted. One
specific example was the requirement that post-colonial societies were made to
form nation-states (in the Western tradition), which often created arbitrary
boundaries and borders that did not necessarily represent a whole nation,
people, or culture, and are often the cause of international conflicts and
friction even to this day. Though the overt colonial era has passed, Western
nations, as comparatively rich, well-armed, and culturally powerful states,
still wield a large degree of influence throughout the world. Although not part
of Western colonization process proper, Western culture entered Japan in the
so-called Meiji period (1868â€“1912). The traditional Japanese society was
virtually overturned into an industrial and militarist power like Western
countries such as the United Kingdom. Cold War context. During the Cold War, a
new definition emerged. The Earth was divided into three "worlds". The First
World, analogous in this context to what was called "the West", was composed of
NATO members and other countries aligned with the United States. The Second
World was the Eastern bloc in the Soviet sphere of influence, including the
Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact countries. It included some Central and Eastern
European countries like Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Bulgaria, Hungary,
Romania, East Germany (now united with Germany), Czechoslovakia (now split into
the Czech Republic and Slovakia). The Third World consisted of countries, many
of which were unaligned with either, and important members included India,
Yugoslavia, Finland (Finlandisation) and Switzerland (Swiss Neutrality); some
include the People's Republic of China, though this is disputed, as the
People's Republic of China is communist, had friendly relationsâ€”at certain
timesâ€”with the Soviet bloc, and had a significant degree of importance in
global geopolitics. Some Third World countries aligned themselves with either
the US-led West or the Soviet-led Eastern bloc. There were a number of
countries which did not fit comfortably into this neat definition of partition,
including Switzerland, Sweden, Austria and Ireland, which chose to be neutral.
Finland was under the "Soviet Union's" military sphere of influence (see FCMA
treaty) but remained neutral, was not communist, nor was it a member of the
Warsaw Pact or Comecon but a member of the EFTA since 1986, and was West of the
Iron Curtain. In 1955, when Austria again became a fully independent republic,
it did so under the condition that it remain neutral, but as a country to the
West of the Iron Curtain, it was in the "United States'" sphere of influence.
Spain did not join the NATO until 1982, towards the end of the Cold War and
after the death of the authoritarian Franco. Modern definitions. The exact
scope of the Western world is somewhat subjective in nature, depending on
whether cultural, economic, spiritual or political criteria are employed. Many
anthropologists, sociologists and historians oppose "the West and the Rest" in
a categorical manner. The same has been done by Malthusian demographers with a
sharp distinction between European and non-European family systems. Among
anthropologists, this includes Durkheim, Dumont and LÃ©vi-Strauss. As the term
"Western world" does not have a strict international definition, governments do
not use the term in legislation of international treaties and instead rely on
other definitions. Ethnic / linguistic. The Western world is also considered to
be the collection of nations, where Indo-European languages and cultures
(primarily of colonial origin) are practiced and dominated. Ethnically
speaking, it can refer to Germanic, Greek, Latin, Celtic, Baltic and Slavic
peoples and most of their territories. Traditionally the ethnicity of the
Western World has been assumed to be that of European peoples of Western
European descent and the settler peoples of their respective colonies. However,
more recently it is commonly perceived as including peoples of originally other
ethnicities who have become westernised by living and assimilating into western
countries, in some cases for centuries- such as Black and Asian Americans and
Europeans. Moreover even more recently with the end of the cold war many
European countries with large populations of Baltic, Slavic and many other
ethnicities re-united with the rest of the West. This points to the fact that
the ethnic and national definitions of the Western World, along with the
phenomenon of the Western World itself, have been, and are still, subject to
flux. Cultural. From a cultural and sociological approach the Western world is
defined as including all cultures that are directly derived from and influenced
by European cultures, i.e. western Europe (i.e. France, the UK, Ireland),
central Europe (i.e. Germany, Poland, Switzeland), northern Europe (i.e.
Sweden, Denmark, Finland), eastern Europe (Russia, Ukraine, Belarus),
southeastern Europe (i.e. Bulgaria, Greece, Romania) and southern (or
southwestern) Europe (i.e. Spain, Italy, Portugal), United States of America
and Canada, (Latin America - Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Panama, Peru,
Uruguay, Venezuela and Chile), Australia and New Zealand. Together these
countries constitute Western society. In the 20th century, Christianity
declined in influence in many Western countries, mostly in the northern,
central and eastern parts of Europe (Sweden, Norway, Finland, Denmark, Estonia,
the Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria) and elsewhere. Secularism
(separating religion from politics and science) increased. However, while
church attendance is in decline, some western countries (i.e. Italy, Poland and
Portugal) believe that religion is important, and most Westerners nominally
identify themselves as Christians (e.g. 70% in the UK) and attend church on
major occasions, such as Christmas and Easter. In the Americas Christianity
continues to play an important societal role (though at least Argentina,
Brazil, Uruguay, Chile, specially among the middle and upper classes, are
experiencing processes of secularization similar to European ones). The
official religions of the United Kingdom and some Nordic countries are forms of
Christianity, even though the majority of European countries have no official
religion. Despite this, Christianity, in its different forms, remains the
largest faith in most Western countries. Due to the high influence of European
culture in places like South Africa, it could be said that the country is
Western or has achieved Westernization. Moreover, White South Africans of
European origin make up about 9% of South Africa. Another 9% are of mixed race.
Unlike Black South Africans who've maintained their own native languages, most
mixed South Africans speak Afrikaans as a first language. Likewise, most Indian
South Africans speak English natively today. Therefore, it can be argued that
this collective 20% of native English and Afrikaans speakers (both European-
derived) live in heavily Western influenced cultures. Similarly, whites and
coloureds are over 10% of Namibia. They primarily speak Afrikaans and German as
a first language. In addition to that, many Black South Africans and Namibians
speak European languages, e.g. Afrikaans and English, fluently and are also
considered speakers of those languages. Modern political. Countries of the
Western world are generally considered to share certain fundamental political
ideologies, including those of liberal democracy, the rule of law, human rights
and a high degree of gender equality (although there are notable exceptions,
especially in foreign policy). All of these are prerequisites, for example, for
a state to become a full member of the European Union and therefore from modern
political point of view all European Union member states from the Western,
Central and Eastern Europe are considered to be part of the Western world in
political terms. Economic. Though the Cold War has ended, and some members of
the former Eastern Bloc are making a general movement towards liberal democracy
and other values held in common by the traditionally Western states, most of
the former Soviet republics (except Baltic states) are not considered Western
because of the small presence of social and political reform, as well as their
obvious cultural, economic and political differences to what is known today as
described by the term "The West" North America (USA and Canada), Europe,
Australia and New Zealand. The term "Western world" is often interchangeablebly
used with the term First World stressing the difference between First World and
the Third World or developing countries. This usage occurs despite the fact
that many countries that may be geographically or culturally Western are
developing countries. In fact, most of the Americas are developing countries,
which make up a significant percentage of the West. It is also used despite
many Developed countries not being Western (e.g. Japan, South Korea,
Singapore). The existence of "The North" implies the existence of "The South",
and the socio-economic divide between North and South. The term "the North" has
in some contexts replaced earlier usage of the term "the West", particularly in
the critical sense, as a more robust demarcation than the terms "West" and
"East". The North provides some absolute geographical indicators for the
location of wealthy countries, most of which are physically situated in the
Northern Hemisphere, although, as most countries are located in the northern
hemisphere in general, some have considered this distinction to be equally
unhelpful. The thirty high-income countries in the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD), which include: Australia, Canada, Iceland,
Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, South Korea, Switzerland, the United States
and the countries of the EU (except for: Bulgaria, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta and Romania), are generally included in what used to be called "developed
world", although the OECD includes three countries, namely Chile, Mexico and
Turkey, that are not yet fully industrial countries, but newly industrialised
countries. Although Andorra, Cyprus, Hong Kong, Malta, Liechtenstein, Monaco,
San Marino, Singapore, Taiwan and Vatican City, are not members of the OECD,
they might also be regarded as developed countries, because their high living
standards, high per capita incomes, and their social, economical and political
structure are quite similar to those of the high income OECD countries. Other
views. A series of scholars of civilization, including Arnold J. Toynbee,
Alfred Kroeber and Carroll Quigley have identified and analyzed "Western
civilization" as one of the civilizations that have historically existed and
still exist today. Toynbee entered into quite an expansive mode, including as
candidates those countries or cultures who became so heavily influenced by the
West as to adopt these borrowings into their very self-identity; carried to its
limit, this would in practice include almost everyone within the West, in one
way or another. In particular, Toynbee refers to the "intelligentsia" formed
among the educated elite of countries impacted by the European expansion of
centuries past. While often pointedly nationalist, these cultural and political
leaders interacted within the West to such an extent as to change both
themselves and the West. Yet more recently, Samuel P. Huntington has taken a
far more controversial approach, forging a political science hypothesis he
labeled the "The Clash of Civilizations?" in a "Foreign Affairs" article and a
book. According to Huntington's hypothesis, what he calls "conflicts between
civilizations" will be the primary tensions of the 21st century world. In this
hypothesis, the West is based on religion, as the countries of West and Central
Europe were historically influenced by the two forms of Western Christianity,
namely Protestantism and Catholicism. Also, some Anglophone countries share
these traits, e.g. Bermuda, Cayman Islands, British Virgin Islands, Australia
and New Zealand, as well as the more heterogeneous United States and Canada.
Huntington's thesis, while influential, was by no means universally accepted;
its supporters say that it explains modern conflicts, such as those in the
former Yugoslavia. The thesis's detractors fear that by equating values like
democracy with the concept of "Western civilization", it reinforces stereotypes
that some perceive as being common within the West about non-traditionally
Western societies that some may consider racist or xenophobic. Others believe
that Huntington ignores the existence of non-Western democracies such as the
East Asian and South-Central Asian democracies. As such, these detractors
believe that it will serve to provoke and amplify conflict rather than
illuminating a way to find an accommodating world order, or in particular cases
a commonly agreed solution. In Huntington's narrow thesis, the historically
Eastern Orthodox nations of Southeastern and Eastern Europe constitute a
distinct "Euro-Asiatic civilization"; although European and mainly Christian
(as well as notable Muslim influence and populations, particularly in the
southeastern Europe and southern/central Russia), these nations were not, in
Huntington's view, shaped by the cultural influences of the Renaissance. The
Renaissance did not affect Orthodox Eastern Europe due in part to the proximity
of Ottoman domination, despite the decisive influence of Greek Ã©migrÃ©
scholars on the Renaissance. Other views might be made regarding (Central and)
Eastern Europe. A controversial theory of Huntington is that he considered the
possibility of South America being a separate civilization from the West, but
also mused that it might become a third part (the first two being North America
and Europe) of the West in the future. The theologian and paleontologist Pierre
Teilhard de Chardin conceived of the West as the set of civilizations descended
from the Nile Valley Civilization of Egypt. Palestinian-American literary
critic Edward Said uses the term occident in his discussion of orientalism.
According to his binary, the West, or Occident, created a romanticized vision
of the East, or Orient, in order to justify colonial and imperialist
intentions. This Occident-Orient binary is focused on the Western vision of the
East instead of any truths about the East. His theories are rooted in Hegel's
Master-slave dialectic: The Occident would not exist without the Orient and
vice versa. Further, Western writers created this irrational, feminine, weak
"Other" to contrast with the rational, masculine, strong West because of a need
to create a difference between the two that would justify imperialist
ambitions, said influenced Indian-American theorist Homi K. Bhabha. The term
the "West" may also be used pejoratively by certain tendencies and especially
critical of the influence of the traditional West, due to the history of most
of the members of the traditional West being previously involved, at one time
or another, in outright imperialism and colonialism. Some of these critics also
claim that the traditional West has continued to engage in what might be viewed
as modern implementations of imperialism and colonialism, such as neoliberalism
and globalization. (It should be noted that many Westerners who subscribe to a
positive view of the traditional West are also very critical of neoliberalism
and globalization, for their allegedly negative effects on both the developed
and developing world.) Allegedly, definitions of the term "Western world" that
some may consider "ethnocentric" are considered by some to be "constructed"
around one or another Western culture. The British writer Rudyard Kipling wrote
about this contrast: "East is East and West is West and never the twain shall
meet", expressing his belief that somebody from the West "can never understand
the Asian cultures" as the latter "differ too much" from the Western cultures.
Some may view this alleged incompatibility as a precursor to Huntington's
"clash of civilizations" theory. Paradoxically, today Asia and Africa to
varying degrees may be considered quasi-Western. Many East Asians and South
Asians and Africans and others associate or even identify with the cosmopolitan
cultures and international societies referred to sometimes as Western.
Likewise, many in the West identify with a transcultural humanity, a notion
often found in visions of the sacred. From a very different perspective, it has
also been argued that the idea of the West is, in part, a non-Western
invention, deployed in the non-West to shape and define non-Western pathways
through or against modernity.
